MR. STERN: Good morning, still, ladies and gentlemen.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. STERN: Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was not a legal cause of Mr. McKeever's COPD. Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was not a legal cause of his lung cancer. Nothing that Philip Morris said or didn't say was a cause of Mr. McKeever's COPD or his lung cancer.
And how do you know that, ladies and gentlemen? You know it from the evidence that you heard. Because that evidence showed you that it wasn't addiction to nicotine that caused Mr. McKeever's COPD and lung cancer, it was his own choices and decisions to smoke.
And make no mistake about it, ladies and gentlemen, the concept of choice, the concept of personal responsibility, is at the heart of this case. And it's in those instructions, it's in those instructions as part of the
concept of legal cause, because what legal cause is about -And, of course, you have the instructions, but counsel has articulated his perspective on legal cause and I'm going to give you mine.
We respectfully submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that that "but for" instruction means that the plaintiff must prove that Mr. McKeever could not have quit smoking in time to prevent his COPD and lung cancer. They must prove that he was unable to quit smoking in time to avoid his injury. And we respectfully submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, they have not come close to meeting that burden of proof.
And I would like to talk to you about the evidence, and I'm going to talk to you also about the verdict form that you've seen. I'm going to put it up in just a minute.
But you may recall that, in opening statement, I had a request for you, and that request was to please keep your eye on the ball. That request was: Ask yourselves, as the evidence is coming into the case, what does
that evidence have to do with Mr. McKeever?
Ask yourselves, I requested, what does that evidence have to do with Philip Morris?
And I'm going to renew that request now.
As you review the evidence in this case, back in the jury room, as you listen to the arguments of counsel, ask yourselves, what does the evidence have to do with Mr. McKeever?
So when you see a document up there, and there's not a shred of evidence that he ever saw it, not a shred, you have to ask yourselves, what does that matter? What does that have to do with this case? What does that have to do with the question whether Mr. McKeever could have quit in time to avoid his injury? What does that have to do with the question whether Mr. McKeever reasonably relied to his detriment on the document that you're seeing?
So we just saw -I'm going to come back to this, but we just saw a letter to the Surgeon General.
Well, there's no evidence that Mr. McKeever ever saw that.
Mr. Alvarez was talking about how they
shouldn't have said this in that letter, and they shouldn't have said that. There's not a shred of evidence that Mr. McKeever ever read that letter, ever saw that letter, ever even heard about it.
And we -- we saw clip after clip after clip of people who have nothing to do with Philip Morris. That Mr. Heimann, he was the head of a different tobacco company, he retired in 1980, and they're putting up a clip of him talking in 1986. That is not evidence, ladies and gentlemen. That has to do with keeping your eye on the ball.
So I would like to turn to the verdict form.
Michael, can I get the first page of the verdict form?
And I'm going to talk to you -- first,
I'm going to talk, too, about Question Number 1; but, before I do, I wanted to emphasize something that His Honor has instructed you, and that will be in the instructions -- in the instructions that you have to take back with you.
And that -- that point is this: You
heard the Judge read those Engle findings. And the instructions are clear that those Engle findings have absolutely nothing to do with the answer to this first question.
Those Engle findings simply don't apply to your consideration of this first question, and you should totally ignore them when it comes to answering this question, Number 1, on the verdict form.
And the only other thing I'll say about the findings is that you've heard -- and you'll see in the instructions -- that those findings do not establish that Philip Morris is liable.
Those instructions tell you the findings do not establish that Philip Morris is liable, and they don't establish in any other way that Mr. McKeever was injured by conduct by Philip Morris. So we'll put those findings to the side in answering this first question.
So let's turn to that first question.
Was Theodore McKeever addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema?
And I would suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the evidence has shown that the
plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proof on that question. But I want to talk for a minute about the structure of this question, and point out something about the way that you need to go about answering it.
This first question is really in two parts. The first part is: Was Mr. McKeever addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
The second part -- and it's a separate part of the question for reasons I'm going to get do in a minute -- the second part is: If so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema? So the fact -If you find that Mr. McKeever was addicted -- and we respectfully submit the plaintiff hasn't met her burden of proof on that -- but even if you find that, you must go on to ask yourselves the second separate question: Has the plaintiff proved that that addiction was a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema?
I want to make one more point about that, ladies and gentlemen. You must all agree as to each part of the question. In order to answer that question "yes," you must all agree that
Mr. McKeever was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and then you must all agree that any such addiction was a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema. If some people think one thing and some people the other thing, not good enough. Everybody has to agree on both parts.
And we respectfully submit, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is not sufficient for you to answer that question "yes."
And, then, just one more procedural matter, the instruction tells you: If your answer to Question 1 is "no," your verdict is for the defendant, and you should not proceed further except to date and sign this verdict form and return it to the courtroom.
And that means that if your answer to the first question is "no," job done, thank you very much, case over. So this is, indeed, a very important question on the form.
So let's talk about the evidence on the first part of that first question. Namely, was Mr. McKeever addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
But I want to actually reiterate
something Mr. Alvarez said. And that is,
His Honor is not going to give you a legal definition of "addiction." You're not going to see -You didn't hear anything and you're not going to hear anything in the further instructions about a legal definition of "addiction." There's no law that says if "X" is true or "Y" is true, then somebody was addicted.
And that makes sense, because you know from the evidence that you heard, from the witnesses on both sides, that lots of different people have lots of different ideas about addiction.
The plaintiff's own witness,
Dr. Drobes -- and I'll get back to him in just a minute -- Dr. Drobes even told you that even the Surgeon General, back in 1964, wasn't calling cigarette smoking an addiction; the Surgeon General was calling it a habit.
It wasn't until the 1988 Surgeon General's report that the first Surgeon General's report came out calling cigarette smoking an addiction. And, in fact, there's
still no established agreement on the definition of "addiction."
Dr. Drobes, himself, told you that the 2010 Surgeon General's report that Mr. Alvarez put up on the screen, the 2010 Surgeon General's report says: There is no established -- there are no established criteria for the diagnosis of addiction.
That means there's no agreement. That's the Surgeon General saying, people -reasonable people disagree about how to diagnose addiction. And you saw evidence of that disagreement in this very trial.
You heard the different witnesses give their different definitions of addiction and you heard the different witnesses give their different criteria for diagnosing addiction.
Now, I want to say one other thing about addiction, ladies and gentlemen, and this goes back to my original request: Please ask yourselves, what does the evidence have to do with Mr. McKeever?
Because we believe that the evidence showed that addiction is different for different people. Whether one person is
addicted is a different question from whether some other person might be addicted.
And when I get to the second part of that first question, whether addiction was a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema, I will submit to you that the evidence shows that what addiction might cause in one person may be very different from what addiction might cause in another person. And that's why it's so important to focus on evidence that relates to Mr. McKeever.
So we come back to addiction. You heard from a bunch of witnesses, but the bottom line is that Dr. Ticknor, who we called yesterday, is the only witness you heard who is a medical doctor with an expertise in addiction. He's a psychiatrist who actually diagnoses and treats patients who have addiction.
And I have here in my notes that counsel said that Dr. Ticknor doesn't know this stuff; he's not consulted by whoever he had up there, the Surgeon General, or somebody else.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Ticknor is consulted. He's consulted 100 or more times a month. By whom? He is consulted by patients. He is consulted by people who come
to him for help with their addiction problems, because he's an expert.
Thirty years of experience, ladies and gentlemen, treating patients. So when you hear there's no backup to his opinions, you know that's just not right. He has backup of 30 years of actually doing clinical work.
The evidence showed you that Dr. Drobes doesn't have any of that. The evidence showed you -And Dr. Drobes was quite candid on that point. He said, that's not my life's work. My life's work is in a library, doing research.
My life's work is not treating patients.
You also know, of course, that Dr. Drobes isn't a medical doctor, and Dr. Ticknor is. So when it comes to all of the complicated medical aspects of addiction, Dr. Drobes didn't even claim to be an expert, and Dr. Ticknor clearly was.
And you also heard counsel refer to Dr. Singer's opinion about Mr. McKeever's addiction. I want to say a couple of things about that. I believe counsel said that Dr. Singer was not a paid expert. That's just
not so.
And His Honor has instructed, and will instruct again, that it's your recollection of the evidence that controls; but I submit to you, when you sit down and remember the evidence, you will remember full well that Dr. Singer said, I was paid $500 an hour to review the records in this case.
And what's that about? What that's about is, Dr. Singer was Mr. McKeever's physician, but he was his pulmonologist. He didn't treat him for anything having to do with addiction.
You know that by the time Dr. Singer met
Mr. McKeever, Mr. McKeever was a nonsmoker. He
had quit smoking months before.
So these opinions that Dr. Singer formed about Mr. McKeever's addiction have nothing to do with his care and treatment of Mr. McKeever. They had to do with what he was paid $500 an hour to do, review the records and come in here and, for the purposes of litigation, give his opinion that Mr. McKeever was addicted.
You remember he was asked, did this matter to you in your treatment of him, his addiction? And he said, no, it was a
non-issue. He had quit.
So we respectfully submit, ladies and gentlemen, you should take that into consideration in evaluating Dr. Singer's testimony.
And you also heard -- we heard the testimony of Mr. McKeever, when he said, I was addictive, or I was addicted; and that just goes to show you, ladies and gentlemen,
Mr. McKeever had some definition in his mind of what it meant to be addicted.
But you will learn that the evidence just isn't there to find that the plaintiff has met her burden of proof on that first question, because who else did you hear from, from the plaintiff?
You heard from Dr. Drobes. And counsel said Dr. Drobes, he read everything. Well, if one thing came through loud and clear in the examination of Dr. Drobes, is he didn't read everything.
You remember he told you he counted on plaintiff's counsel to give him all the records that would be relevant to his opinion; and he told you that his opinion was based on the
assumption that he had gotten all the relevant information, and then he told you that assumption was wrong. Record after record after record that he said, yes, this would have been relevant; yes, this is something I would have wanted to know.
And you learned, also, ladies and gentlemen, that Dr. Drobes' opinion was based on some other assumptions. For example, the assumption that Mr. McKeever smoked two-and-a-half to three packs a day.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, there is absolutely no reliable evidence on that point.
And, in fact, the reliable evidence is completely contradictory to that. So the -And I want you to remember that Mr. McKeever -- Mr. McKeever never said, I smoked two-and-a-half to three packs a day.
That never came out of Mr. McKeever's mouth in his deposition.
But, fortunately, we do have what Mr. McKeever had to say on how much he smoked, and we have that from all of those medical records that made crystal clear that, time after time after time, when Mr. McKeever
reported his own smoking history, he reported a smoking history of 50 pack years.
And you learned that that could mean lots of different things. It could mean one pack a day for 50 years, it could mean less than a pack a day for a greater period of time; but the evidence was clear, we would submit to you, that the most reliable construction of that record is that he smoked a pack or less a day.
So when Dr. Drobes bases his opinion and does all the scoring on all those charts based on two-and-a-half, three packs a day, and you know he's off by two or three times Mr. McKeever's actual smoking history, you'll know that that opinion does not support the plaintiff and that that opinion does not meet the plaintiff's burden of proof.
I just -- I want to pause for just a moment about the medical records. There was some suggestion in the testimony that you shouldn't rely on those medical records, that you shouldn't rely on what it was that Mr. McKeever said to the doctors who were responsible for his care and treatment, that you shouldn't rely on what Mr. McKeever said to
the doctors taking care of his lungs about his smoking, even after he had quit.
Ladies and gentlemen, if that suggestion is made to you, you need to reject it.
Can I get Slide 6?
And you need to reject it because Mr. McKeever swore, under oath, that he never lied to any of his doctors about whether or not he was smoking, because there would be no reason to do that.
So if plaintiff's counsel suggests that somehow you should discount what's in those medical records because Mr. McKeever underreported or Mr. McKeever wasn't telling the truth to his doctors, you've got -In order to accept that, you've got to believe that he lied under oath about whether or not he lied to his doctors. And we respectfully submit, ladies and gentlemen, that doesn't make any sense.
So when you're looking at those medical records, when you see in those medical records that Mr. McKeever said that he smoked one pack a day and not two or three packs a day, you'll know, with all due respect to Ms. McKeever,
that her testimony on that point shouldn't be accepted.
And I want to -- I want to stop there for just a minute, because when you are evaluating the testimony of a witness, any witness, including Ms. McKeever, we respectfully submit that you should ask yourselves, in using your common sense the way His Honor said that you should, you ask yourselves, is that testimony supported or corroborated by other evidence in the case? Is that testimony contradicted by other evidence in the case?
So when we have uncorroborated testimony of two-and-a-half, three packs a day, and then we have Mr. McKeever's statements to his own doctors that it was one pack a day or less, we have his own testimony that he didn't lie to his doctors, you'll know that that's the reliable testimony and that the two-and-a-half to three packs a day is not reliable testimony.
And when Ms. McKeever says that one of the things that Mr. McKeever wasn't able to do after his 2006 surgery was go for walks anymore, and you see record after record after record saying that Mr. McKeever was telling his
doctors, I'm walking 20 to 30 minutes a day, seven days a week, you'll know that that testimony just isn't reliable from Ms. McKeever.
So in deciding what weight, if any, to give to Dr. Drobes' opinions, I urge you to consider Dr. Drobes' own testimony that he didn't have all the relevant information and Dr. Drobes' own testimony that he didn't treat patients.
I want to turn for just a minute to Dr. Ticknor, because Dr. Ticknor told you how he diagnoses addiction. He told you that he uses the criteria in that DSM manual that all the experts agreed was an authoritative source.
And I'm not going to review everything Dr. Ticknor said -- I know you were playing close attention -- but he talked about how he applied those criteria, he explained his analysis of the criteria, and he explained how that analysis led him to the opinion and the conclusion that Mr. McKeever wasn't addicted.
And we would suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, when you put all of that evidence together, you'll come to the conclusion that
the plaintiff has not met her burden to prove that Mr. McKeever was addicted to the cigarettes -- to cigarettes containing nicotine.
And if you answer "no" to the first part, the first question, that's it, you're done, case over; but I'm going to move on -- and we respectfully submit that you should, but I'm going to go on to talk about the second part of that first question, as well.
And the second part of the first question is whether addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. McKeever's COPD.
And when I stood up, I took this a little out of order, because I wanted to respond to what Mr. Alvarez said; but as I told you in the first part of my closing remarks to you -excuse me -- what that means is, could Mr. McKeever have quit in time to avoid his injuries?
And I want to point again -- point out again, in answering this question, even if he was addicted, could Mr. McKeever have quit, you have to look at the evidence about
Mr. McKeever, because what may be true of one addicted smoker might be very different for another addicted smoker.
There is one thing that we know for absolutely sure: The one thing that every expert agreed on, the one thing that every witness agreed on, was that addicted smokers can quit; even heavily addicted smokers can quit.
And that's why this is two separate questions. Because it may be true that someone is addicted, but it may also be true that they're able to quit and they're able to quit in time to avoid their injury.
And how do we know that addicted smokers can quit? Well, we know that from the experts. They told us addicted smokers can quit. There may be some addicted smokers who can't quit, but we know that millions of addicted smokers are able to quit because everybody agreed that they do.
But I'm violating my own rule. I don't want to talk about other smokers; I want to talk about Mr. McKeever. So let's talk about the evidence about him.
Let's start with where the plaintiffs -plaintiff would have you start. And that is the proposition that Mr. McKeever was addicted.
Well, if that's true, what do we know?
We know that Mr. McKeever quit smoking. So we know that, even if he was addicted, he was able to successfully quit smoking in 2005.
So either he wasn't addicted at all, and that's why he was able to quit, in which case you've answered "no" to the first part of the question; or we know that, if he was addicted, he still had the ability to quit. So there is no question -So, in asking yourselves could Mr. McKeever have quit in time to prevent his COPD and his lung cancer, if we break that down, the first part is, could Mr. McKeever have quit smoking?
Well, that question is answered, because he did. So the only remaining question is, did he have the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid his COPD and his lung cancer?
We know that addiction did not prevent Mr. McKeever from quitting in 2005, because if you've gotten to the second part of this
question because you've decided that Mr. McKeever was addicted, on the plaintiff's own evidence, he was more addicted in 2005 than he was at any other time in his life.
Remember, that's what Dr. Drobes said.
He said, the longer you smoke, the more addicted you are.
So he quit at the time when he was the most addicted. So if you're asking yourselves, could he have quit earlier, of course he could have. If he could quit in 2005, when he was at his most addicted, we know, you know, from the evidence, that he could have quit earlier in time to avoid his injury.
So that brings us to the question of what, if anything, prevented Mr. McKeever from quitting earlier. We submit to you the answer to that is his own choice and his own decision.
But before I get to that evidence, I want to talk for a few moments about some issues that aren't in dispute. And one of the things that isn't in dispute -- you have it in your instructions -- is that Mr. McKeever's COPD and lung cancer were caused by smoking Philip Morris cigarettes. That's not the issue.
Medical causation is not an issue in this case.
The issue we're talking about is the question of whether addiction was a legal cause, because if addiction was not a legal cause, then it doesn't matter what the medical cause was.
So we took that medical cause issue off the table so there wouldn't be disagreements about it, and we are focused on the very thing that the verdict form asks you to answer. Namely, whether it was the addiction that led to Mr. McKeever's COPD, or was it his own choices and decisions to smoke.
It's also undisputed, ladies and gentlemen, that Mr. McKeever's death was the result of causes totally unrelated to his COPD and lung cancer. Let me say that again, because it's important. It's undisputed that Mr. McKeever's death was totally unrelated to his COPD and lung cancer.
You also heard testimony in the case that Mr. McKeever was diagnosed and treated for colon cancer in 2012. And you may recall that there was testimony that, after that diagnosis and treatment, which involved surgery, his
health declined.
But you heard from His Honor -- and I would like to emphasize to you -- that there is absolutely no dispute in this case -- in fact, the parties agree -- that Mr. McKeever's colon cancer was not related to his smoking.
So let's come back to this question, the second part of the first question, how do you know that addiction to smoking was not a "but for" -- that's B-U-T, F-O-R -- not a "but for" cause of Mr. McKeever's COPD? How do you know from the evidence that he could have quit smoking in time to avoid the COPD?
You know that because you know that the evidence showed that Mr. McKeever made his own decisions about smoking. He made his own decisions to start smoking, he made his own decisions to continue smoking; and, most importantly of all, ladies and gentlemen, he made his own decision -- successfully made his own decision to quit smoking.
And how do you know that? You know that from the evidence of Mr. McKeever's smoking history. You learned that Mr. McKeever started smoking in the 1940s, when he was a teenager;
and the evidence will show you, you will recall, that the first brands -- and this came from Mr. McKeever himself -- the first brands of cigarettes he smoked were Camel, Chesterfield and Lucky Strike, and the evidence shows you that none of those were Philip Morris brands.
But, in any event, whoever's cigarettes he started to smoke in 1943, you know from Dr. Drobes that it wasn't because of some addiction. Dr. Drobes said, no, of course people don't start smoking because of an addiction.
And that's not the only way, though, that you'll know that Mr. McKeever's decision to start smoking was his own decision, because, once again, we have Mr. McKeever's own testimony, and we're going to put some of that up in just a minute, but I wanted to point something out.
Mr. Alvarez asked Ms. McKeever: Is there anybody in the world who knew Mr. McKeever better than you did?
And she said "no."
Well, that's not quite true, because
there is a person who knew Mr. McKeever best of all, and that's Mr. McKeever, himself.
And here's what Mr. McKeever had to say about his decision to start smoking.
Slide 5, please.
This was his testimony: So you're telling us, your very first cigarette, you purchased yourself; correct?
Correct.
And you made the decision to do so?
Correct.
You're the person who decided, I'm going to purchase a cigarette?
Correct.
You said, I'm going to the store and use my own money?
He didn't say, well, I was 13 years old,
I had no idea what I was doing. He said that he made a decision to smoke, he goes to the store, he buys his first cigarettes.
And what else did you learn -You can take that down, Michael.
But, more importantly than that, for purposes of some of the questions you're going to have to answer, you learned something else
about the time that Mr. McKeever started smoking.
You learned, as I told you you would learn when I said this in opening statement, you learned that Mr. McKeever did not start smoking because of some tobacco conspiracy to conceal information about smoking and health.
And how do you know that? You know that from Dr. Proctor. Dr. Proctor was here for a long time. There were some things that he said he was knowledgeable about, there were some things he said he had no clue about.
One of the most important things he told you was, he has no clue about any of the facts that relate to Mr. McKeever. But he did talk to us about some other history that he said -excuse me -- that he said took place around this time. And what he told you was, there was no conspiracy among the tobacco companies about concealing information about smoking and health in 1943.
Even according to Dr. Proctor, that conspiracy did not even come into existence until December 14th, 1953. Remember he told us about the meeting at the Plaza Hotel, they put
up a picture of the hotel, and he told you that's when the conspiracy started?
So there is no dispute in this case that -- whether Mr. McKeever -- whether Mr. McKeever was 13, or whatever age he was, his decision to start smoking was not influenced by any tobacco industry conspiracy.
And what else did you learn about Mr. McKeever? You learned that Mr. McKeever didn't switch to Marlboro -And, remember, the Philip Morris brands that most of the testimony was about were Marlboro and Marlboro Lights. And the evidence showed you that Mr. McKeever didn't switch to Marlboro until the early '50s, when he was in the service.
So the evidence is undisputed, ladies and gentlemen, that when Mr. McKeever switched to Marlboros, from whatever he was smoking before, he was an adult. He was an adult who had been a regular smoker for years before he ever picked up a cigarette manufactured by Philip Morris. And the evidence also showed you, ladies and gentlemen, that he didn't switch to Marlboro because of some advertising campaign.
Now, I'm going to come back to the ads in a few minutes; but, for now, you'll remember,
Dr. Proctor told you that in the early '50s -'50, '51, '52, '53 -- when Mr. McKeever testified, himself, that he switched to Marlboros, Marlboros were being marketed as what Dr. Proctor referred to as a lady's brand cigarette. You may recall those ads, they said "mild as May."
Mr. McKeever, in the Navy, is not being influenced to smoke a lady's brand of cigarette by any advertising.
And you saw all these Marlboro Country ads, with the cowboy and everything. Well,
Dr. Proctor told you, those -- that ad campaign didn't even start until the early '60s, which, according to Mr. McKeever, is ten years after he made his decision to switch to Marlboro.
So you know that his decision to switch to Marlboro was not the result of some ad campaign by Philip Morris.
So then the evidence shows you that a few years later, by the time he meets Ms. McKeever in 1954, he is smoking filtered cigarettes.
And I'm going to come back to this, too,
ladies and gentlemen, but Mr. McKeever's testimony was that he saw ads that said low tar and filter cigarettes were safer. Remember that? He said he saw ads. He never said, I saw Congressional testimony on TV.
He was asked over and over about what he believed the tobacco companies were saying to him, and he was asked over and over to tell us what he was referring to. And he said, over and over, the ads, it was the ads that were telling me they were safe. He said, I've never heard of TI, the Tobacco Institute; I've never heard of CTR. He'd never heard of any of those organizations.
And don't you think if that Congressional testimony that we saw over and over again were such a profound influence on Mr. McKeever's thinking about smoking, that he would have said something about it in his deposition?
When he was asked, what were you talking about when you said the tobacco companies said things were safe, don't you think he would have said, well, it was that Congressional testimony?
Ladies and gentlemen, I respectfully
submit to you that the only evidence you have on that point comes from a single witness. It is totally uncorroborated. It's not corroborated by Mr. McKeever, it's not corroborated by the other people that you know from that interrogatory response had knowledge about Mr. McKeever's smoking history -- namely, his children -- it comes from one source.
And with all due respect to Ms. McKeever, who's certainly a lovely lady, the question is whether you can rely on her testimony.
And one of the things that you're going to see in the believability of witnesses instruction is that one of the things that you can consider is whether a witness remembers the matters about which they're testifying.
And I respectfully submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that when you think about whether there is any confirmation of this conversation that Ms. McKeever reported between her and her husband, now over 20 years ago -and there's no confirmation of that, either, from Mr. McKeever or the family members or anywhere else -- I respectfully submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that that is not the kind
of evidence you can rely on in deciding that the plaintiff has met her burden of proof.
So, going back to 1956, we do know from Ms. McKeever, and Mr. McKeever, that she was talking to Mr. McKeever from the time they were married about his smoking. And she was telling him, don't smoke.
He told you, from the time they were married in 1956, Ms. McKeever was telling him, you need to quit smoking. And he knew -- he knew that that was because she was concerned about his health. So just like -Remember the testimony that he thought, when he was a teenager, if his father caught him smoking, he would be punished, he got the message from his father; and then, starting in 1956, for their entire marriage, Mr. McKeever was hearing it from Ms. McKeever that he should quit because it wasn't good for him.
And that's not surprising, ladies and gentlemen, because the word was out in the '50s that smoking was bad for you.
Remember Dr. Singer's testimony?
Dr. Singer said, I knew back in the '50s that smoking was bad for me. And he said, I knew
not only that it was bad for me, I knew that it was fatal.
He wasn't in medical school in the '50s.
He was out there, hearing what everybody else
was hearing, and he was hearing what
Ms. McKeever was hearing and what Mr. McKeever
was hearing, and that's why you can infer
Ms. McKeever was concerned about Mr. McKeever's
health and his smoking as early as the
mid-'50s.
But you heard from Mr. McKeever, himself, that he just ignored Ms. McKeever. He made the decision to quit smoking -He didn't even try to quit. He didn't try to quit in the '50s; and then we have the '60s, and I'm not going to rehash all of that evidence, but you remember what it was.
You remember what happened in the '60s.
You remember the Surgeon General's report in 1964, we heard a lot about that. We heard about how it came into the McKeevers' own living room on their TV.
We heard about the warnings that went onto the packs in 1966, that said smoking may be hazardous to your health. Every single pack
of cigarettes that Mr. McKeever smoked, ladies and gentlemen, every single pack had that warning.
And the evidence showed you that the 1964 Surgeon General's report was a huge event, and that millions of smokers, including millions of addicted smokers, quit smoking in the years after that report came out. But Mr. McKeever wasn't one of them.
You also heard that millions of smokers quit smoking after the warnings came on the packs, including addicted smokers, but Mr. McKeever wasn't one of them.
The evidence is completely undisputed, ladies and gentlemen, that Mr. McKeever made no attempt to quit smoking. No attempt. He didn't say, I tried and I couldn't.
Ms. McKeever didn't say, he tried and he couldn't. No attempt to quit smoking for the '40s, '50s and '60s.
What happened in the '70s is not entirely clear, because you'll recall that at one point in his testimony, Mr. McKeever said, I didn't try to quit in the '70s. At another point in his testimony, he suggested that he may have
tried to quit twice in the '70s.
But a few things are clear. It's clear that, in the early '70s, Mr. McKeever learned that his father died from throat cancer. And it was clear that Mr. McKeever believed that smoking was the cause of his father's death, that smoking killed his father. And you recall that he testified about that, and that testimony tells us a lot.
Can we have Page 8 -- Slide 8?
So there's nothing about your father's death that you took as an opportunity to say, you know, I really need to change my own smoking behavior because I don't want to end up like my father?
No.
That's because you understood that was a choice that your father could make about whether to smoke, and it was -- right, it was your father's decision about whether he smoked for himself; correct?
Was -- and that's the way you viewed your own smoking, is that it was a decision for yourself that you could make as to whether or not you would smoke; correct?
Correct.
This was his deposition testimony, ladies and gentlemen, his sworn testimony.
He's asked: That's the way you viewed your own smoking, is that it was a decision for yourself that you could make.
He didn't say, no, no, wait a minute, I didn't view my smoking that way, I was addicted, it wasn't a decision. The reason that my father's throat cancer didn't matter to me was I had no choice. I couldn't have quit even if I wanted to. So it didn't matter what I thought. That's not what he said.
What he said was, what happened to his father didn't matter to him because he viewed that as his father's decision and, more importantly, he viewed his own smoking as a decision for himself.
So if the question is, did his addiction prevent him from quitting in time to avoid his injury, or did his own decision prevent him from quitting in time, that's the answer right there, from Mr. McKeever.
Now, later in the '70s, again, there's some testimony that he may have -- from
Mr. McKeever -- that he may have tried to quit, but he says it was just two times.
And this is a point on which Mr. McKeever's testimony and Ms. McKeever's testimony differed, because you may recall that Ms. McKeever suggested, in the '70s, there were more -- he tried to quit more than twice.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, once again, we would submit to you that it is Mr. McKeever's testimony that's more reliable and here there's another reason. And the reason is, when it came to whether or not he was actually attempting to quit, Mr. McKeever was not honest with Ms. McKeever. He lied.
Not my word; his word.
So Ms. McKeever may well have believed that Mr. McKeever was trying to quit. She may well have believed that when she saw the pack of gum, that he was using it to try to quit, but we know that he wasn't telling her the truth.
Can we get Slide 12, please?
Again, his sworn testimony: Okay. Who else have you lied to about your smoking?
Answer: My wife. That's about it, as
far as I can remember.
And Ms. McKeever told you that she now knows that she wasn't getting the full picture, the right story, from Mr. McKeever when it came to his attempts to quit.
And then he went on a little later in the transcript: Okay. Well, why would you lie to your wife about whether or not you had quit?
Because if I did admit to her, I'd have to give up smoking, and I didn't want to. I didn't want to give up smoking.
Not, I lied to my wife because if I did admit to her, I would have to give up smoking and I was too addicted. Not, because if I did admit to her, I would have to give up smoking and I just couldn't do it. Not, because if I did admit to her, I would have to give up smoking, but I thought it was safe for me. I didn't want to.
And that, ladies and gentlemen, tells you everything you need to know about whether or not it was Mr. McKeever's own choices and decisions to smoke that prevented him from quitting.
How else do you know that Mr. McKeever
wasn't being totally honest with Ms. McKeever when he told her he was trying to quit?
Well, you heard Ms. McKeever's testimony that -- about the gum. And she said, well, I actually never saw him chew the gum.
You heard her testimony about the patch.
And she said: Well, I actually saw the patch on his arm one time.
And then I asked her -- I said:
Ms. McKeever, at the time you thought that he was chewing the gum and at the time you thought that you saw the patch on his arm, was he smoking any fewer cigarettes?
She said: Not that I could see.
So that's not a quit attempt, ladies and gentlemen. And, so, when he's chewing candy or drinking soup -- and we're not making fun of that, people do all sorts of things if they're genuinely trying to quit -- but we respectfully submit to you the evidence shows Mr. McKeever wasn't genuinely trying to quit, because if you're chewing candy and you're smoking the same number of cigarettes that you always were, you're not trying to quit; you're just smoking and eating candy.
If you're drinking soup while you're smoking, but you're not trying to smoke fewer cigarettes, you're not trying to quit smoking; you're smoking and eating soup.
So we would respectfully submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that what plaintiff's counsel referred to as countless quit attempts -- you saw up on that slide "countless quit attempts," the same slide that said two-and-a-half to three packs a day -- you know that those were not serious, genuine attempts to quit.
Now, I want to come back to everything -I want to make one more point about what we just saw. Mr. McKeever told us, through that deposition, that he didn't want to quit smoking.
And I would ask you to consider the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, because your recollection of that evidence will tell you that there is not a shred of testimony, there is not a single piece of paper that would demonstrate to you that any time in 50-plus years of smoking, Mr. McKeever said to anyone, I want to quit smoking. He never said that.
So don't you think that if he's really trying to quit, time after time after time, he would say to Ms. McKeever, I want to quit?
Don't you think there would be evidence from his children that he said, I really want to quit?
Don't you think there would be evidence that he went to some doctor or went to a doctor that he was seeing anyway, to say, you know, I really want to quit smoking?
He never said it. And he never said it because he didn't want to quit smoking. He was smoking because that was something that he enjoyed doing.
Now, plaintiff's counsel spent a lot of time trying to say that Mr. McKeever didn't try to quit because of something the tobacco companies were saying.
In the first place, ladies and gentlemen,
I would respectfully submit that that's sort of trying to have it both ways. So, to say, I made a decision to smoke, but it was an ill-informed decision, is completely different from saying, I smoke because I was addicted.
Because if you're smoking because you're
making ill-informed decisions, maybe you're making ill-informed decisions, but you're smoking because of your decisions, not because you were addicted.
But, in any event, ladies and gentlemen, you know from the evidence that Mr. McKeever's testimony about seeing ads that said cigarettes were safe isn't right. In fact, the ads were saying exactly the opposite.
So can we get Slides 13 and 14?
Court's indulgence.
That's Mr. McKeever's testimony. He was asked: Can you recall any specific statement by anybody that cigarette smoking is safe?
And he didn't say, well, of course, I remember that 1994 hearing like it was yesterday. He didn't even refer to it. He didn't talk about any statement by anybody on TV from the tobacco -- from any tobacco company, let alone Philip Morris, or any -like T -- Tobacco Institute or any of those other organizations that counsel referred to as "front organizations." He didn't say, oh, yeah, I heard all these people coming on TV, saying it was safe.
He said: All I can say is I heard on the advertisements that it wasn't -- they claimed it was safe. That's as far as I -- that's as far as I know in reference to that, safe and not dangerous.
And I asked Dr. Proctor -- I said:
You're not aware of any statement by any cigarette manufacturer that any specific brand of cigarettes was healthy, correct?
Correct.
That's their expert historian. And you'll also see in the instructions, ladies and gentlemen, that after 1969, there can't be any claim that anything in the advertising undermined the warnings. And, in fact, there wasn't.
Can we go to the next slide?
I specifically asked him about any statement that low-tar cigarettes are safe, because you recall Mr. McKeever suggested that he was hearing statements that filters and low-tar cigarettes were safe. And I believe that counsel touched on that in his closing argument. So here we go. We have the same testimony from Mr. McKeever.
And then Dr. Proctor, I asked him this very specific question: You're not aware of any statement by any cigarette manufacturer that low-tar cigarettes are safe, correct?
In those exact words, you're correct.
And that would include Philip Morris, correct?
Sure.
Dr. Proctor, I may have had my issues with Dr. Proctor, but he certainly read a lot of ads, and he told you that he's not aware of any statement, including advertising, by any cigarette manufacturer, that low-tar cigarettes are safe.
So if counsel tries to suggest that there's this mass of evidence of statements by cigarette manufacturers that low-tar cigarettes are safe, you'll know that that's contradicted by Dr. Proctor's own testimony.
And you also will recall from Mr. McKeever's testimony that he was asked to identify any ad -- any ad -- that said that cigarettes were safe, and he couldn't do it.
And the evidence showed you why he couldn't do it, because the evidence was clear
that the cigarette advertisements didn't say that.
And I was going to put up a whole bunch of ads, but you've probably seen enough ads to last you a lifetime, and you'll have them back in the jury room. I urge you, look at the Marlboro ads and see if you see anything on those Marlboro ads that says smoking Marlboro cigarettes is safe, or smoking Marlboro Light cigarettes is safe.
What you will see is that on every advertisement after 1972, the message was exactly the opposite. The message was that there was a warning from the Surgeon General, starting in 1972, on the ads, that the Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
And while I'm on the subject of ads -and I'm going to come back to this when we get to the other verdict form questions -- I want to talk for a moment again about Dr. Proctor.
You recall he had absolutely no information about Mr. McKeever. And he didn't fight on that point. He said, that's right,
I'm not here to talk about Mr. McKeever; I'm
here to talk about these other things. So I don't know anything about Mr. McKeever. If you were to ask me questions about what he thought or what he read or what influenced him, he said, I have no opinion about what influenced Mr. McKeever.
He had no opinion about whether Mr. McKeever reasonably relied to his detriment -And I'm going to come back to that language in a few minutes.
Dr. Proctor had no opinion about whether Mr. McKeever reasonably relied to his detriment on a single one of the documents that Dr. Proctor talked about in his hours and hours of testimony.
So, at most, there are only two attempts to quit in the 1970s, and we would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that those were not genuine attempts to quit.
And, on that point, the experts, again, agreed. In fact, Dr. Drobes told you, motivation is a necessary condition. You have to really want to do it. You have to want to do it, you have to try to do it, and you have
to mean it.
I do not want you to hear me say that somebody can quit smoking on a whim. Someone who smokes heavily can't quit smoking on a whim. They have to make a decision. They have to do something about it.
And the evidence shows you, ladies and gentlemen, that whatever happened in the '70s, with Mr. McKeever and the patch and the gum -or maybe the patch and the gum were in the '90s, with all due respect to counsel, I'm not making a big deal of what decade it was -- the question is, whenever it was, was it a serious attempt to quit; and you know that it wasn't because you know that whenever the patch and the gum were going on, if they were going on,
Mr. McKeever didn't even try to cut back on how much he was smoking.
So that brings us to the '80s. And counsel has suggested -And, again, I'm going to come to this when we reach the other questions on the verdict form in just a few moments, but as long as we're in the '80s, in the 1980s -Can we get the -- I'm sorry, can we get
the -- just the '66 and '70 warnings, Michael, just -- I referred to them, but maybe we can put them up. '66 first.
Okay. So this is what we're talking about. That's the warning label that was on from '66 to '69. Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
Next, Michael.
All right. This is the one from '70 to '85, and this is the one that goes on the ads in 1972. Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
Every single pack of cigarettes that Mr. McKeever bought had this warning, and he told you he saw it. He said, I saw it, but I ignored it.
So now let's bring us up to 1985, if you would, Michael.
So now, in 1985, you'll recall that there were four rotating warnings, and I would like to focus you on the third one.
So, in 1985, this is the warning that comes on the pack: Surgeon General's warning: Smoking causes lung cancer. Smoking causes
lung cancer. Smoking causes emphysema.
Loud and clear, if you smoke the cigarettes in this package, you are doing something that causes lung cancer and emphysema.
And here's what Mr. McKeever had to say about those warnings.
Slide 9.
And, in fact, in 1985, the warnings on packs and ads change and they talk about cigarette smoking causing cancer and emphysema and various other health issues. You never disputed any of those warnings, did you, sir?
Yes -- no, I didn't. I didn't dispute
it.
He didn't say, I thought the Surgeon General was wrong. He didn't say, back then, I was telling everybody I don't believe that, the cigarette companies are telling me something different. He said that, back then, he didn't dispute it.
Then, Question: Okay.
Answer: I just kept smoking.
And here, ladies and gentlemen, is critically important evidence from
Mr. McKeever, the person who knew Mr. McKeever the best. What was that testimony?
Question: Right. But that was a choice that you made, cognizant of the risks; correct?
In other words, aware of the risks, that was a choice that you made?
Yes.
So, by 1985, there is no quest -- he doesn't -Remember, he's giving this testimony in
2011,	2012. He doesn't say, well, wait a minute, it was a choice that I made, but I wasn't really aware of the risks because I didn't accept what I was being told. I wasn't really aware of the risks, because the tobacco companies were telling me something different.
He said, in other words, aware of the risks, that was a choice that you made.
What else did he say? He didn't say, well, wait a minute, maybe I was aware of the risks, but I didn't make a choice, I was addicted. So, whatever I knew or didn't know,
Mr. Cross-Examiner or Mr. Deposition Examiner, it didn't matter because it wasn't a choice, I was addicted. That's not what he said.
And then we have the '90s and Mr. McKeever test -- didn't testify that he made any serious attempts to quit smoking in the '90s. And that brings us to the 2000s and I'm going to come right to 2005.
Because in 2005, we know -- we have the most important piece of evidence in this case on the question of whether Mr. McKeever had the ability to quit, because we know that in late 2005 -- whether it's August, September, December, I don't want to quarrel about that -but sometime in 2005, over a month before he went in for his surgery on January 25th,
Mr. McKeever quit smoking. We know that from the medical records. We know that from Dr. Singer.
So Dr. Singer may not have been an expert on addiction, but he was an expert on pulmonology. And he treated lots of patients, and he knew how to take what he called a history. And you remember -I think it was Ms. Sastre asked him, said: You took great pride in this particular history from January 9th, 2006, you thought it was publishable?
And he said: Yes.
And whether or not he's going to actually publish his history is neither here nor there.
The point is, Dr. Singer had been practicing for 30 years. And in perhaps a rare moment of agreement with Mr. Alvarez, he didn't take much guff, and he wasn't going to be taken in by anybody. He wasn't going to be led by Mr. McPharlin, saying things he didn't believe, and he certainly wasn't going to be fooled by Mr. McKeever.
So he wrote down what he believed to be true about what Mr. McKeever was telling him; and there was no question in his mind that by the time he saw Mr. McKeever, Mr. McKeever was a nonsmoker. He had quit smoking months before.
There was no evidence of any withdrawal symptoms, there was nothing to suggest to Dr. Singer that -- anything other than Mr. McKeever had, in fact, quit.
And you learned from Mr. McKeever something very important about that quit. You learned that he quit cold turkey. No gum, no patch, no nothing. He just made up his mind to
quit because finally he was motivated. And he told you what motivated him. He said, I couldn't take a chance on this other lung.
So you know that when Mr. McKeever made up his mind, when he put his mind to it, he was able to quit without drugs, without patch, without gum, his own willpower that was there all along, just waiting to be called upon.
And let's take a look at Slide 17. You all heard all this testimony about cravings and urges. Again, this is testimony in 2011, 2012.
Have you had a cigarette since that quit in 2005?
No way.
Have you missed it?
No. I'm happy.
He went on to say, actually, I'm miserable because of my medical condition.
But it wasn't because of missing cigarettes.
Have you missed it?
No.
So this goes back to what I was saying before. Are there some people who have a hard time quitting? Are there some people who quit
and then have urges and cravings and relapse in a couple of months or year or something else? Are there people who do miss it? Well, of course there are. But that's not Mr. McKeever.
Mr. McKeever quit cold turkey. He said -- he went nuts, was his phrase, for a few days, and that was it. And that's consistent with the testimony that you heard from Dr. Drobes, that, in the typical case, the withdrawal symptoms peak in two or three days.
I just want to touch briefly on what -what counsel put up on the board about withdrawal symptoms. You saw that long list of upset, irritable, pacing, and all those things, like trouble sleeping -- no small wonder if you're drinking ten cups of coffee, by the way -- but those other withdrawal symptoms, when you go back there, ask yourselves, did Mr. McKeever ever say that at any point in the '70s, '80s or '90s, I was trying to quit and it made me irritable, it made me pace, it gave me problems with my co-workers, it made me short with my children? Did he say any of that? No, he did not.
That is, again, ladies and gentlemen,
uncorroborated testimony from Ms. McKeever about things that happened decades ago, that is not supported by testimony from Mr. McKeever, her children, or anybody else. And we respectfully submit that you should take that into consideration in deciding what weight to give, if any, to that testimony about withdrawal symptoms.
So let's go to the -- back to the verdict form, Michael.
I'm not going to spend much time on this one: State the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of Theodore McKeever's COPD and lung cancer, that you charge to -We submit, ladies and gentlemen, you don't get to this question, because for all the reasons I just said, we respectfully submit that you should conclude that the plaintiff has not proved by the greater weight of the evidence that addiction was a legal cause of Mr. McKeever's COPD.
So we respectfully submit to you that the answer to Question 2, if you were to get that far, would be it was Mr. McKeever's own choices and decisions to smoke that prevented him from
quitting in time to avoid his injury, so he was the entire legal cause of his injury.
Can we get the next -Court's indulgence.
I can slow down a little bit.
Total amount of damages, I'm going to skip these for right now, to get to -Can we go to the next one, Michael?
I want to talk about these. Now, again, we respectfully submit to you, you never get this far. You don't reach these questions because we submit that you stop long before; but counsel talked about them, you heard instructions about them, so I'm going to address them.
So the question is: Did Theodore McKeever reasonably rely to his detriment on Philip Morris USA Inc.'s concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known, and so forth; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Theodore McKeever's COPD and lung cancer; and did he rely after May 5th, 1982.
Well, this sort of goes back to something I touched on before. And it's all that -- you
heard about Mr. McKeever was hearing from the tobacco companies that smoking was safe, he was saying, according to Ms. McKeever, well, because they're saying they're safe, I guess I've made a decision to keep smoking. He didn't say he was addicted.
Because they're saying they're safe, I'm going to keep smoking, that -- that -- I'm -pros and cons, whatever he said, I'm on the fence, I'm in the middle.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, we respectfully submit that that can't be right.
And how do you know? You know, first of all, for the reasons I suggested to you earlier, plaintiff's own witnesses telling you that the ads that Mr. McKeever said had safety messages did not say that cigarettes were healthy, that the low-tar cigarette ads did not say they were safe. But there's another reason that you know that.
The other reason that you know that has to do with what happened in 1999. Because you'll recall that the evidence showed you that, in 1999, Philip Morris came out with a new website. And what did they say on that
website? They agreed on that website that cigarette smoking was addictive. They agreed on that website that cigarette smoking caused disease.
So ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen, and think about this: If what's keeping Mr. McKeever smoking was not his own choice and decision, but being duped by tobacco companies into thinking cigarettes were safe, what would happen, in 1999, when Philip Morris said we agree that smoking was addictive, we agree that smoking causes disease?
And that wasn't a secret, that was all over the newspapers. And you saw one of those newspapers, you saw the Sun-Sentinel article, you saw the interrogatory response that Ms. McKeever submitted, that asked what papers did Mr. McKeever read, and right there in that interrogatory response, Sun-Sentinel.
And we heard about how Mr. McKeever was an intelligent man, he read newspapers and magazines. If he was reading anything, he was reading the Sun-Sentinel. And you were also told that he's reading articles about smoking and health.
So when he sees the headline and reads the article and sees that Philip Morris is now saying that cigarette smoking is addictive and causes disease, if that's what he was waiting for, to be able to make a decision to quit, what would have happened?
You know what would have happened. He would have gone to Ms. McKeever and he would have said, Vickie, I've been wrong all this time, now they tell me, the cigarette companies, they know their product, they're telling me it's addictive and it's dangerous, now I need to quit. Will you help me? Can I go to a doctor? Is there something I can do now to quit?
Well, ladies and gentlemen, there's not a shred of evidence, not a shred, that Mr. McKeever made any attempt to quit between 1999 and 2005.
And what does that tell you? That tells you he wasn't waiting to hear from some tobacco company that cigarette smoking was addictive or causes disease.
You can infer, ladies and gentlemen, that he knew that all along. He knew that and he
decided that he was going to take that risk.
He decided that that was a decision that he was going to make for himself, because if -- if it were really true that he were just waiting to hear from Philip Morris, he heard from Philip Morris six years before he quit smoking, with not a single attempt to quit in between.
And, again, without going through all of Dr. Proctor's testimony -And we saw document after document, mostly, ladies and gentlemen, from companies that were not Philip Morris, the documents you saw today, Mr. Alvarez, of course, forthrightly identified from being from other tobacco companies, there's not -And he talked about a conspiracy, but the point is, ladies and gentlemen, that I ask you, once again, to keep your eyes on the ball.
So, no matter who said it, is there any evidence that Mr. McKeever relied to his detriment on any of the statements that plaintiff says are false?
Is there any evidence that he relied to his detriment on any omission? You know that he didn't, ladies and gentlemen, because of
what happened in 1999, and because you learned that what he said about the ads just can't be true.
So we submit -And certainly whatever he may have thought in the '60s, and maybe even the '70s, did not continue after May 5th, 1982.
Court's indulgence.
So let's -These questions, did Mr. McKeever rely to his detriment on concealment and was it a legal cause -And, again, the question is: Did any concealment prevent him from quitting? And you know the answer to that is "no."
Then there's the May 5th, '82, question.
Can we go to 8 and 9, please?
These are related, but same idea: Did Mr. McKeever reasonably rely to his detriment on any act or omission taken by Philip Morris in furtherance of an agreement to conceal?
And we respectfully submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, for all the reasons, that there is no evidence that Mr. McKeever relied to his detriment on something Philip Morris did or
said or didn't say. There's no evidence on this question, either.
And, again, Dr. Proctor told you, the expert that they brought in here on all this evidence, he told you, I have no opinion on whether or not Mr. McKeever relied or was influe -- relied on or was influenced by any of these documents.
So let me just go backwards for just a minute to the damages questions.
Can we get those, Michael?
So we respectfully submit to you, ladies and gentlemen -Again, this all flows from the legal cause questions. We respectfully submit to you that the plaintiff has not proved that Philip Morris -- that -- I'm sorry, that smoking cigarettes containing nicotine was the legal cause, and addiction was the legal cause of Mr. McKeever's COPD and lung cancer.
So we submit that you don't get this far; but, again, this is something that counsel talked about, it's in the instructions, so I will touch on it.
I am not going to give you a number. If
you get this far, I just have some things to suggest for your consideration; and, namely, that you take into consideration the fact that we are talking about just a limited period of time, from December 13th, 2005, to Mr. McKeever's passing in 2013.
And I would also ask you to consider, first of all, the reliability of the testimony that you heard. And just to go back to that, the one -- the one thing that Ms. McKeever emphasized Mr. McKeever could no longer do after 2006 -- or the beginning of 2006, that she and Mr. McKeever used to do together, was walking.
And just as an example -- can we get Slide 11? -- in asking yourselves whether you can rely on the testimony that you've heard about damages for that period, here are the medical records that you saw.
So we have a 2010 and 2011: Takes a 20-to 30-minute walk, seven days a week; he walks every day, about 20 minutes.
So here we have years after 2005 and 2006, in this period of December 13th, 2005, to May of 2013, right in the middle of that
period, Mr. McKeever is reporting to his doctors that he's walking every day for 20 to 30 minutes. So -- and, again, he would have absolutely -He told you he didn't lie to his doctors and he would certainly have no reason to lie to his pulmonologist about this. If he's not able to walk, that's, of course, something he would share with them.
I want to go back and touch on -And, also, we know that -- of course, that he was having no symptoms up until that December 13th, 2005, date.
And you can take that down, Michael.
And something else we would ask you to take into consideration. When you're evaluating Mr. McKeever's -- I believe counsel used the phrase "quality of life."
When you're evaluating his quality of life from December 13th, 2005, to May of 2013, we would just urge you to take into consideration all of the other things that were going on with Mr. McKeever that affected his quality of life.
He had skin cancer. No suggestion that's
related to smoking. He had colon cancer. Agreed that that had nothing to do with smoking. His decline, his real decline, as you heard from the evidence, didn't happen until after his surgery for colon cancer.
So if you were to get to that damages question, which we submit you should not, we would ask you to take into consideration all of those things.
That -- that brings me, ladies and gentlemen, to the last question on the verdict form. And I know I'm beginning to sound like a broken record, but it is especially important for me to repeat that we do not believe that you get to this question. And this is the punitive damages question.
What I -- what I would like to point out -And this sort of puts a lawyer like me in a weird position because we've submitted to you that you don't get past the first question on the form and here I am talking to you about the question on the bottom of the form.
And I think you know by now that the reason I'm doing that is not because we think
you get there, but because it's addressed by counsel and addressed in the instructions.
The first and most important thing that I would ask you to bear in mind is that -- you can take that down, Michael -- is that the plaintiff's burden of proof on this question is different and substantially higher than all of the other questions you're going to be asked.
And I would like to take just a moment -I'm going to read just part of the instruction. His Honor has told you you are to consider the instructions as a whole, and I don't -I'm reading just part in the interest of time, but, obviously, you've heard His Honor's instructions, you'll have the instructions, and you should read them all in context. But I would like to just go over with you a part of the instruction that we submit is particularly important.
It says: As I've already instructed you, greater weight -- now it's Stern talking, which is the standard -- the burden of proof on the other questions -- back to Judge Murphy -means the more persuasive and convincing force
and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue. That is the burden of proof for punitive damages.
So if you have decided -And, again, we respectfully submit that the plaintiff has not met her burden of proof.
If you decide that it is just the scales are tipped to the greater weight of the evidence and only the greater weight of the evidence on the other questions, that is not clear and convincing evidence. That would be a "no." If all you can say is greater weight, that is all you can say on punitive damages, then that is a "no."
You must be able to say that it is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation.
So if you were to reach this question and you were to say, well, we think it's the greater weight, but we don't really -- we
can't -- there's some confusion here, or we think it's the greater weight, but we have some hesitation, that's not clear and convincing evidence and that's a "no" on the punitive damages question.
And two last points: One is, if you answer "yes" on punitive damages, that wipes out the comparative fault question that's up above.
And the second point is that -- what His Honor has instructed you, namely, that these damages would be in addition to whatever compensation you might have awarded if you get this far.
I'm about to wrap up, and I want to just say one more thing about the burden of proof.
His Honor has given you instructions, and there are lots of different ways to think about the burden of proof; but one way to think about the burden of proof is, if you want questions answered about elements that the plaintiff has to prove, you look to the party that needs to prove those elements. If you have questions, you look to the party that needs to prove the case. And that means you look over there, not
over here.
So if you're back there and you're saying, hey, if Mr. McKeever's -- if Mr. McKeever wasn't able to quit, how was it that he quit successfully in 2005, if that's your question, ask it over here, not over there.
If your question is, where is the corroboration or the support for some of this testimony, that's a question you ask over here and not over there. That, ladies and gentlemen, is what it means for the party to bear the burden of proof.
I would like to end by thanking you. I want to thank you on behalf of myself,
Ms. Sastre, our other colleagues, and, most importantly, our client, because you have been extraordinarily attentive and extraordinarily patient, and we are very, very grateful to you for that. And we have appreciated it all along, and this is my chance to express those things out loud. So I do that.
And I close with this: We respectfully submit that once you have considered all of the evidence and His Honor's instructions on the
law, and you have deliberated amongst yourselves, you will conclude that the plaintiff has not met her burden of proof. You will conclude that she has not proved by the greater weight of the evidence all of the elements of her claims and that you will return a verdict that says so.
Thank you.
