          (PLAINTIFF'S CLOSING ARGUMENT)
          MR. MITNIK:  Good morning.  We've been
     together for a long time.  We've been together long
     enough I've had to give myself a haircut.  That's a
     while.
          But now we can do what's called argument about
     the evidence.  Opening statement we were presenting
     it to you, laying it out.  We can actually bring it
     together in our view, our positions.
          And I want to do that.  But I want to keep it
     tied to the evidence.  And most importantly, I want
     to keep it tied to the law.
          Because in this case, the true guiding stick
     in here is what the judge gave you, bringing the
     law as your guidance.  And it's going to be
     particularly important here because we've gone
     back-and-forth with evidence, and it's kind of a
     bit of a rollercoaster up and down.
          But there's certain parameters that aren't
     clear at the beginning because you don't get the
     full instructions now.  And those parameters, I
     think, will guide you to a just result in this
     case, and to put all that evidence in the proper
     framework so decisions get made not on suggestions
     of what it might be, but on what the law really is.
          And I think when you hear what the law really
     is, it's going to be clear we met our burden of proof.
          And before I start going through that, there
     are a couple things I do want to do.  I first want
     to thank you very much for your time.  I'm not
     going to go back through a description of the
     importance of this.  Everybody understands, you
     made the duty, you've been here.  And we all know
     it was a difficult, long journey.  Thank you on
     behalf of that.
          Now, I want to talk to you first about the
     burden of proof.  And the burden of proof in the
     case is not that we prove this by -- to the
     exclusion of all other evidence, not by the beyond
     a reasonable doubt.
          This isn't a criminal case where we have a
     burden where creating doubt creates an out.  That
     is not the law here.  This is not like a criminal
     case where someone can throw up evidence and things
     and create some doubt, and if the juror thinks it's
     reasonable, then there would be a not guilty.
          This is a civil case.  And we have a very
     different burden.  It is a burden that is based on
     what weighs more.  It's a weighing process.
     Greater weight of the evidence means more
     persuasive, convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
          You don't take one piece of evidence out of
     context.  It's all put together.  You put your
     collective wisdom together, and you say, does our
     evidence weigh?  Is it the greater weight of the
     evidence?  Is it more persuasive, more convincing?
          And I'm intentionally emphasizing the word
     "more" because it isn't the only evidence.  It's
     not the most.  It's more.  Meaning often people
     say, you tilt the scale.  It's got to weigh more.
          That's not literally what the law says, but
     it's often interpreted that way.
          Another way it's often called is what's more
     like -- what's more likely right than wrong.
     What's more likely right than wrong?  What's more
     persuasive?  What's more convincing?  What makes
     more sense to me, looking at the totality of the
     evidence?  What's more likely right than wrong?
          So you have the freedom to use your common
     sense and apply it here and weigh it, and don't
     have a black-and-white type certainty that would be
     in a criminal case that could lead to circumstances
     where jurors say, gosh, I really, in my heart of
     hearts, think that this side's right, but there's a
     little doubt and I'd have to say a verdict that was contrary to where my heart was and my common sense
     was.
          So this is a -- something that is manageable
     for a jury, and it happens to be, most importantly,
     the law in the case.
          Next thing I want to point out is that -- and
     we said this at the front.  But I want to bring
     this back full circle.
          From the first piece of paper filed in this
     lawsuit, Mr. McMannis, on behalf of his wife,
     Barbara McMannis, has accepted responsibility for
     her share in this.  And I'm going to talk to you a
     little bit more about some suggestions of how to
     divide that up.
          But the important point -- and sometimes
     during trial, I sit here and get antsy and wish,
     gosh, I could get up and say it right now and
     remind people -- when you start hearing evidence
     of, well, wasn't there a big Surgeon General
     Report?  Didn't this make big news?  Didn't a
     family member die and at least they were telling
     you it was from cancer?
          And it's very easy to say, well, how can you
     say it's all their fault?  Well, that's a very
     reasonable reaction.  It shouldn't be all their fault.  And the point here is, it's not.
          She's taken responsibility.  And the judge,
     under the law, has laid out how all that
     percentages and all will work.  And she's you
     telling how it works.  But the fact of the matter
     is there's an acknowledgment of fault on her part
     too.
          But what we're here to do is to prove that she
     doesn't bear that responsibility alone.  That the
     evidence and the facts of what these defendants did
     that had an impact on her -- and I'm going to talk
     about the evidence of that impact in -- shortly --
     but had an impact on her makes them share in the
     responsibility.  And I'm going to share with you
     the lion's share of the responsibility because of
     the things that they did and how they went about
     it.
          But this is not a circumstance where we're
     walking in the courtroom saying, It's all their
     fault; I've got no responsibility under these
     facts.  That wouldn't be the position that we've
     taken.
          And the judge will tell you how all that fits
     into the law.  But that is an important fact, that
     if I could have, I would have popped up every day at the end of evidence and said, Please remember
     this, because I think it's an important
     perspective.
          Now, having said that, I want to talk to you
     next about the law, what brought us here, which is
     this Engle case.  And the judge has laid the
     circumstances out when she described them in the
     jury instructions.
          And the -- we've got this little cartoonish
     diagram just to simply give it some context of --
     and I'm sorry.  I'm forgetting your screen's here
     and I'm marching all in front of you.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, objection, your
     Honor.  Could we approach?
          MR. WEAVER:  May we briefly approach?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          (A discussion was held at the bench and out of
the hearing of the jury.)
          THE COURT:  It is closing time.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I understand.  Two issues -- we
     asked -- Mr. Mitnik wasn't here.  But I asked
     Mr. Prysock if there were demonstratives above and
     beyond the documents that have been admitted to
     evidence; and if so, could I see them before they
     were shown.  He said they weren't going to use any
     demonstratives.
          MR. MITNIK:  He was standing here when that
     happened, and we said we are using demonstratives.
     Absolutely.  That is a falsehood.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  No, that's not.
          THE COURT:  Let's take a look, then.  Show
     them to me.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  They have never shown to us.
          And the second objection is just telling them
     all about the --
          MR. MITNIK:  He absolutely told you he had
     them.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  That's not what I heard you
     said.
          MR. MITNIK:  You rolled your eyes and
     shrugged.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Prysock --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  About when -- how about you
     relax?
          THE COURT:  How many are there?
          MR. GERAGHTY:  We just need to see them.
     That's all, your Honor.
          (The sidebar discussion was concluded.)
          THE COURT:  You may proceed, Mr. Mitnik.
          MR. MITNIK:  Yes.  Okay.  Can you put that back up on the monitor?
          Okay.  We'll put it up in a moment.
          Let me -- so I'm not just standing here and
     wasting your time and mine, let me talk to you
     about what I'm going to be showing you in a few
     minutes, that this started, as you know, back in
     the 19 -- in the 19 -- here we go.  Let me get out
     of your way -- started in the 1950s, back when you
     heard when the conspiracy started with all of this.
          There was a trial down in South Florida in
     1998, and the jury sat for a whole year.  And after
     that, they came --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Objection, that's not -- that's
     not in evidence, your Honor.
          THE COURT: The case went up to the Florida
     Supreme Court in '99.  And from that is the
     judge -- and I'm not going to go into details of
     what the Supreme Court did.  Because her Honor, as
     it's going to be in your instruction, laid out what
     happened.
          But from the Supreme Court of Florida came
     these findings that in 2006, these type --
          MR. WEAVER:  Objection, your Honor.  Misstates
     the law. THE COURT:  The final decision, with a
     final -- findings were made final was what year?
          MR. MITNIK:  Came out of the Supreme Court in
     '90 -- I mean, the findings came out in 2006.
          THE COURT:  Okay. And those findings come into this
     courtroom with a -- an authority.  And we talked
     about this in voir dire.  There are certain things
     we have to prove before they come in -- come into a
     full force and effect.  And if we don't prove them,
     then we've lost the case.  It's that simple.
          And if we did prove them -- and I'm going to
     talk to you about what we have to prove and why we
     have in just a minute.  But once we've proven --
     and if we haven't, we're gone.  But once we do,
     then those findings come into this courtroom with
     full force and effect, period.  They have to be
     accepted.  That's just the law.
          And then, there are things we will have to
     prove that I'm going to talk to you about that
     showed that those findings then had a relationship
     under what's called a legal cause.  "A".  And I'm
     going to say this repeatedly.  I'm going to use
     some demonstrative.  And every time you will see
     the word in quotes and in bold, "a legal cause." And that's very important.  This is one of
     those law points that I'm so grateful that you got
     the instructions before I got up because it need
     not be the sole cause.  It is a cause.
          So long -- and it can act in combination with
     other factors so long as it contributes
     substantially to the outcome.  It can't be
     something that is un -- insubstantial or
     insignificant.  But if it contributes in a
     meaningful way, then it has met the legal-proof
     requirements of it being a legal cause.
          And we will be presenting you evidence to
     show, once those findings come in, the findings
     involving the concealment, the findings involving
     the fraud, the findings involving a defective
     product, the findings involving negligence, that
     those findings do have applicability to
     Mrs. McMannis that it did have an impact.  It
     wasn't frivolous or meaningless.  That it had an
     impact.
          And once we've shown that, we have met all of
     the proof on that aspect.  And then the next part
     of it will be to talk about the damages, cause, and
     what's fair and reasonable value under the
     circumstances just -- and then we will talk about the piece of this that deals with our punitive
     damages warranted to punish and deter.
          And this case is about Mrs. McMannis.  Make no
     mistake about it.  She has requirements under the
     law, proof requirements, evidence under the law
     that has to be presented before we can reach these
     steps.
          But at the end when I'm talking about these
     and we've gone through the evidence as it meshes
     with the law, what we will be talking to you about
     is that the case is about more than just
     Ms. McMannis.  But, because she qualifies for the
     criteria under the law the Court gives you and the
     evidence presented here in this case, that it
     provides an opportunity under the law to attempt to
     utilize this process where we have local citizens
     come into court and be seated as a jury and give up
     their time to try to deter conduct of these
     defendants and others similarly situated, to
     provide a motivation for change to protect the next
     generation.
          So this case involves clearly Ms. McMannis.
     If she doesn't meet the criteria, she can't provide
     that opportunity.  But once I've shown that she
     does meet that criteria, then we will be talking
     about that additional important purpose.
          Now, next, I want to talk to you about the
     class membership.  And I want to give you a brief
     analogy before I give that to you.  And that is --
     I'm walking -- I apologize.  I'm a pacer, and I'm
     probably going to walk in front of you.
          Here is an analogy that I find helpful in
     describing a legal cause.  And that is like a
     bicycle built for two.  You can have more than one
     force driving towards the same destination.
          For example, someone can have the ability to
     quit.  It's not impossible to quit.  Someone can
     have some choice left or, quote, free will, left
     and not be a total zombie.  And that is not the
     proof requirements here, that you have to have had
     no control or no ability --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I object to the argument, your
     Honor.
          THE COURT: That is not the law of the land
     in this courtroom.  The law is that the addiction
     has to be a cause.  And a cause --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I object.  It's a legal cause,
     your Honor.
          MR. MITNIK:  Yeah.  I'll fix that. It has to be a legal cause.  And let's look at
     what the law is on legal cause quickly.  You've
     heard it.  But I want to point this out because I
     believe, as I said, keeping the facts within the
     road and not having them go off the road so that
     there's a miscarriage of justice because we get off
     there, the legal track.  I want to point this out.
          Here is the description.
          Ms. McMannis was addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine and that this addiction was a
     legal cause of her lung cancer.  Addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of
     Ms. McMannis's lung cancer if it directly and in
     natural continuous consequence -- sequence -- I'm
     sorry, produces or -- I put a highlighter there on
     purpose -- or contributes substantially to
     producing her lung cancer.
          And I didn't highlight here.  But in order to
     be the legal cause of Ms. McMannis's lung cancer,
     addiction need not be the only cause.  Addiction
     may be a legal cause of her lung cancer, even
     though it operates in combination with the act of
     another, some natural cause, or some other cause,
     if the addiction contributes substantially to
     producing Mrs. McMannis's lung cancer. So the question isn't, Can she quit?
          The question is, Was addiction -- A, was she
     addicted, and was the addiction one of the reasons,
     not an insignificant reason --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Objection to the misstatement
     of the law.
          MR. MITNIK:  May I finish?
          THE COURT:  You can proceed.
          MR. MITNIK:  Was it, could not be some
     insignificant reason that she smoked so much as to
     get sick, but it had to have been a reason that
     contributed in a meaningful way.  As you just saw
     with the instruction, it's a contributing cause
     that is substantial.  Can't be insubstantial.
          In other words, when she got up in the morning
     first thing and decided to lit -- light a stick on
     fire with tobacco in it and suck it in her lungs --
     not an iced tea, not a coffee -- the first thing
     she wanted was to suck the nicotine out.  And not
     just puff it a couple times for the joy of it, but
     deep down into her lungs every morning for 40
     years.  Maybe not so many the first few years, but
     most of the 40 years, start every single morning.
          And the reason is, you heard from
     Dr. Henningfield, who has spent his life on this subject, that that is a substantial piece of
     evidence in determining if someone is addicted or
     dependent on nicotine because they had slept
     through the night and they are wanting to relieve
     the feelings of having been without something that
     you're dependent on and they do it right away.
     That is a profound piece of evidence of whether or
     not someone is addicted.
          But not just to stop there.  But that she then
     smoked more.  It's not like I have one in the
     morning because this is so much fun to smoke,
     suck -- smoke deep down in my lungs.  Not once, but
     puff after puff.  And every single puff, it is
     undisputed, delivers nicotine, the highly addictive
     drug.
          You saw me lay the cigarettes out.  I'm not
     going to do that again.  It would be too gimmicky
     to do it again.  But you saw a pack.  So it's a
     pack.  When you start seeing how many cigarettes --
     and the evidence is a pack to a pack and a half.
     But just take the pack.  If it's a pack and a half,
     it's 30.  In a pack, it's 20.
          Ten times, it takes ten minutes out of your
     life.  And it's ten hits on average per cigarette.
          One after another after another after another, on the way to work, every opportunity.  You heard
     the testimony.  When she worked somewhere where she
     was inside where she couldn't smoke, wherever --
     and remember, you could smoke everywhere back then.
          But certain circumstances, like, if she's in a
     nice office, they wouldn't want her smoking in the
     nice office, perhaps, later in life, or in a
     bottling place where your hands are busy.
          But is it all just a big coincidence that she
     would, on every opportunity, what all of the
     evidence -- totally undisputed, when there was a
     break and an opportunity, she smoked another one of
     these, deep in her lungs.
          Not one hit.  Ten hits.  And then would return
     to whatever she was doing.  And that would be the
     pattern throughout the day.  Not one day.  Not for
     a while, a while it was a fad.  For her whole life
     after becoming a teenager.
          And then on the way home, more.  Then on the
     way home, first thing, you get home and cooking
     dinner or whatever you're doing, and then all
     evening.
          She's got ashtrays all throughout the house.
     She's got them by her bed.  She smokes in bed.  I
     guess we've got a debate over whether she smoked in bed laying down or sitting up.  She smoked in bed,
     for goodness' sake.
          Her daughter said she would wake up and see
     her get up at night and smoke cigarettes.  At
     night.  It's like the Tina Turner song, "What's
     Love Got To Do with It."  Is the suggestion what's
     addiction got to do with it, got to do with it?  Of
     course, it contributed to the insane-sounding
     circumstances for that long.
          Dr. Henningfield couldn't have been more
     clear.  And put his credentials up against
     Dr. Dorce.
          And you know what's not on that?  Nothing on
     there says, according to the DSM-IV medical, it is
     this addictive.  Nothing on there says, according
     to something that isn't even called addiction in
     that book.  It's tobacco-use disorder.  No longer
     do you call it -- that you have to use a book that
     calls it something else to do it.
          Nowhere does it say anything.  It's, was she
     addicted to nicotine.
          You saw the definition of Dr. Dorce's back
     there that she says is the definition she uses.
          It had nothing to do with all these criteria
     and DSM-IV.  And then you saw what I pulled out and showed what she was doing to the criteria.  I went
     through and showed it.  That was being fairly
     assessed, unbiased assessment, not by someone who's
     doing lots of work for cigarette companies or their
     lawyers, that she would have even met the criteria
     under that.
          All of her family said -- you heard them come
     in court and testify -- she was addicted.  You
     heard her sister on video.  She was addicted.
     Every time she tried to quit, it made her feel so
     lousy, she said, I can't.
          She was told by her sister, I've got COPD, and
     it's from smoking.
          Now, take addiction out of the equation.
     Let's just lift it up and put it out of the room.
     This lady ain't addicted; it's just pleasure.  Man,
     this is so much fun.
          And her beloved sister tells her, please stop.
     I just found out I've got a deadly disease from
     smoking.  Take addiction out of the equation and
     explain her response of, I don't believe it.  I
     don't think it's causing your lung cancer, and I
     don't think it's going to hurt me.
          That's flat denial.  It is the ugly face of
     addiction screaming.  The ugly face of addiction is where denial isn't a stubbornness, it's a
     drug-driven phenomenon that makes no sense, and
     it's so frustrating to loved ones around them.  And
     to say, that's just because she enjoyed it.
          Did she enjoy smoking some?  You don't get
     addicted to a substance if it doesn't bring some
     pleasure.  That's what the drug does.  It's
     pleasurable to feel not euphoric, because it's not
     a euphoria drug that intoxicates, but it's
     pleasurable to have the relief of the feelings of
     being without it.  It's pleasurable to have that
     sense of well-being where you have energy but you
     don't feel wiry and jittery, where you can focus,
     but you feel relaxed and at the same time you have
     energy.
          And that's become a baseline after decades,
     all day long.
          Now, you take it away and they feel totally
     different.
          Now, are we ever going to know exactly how she
     felt?  No.  She's not alive to be interviewed and
     say, tell me how all that felt.
          But you heard her sister talk about the
     profound withdrawal that she told her about and how
     hard it was for her, because she even used the word hurt.  She was miserable.
          That's addiction.
          Greater weight of the evidence.  Is there a
     plausible argument?  Could, if we were in a
     criminal case, some doubt be created?  Sure.
          We're not in a criminal case.  What's more
     persuasive?  What more convincing?  What makes more
     sense?  What's more likely right than wrong that
     she was addicted, and that her addiction was a
     contributing cause to her death?  It was a cause
     that was a substantial factor in her smoking so
     much.
          This is her sister's testimony.
          She was not, when she used the patches.  When
     she used the gum.  Even after her diagnosis where
     you heard they scooped part of her brain out.
          They prescribed nicotine replacement
     therapies.  She tried.  She went to a hypnotist.
     She tried gum.  They put ashtrays out of the house.
          Her husband, who all of the evidence is, they
     had a loving relationship.  Not everybody has a
     great marriage, regretfully, but some do.  And this
     was his soulmate.  They adored each other.  And
     when he wanted her to do something that was
     important to him, within reason, she respected that and did it for him.
          That's what loving spouses do.  But not this
     one.  He had stopped.  And he stopped and didn't
     want her doing it.  And he's asked her to.
          And you heard him.  She couldn't deliver on
     that important request.  But that's just because
     she liked it so much.
          Was she addicted?  The evidence on the greater
     weight, there's no question we met that burden.
          If you take it to -- we can prove it further,
     but we need not, because it's not the law.
          Now, was it a contributing cause, a
     meaningful, substantial, not insubstantial, cause
     contributing to smoking enough to get sick.
          That's the question.  Legal cause.
          Was the addiction one of the reasons --
     because you heard the evidence.  You don't get
     cancer, lung cancer, from smoking occasionally or
     for a short period of time.  It takes a lot for a
     long time.
          Forty years, 20-or-plus cigarettes every day
     starting first thing in the morning.  If she's
     addicted, which clearly the evidence shows she was,
     then how can you say the addiction wasn't one of
     the reasons, a meaningful one, that she smoked like, as they use in those old statements, fiend?
     That much over-usage?  You see what it does.
          You heard their own expert, their last witness
     that came in here say, yes, if she had lung cancer,
     the smoking would have been a substantially
     contributing cause.
          And the question is, are we going to say, but
     gosh, if you took addiction out of the equation,
     she would have smoked that much for that long, when
     you've heard the statistics, almost everybody wants
     to be quit in three to five years.  And they aren't
     because they get hooked.
          And you saw their internal documents talking
     about the power of nicotine addiction.  Isn't it
     wonderful that they can't quit.  Addiction.
          A product that most of their customers would
     quit if they could.  We showed the document from
     Mr. Camel [sic] that said finding a level or
     whatever the phrase was, to keep them hooked.
          This entire industry has been built on the
     power of nicotine addiction to keep people smoking
     in spite of information swirling because the
     addiction does it.  On the supply/demand world for
     them, addiction gives them an unfair advantage on
     the demand side. The demand is drug driven.  And it's
     impervious to much.  And to say that addiction had
     nothing to do, it was not a contributing cause,
     that's what would have to be found here, that the
     greater weight of the evidence showed that
     addiction was just, A, not present, or had nothing
     to do with this.
          Not the only reason she smoked so much.  She
     wasn't a robot.  But a significant reason, a
     contributing cause.
          Once that's proven, once that's proven, then
     the finding -- oh, one more piece, lung cancer, I
     want to talk to you about.  But let me -- I'm being
     signaled to point these out.
          These were some of those documents that you
     saw, we're in the business of selling a
     nicotine-addictive drug; nicotine, a potent drug,
     the industry's upon it; put a hungry rat in a cage;
     smoke the cigarette -- and smoking the cigarette is
     pushing the level [sic].  Very few customers are
     aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive
     nature.
          Without the chemical compound nicotine, the
     cigarette market would collapse.
          We cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop
     using if they could.
          And then we look to the public statements.
     Two factors refute that smoking is a matter of free
     choice; starting smoking as teenagers, and they
     then become addicted.
          Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason,
     that's 2010 Surgeon General Report of the United
     States of America.  Nicotine addiction is the
     fundamental reason that individuals persist in
     using tobacco products.
          Enough of that.  The last step in class
     membership is, did she more likely than not.  Is
     the more persuasive evidence that she had lung
     cancer?
          And I don't -- it is frustrating not to have
     all of those records available because of the
     length of time.  But thank goodness, in America,
     justice doesn't get frustrated so easily.  The
     pursuit of justice has a fighting chance in this
     courtroom.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I object to that
     argument.
          THE COURT: What more evidence do we need than her attending doctor?  Not somebody that was
     there from Hospice and was really unaware, just put
     something down to fill it out.  But somebody that
     put down that was the attending, who would have
     been in the middle of bringing the specialist in,
     in every task that was run.
          We don't have all the results of all the
     tests.  We don't know what all tests were run.  We
     have a handful that, for whatever reason, when the
     hospital's purging for space, a smattering of them
     survived.  But we don't have all the tests.  We
     don't have all the MRIs.  We don't have all the
     information.
          But we have something that's just as good when
     the burden of proof isn't, do you know for sure.
          Remember questions.  This is one of the
     reasons I wanted to start with the burden of proof.
     You had questions, both of Dr. Villa and the guy,
     the doctor they brought last, about would you fill
     out a death certificate just with the information
     you got now?
          And the answer universally is no.  They don't
     want to fill it out unless both said you really are
     very comfortable, almost definitive diagnosis.
          Because it's an important things to put down. So does that mean, okay, gosh, these guys just
     can't prove it.  No.  Because we have here the
     person who was in the best position to have all of
     that information --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
     that argument.  Not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MITNIK:  We have here on this document
     filled out by Dr. Brinson.  And he says, and we
     know now, Dr. Brinson, the person they brought to
     court, didn't -- did not, when he rendered his
     opinions formally at his deposition, didn't even
     realize that was the attending doctor.  I had to
     point it out.  But the attending doctor, from the
     hospitalization in question, said that she had
     metastatic pulmonary carcinoma -- that's lung
     cancer -- to the brain.
          And right at the end, there was a question
     from one of the jurors to their last witness -- I
     don't remember the exact words.  But basically, is
     there some reason to question his answer in here as
     being a knowledgeable or reliable or honest
     response that he wrote in there?
          And Dr. Iannotti said, No, there's no reason
     to question it.  In fact, your patient's just died and it's a very somber, emotional time.
          Well, so there's the answer.
          And it didn't stop there.  You saw other
     evidence of it.  You saw the consent forms for
     treatment.  They're in evidence.  Two different
     radiation consent forms said the same thing, lung
     cancer.
          We don't have all the records and tests that
     were done that led to the conclusion that got in
     here and then got into the medical records on the
     consent forms, or treatment, for goodness' sake.
          But does that mean it's not reliable in a
     court of law?  No.  It's the most persuasive
     evidence under the circumstances that we can bring
     forward to you, and we did.
          There is one thing that I do want to clear up.
          There was an instruction the Court gave you on
     prima facie evidence.  And I want to touch on that
     because this is another one where I'm so pleased
     the judge read the instruction before I got up.
     And we have a clear path to justice outlined on the
     sides of the street by the law.
          And that is the description of what prima
     facie evidence means.  While he gets that, I'm
     going to talk to you in common-sense terms of it, and then I'll put the actual language up for you.
          Prima facie evidence means that it's not --
     prima facie evidence means it isn't the end of the
     discussion.
          It doesn't mean we present the death
     certificate and that's it.  What it means, though,
     it doesn't -- prima facie -- it's not -- prima
     facie evidence doesn't in any way diminish the
     power of that evidence below any other evidence
     that's coming to the Court.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I object, your Honor.  That
     misstates your instruction.
          THE COURT: It does not diminish in any way
     its importance and its value to you than any other
     evidence in the case.
          It's simply saying it doesn't rise up to the
     point of, now we've just proven we're done with it.
     But you take that evidence as valuable evidence and
     weigh it.  Put it on the scale.  And then put
     whatever's on the other side.  And what is on the
     other side, really?  What, other than to say we
     have a lack of evidence?  What's on the other side?
          Someone who ultimately, from a better question
     than I asked, from the jury said, I've really got
     no reason to question the guy.
          Well, now, he raised other questions.  But
     let's keep in mind that he is the guy who had -- I
     don't remember the exact number, whether it was 20
     or 30 or 30 or 40.  But he had other cases for the
     cigarette companies through their lawyers, all
     lined up.  And he's paid by them.
          And he's a cancer doctor who put aside a room
     full of cancer patients and moved them so he could
     come to court and testify on behalf of a cigarette
     company.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
     the aspersion being suggested by that.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Strike it.
          MR. MITNIK:  And didn't bother to even inform
     himself that the person who filled out the death
     certificate was the attending doctor.
          The evidence in this cases includes a
     certificate of McMannis's death and two radiation
     consent forms.  These documents do not constitute
     prima facie proof of the cause of death.
          And here comes the definition.
          Prima facie proof means evidence that established -- establishes a fact as true without
     any other supporting evidence.  In other words,
     it's the be-all, end-all unless the defendants
     present evidence that rebuts the prima facie
     evidence.  In other words, it's the end, over,
     unless they came forward with contradictory
     evidence.
          That is a rare situation where you have prima
     facie evidence.  This isn't there.  But it goes on
     to say, You are to consider this evidence along
     with the other evidence and testimony in reaching
     your verdict.
          It's a -- all that says at the end of the day
     is, it is another piece of evidence for you to
     consider.  It doesn't get special treatment.  It
     doesn't get diminished treatment.  It's another
     piece of evidence.
          But when you put it in these circumstances,
     what is the other evidence when Dr. Iannotti
     acknowledges, I really can't question this.  And
     acknowledge that person would have had access to
     all of the tests, any follow-up tests, any x-rays,
     whatever there was, he had it all.
          Okay.  Once we have -- and you can accept or
     reject the defendants' attempts to rebut or to prove or to show to the contrary that that wasn't
     the cause of death.  And what we know, not just
     from Dr. Villa, but even from -- and not just from
     the death certificate signed by the attending
     doctor, but from the person they brought, admitted
     that if indeed it was lung cancer, if what he wrote
     down there is actually right and not made up or
     misguided, then smoking was a substantial
     contributing cause to that lung cancer and death.
          So now I have completed the cycle of evidence
     on the burden of proof of more persuasive, more
     convincing force and effect of it all as to class
     membership.
          Then class -- after class membership, then the
     evidence comes down from the findings.
          You've heard the findings from the Court.  I'm
     not going to reread those now because I'm trying to
     save some time for what's called rebuttal.
          So I'm going to skip over them because you had
     them, and you will have them in your package back
     in the jury room to look at what those findings
     are.
          And the jury instructions show that, as to
     that each of those findings, it's that same
     standard of cause that says a legal cause; that the conduct, for example, conspiracy; for example, the
     concealment or fraud; for example, the negligence
     and the defective product.
          The burden for us of the greater weight of the
     evidence is to show that those -- that conduct,
     those things, were, A, again, legal cause of her
     lung cancer and death; that it contributed, and it
     can't be insubstantial and substantial alike.
          I want to talk -- that's the parameter.  I
     want to talk to you about that law briefly, I mean,
     about the evidence in that regard.
          And in doing so, I've got two things I want to
     point out.
          Number one, what was the message that was put
     out?  One, there's a real controversy here, folks.
     Ms. McMannis -- and you heard the evidence.  You
     weren't -- you didn't have to see an individual,
     the Frank Statement, for example, or this
     broadcast.  You didn't have to see any of it under
     the law because we have something called
     circumstantial evidence.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I object, your Honor.  It
     misstates --
          THE COURT: You didn't have to see any single piece under the law because we have what's called
     circumstantial evidence.  There's an instruction in
     there that says you can use reasonable inferences
     from the evidence.
          And there was a comment that counsel for the
     defense made about actions speak louder than words,
     with one of the witnesses.  And I couldn't agree
     more.  And it's illegal for you to use something
     called circumstantial evidence or actions speak
     louder than words.
          I'm going to talk to you about that evidence
     and how it lines up here.  But before I do, I want
     to point out, put the context.
          A, these defendants found out that their
     product was causing lung cancer, found it out
     early.  And they did not come clean.  They did not
     come forward and say, It's true.
          They came -- they created together and joined
     together as an industry, including these two
     defendants, to intentionally mislead their
     customers in America and did not do it line
     cane-pole fishing or door-to-door salesmen, but in
     a massive way, like casting a big net.
          And the question is, was Ms. McMannis one of
     those caught in the net that ended up on the boat? And how do we look at that?  When it is
     something that's done at a broad, broad, huge sums
     of money spent for decades, way outspending, one
     day, more than public health would spend.  They
     would -- one day of public health -- I'm sorry.  In
     a whole year of public health, they'd spend more in
     one day.
          That message was out to where someone had to
     live in a hole, not to know this is the "cigarette
     controversy" era.
          Without seeing a single piece of paper, you'd
     have known, gosh, this is a hotly debated subject.
     Some would believe it and say, Gosh, it does.  Some
     would say not.  But nobody was hearing a unified
     message and saying, This ain't open for debate.  If
     a manufacturer admits it, everybody admits it.
          Instead, there was a made-up, cooked-up,
     scientific debate created on purpose so people
     would keep smoking while these defendants in this
     courtroom knew the consequence was going to be an
     epidemic of disease and death, horrible deaths,
     because it was making them a lot of money; and they
     wanted a holding strategy to hold them to keep
     smoking.
          The purpose of -- remember, they don't even want someone to go one cigarette less.  Remember
     how much that would cost them if it was one
     cigarette less?  They didn't want anyone even
     trying to quit or cut down.
          When someone went a long period of time, when
     sense and reason would have said, for goodness'
     sake, this should be a fight-or-flight situation;
     you should be fighting to run for your life; or if
     addiction's hard, you ought to be trying over and
     over.  There's this horrible information everybody
     knows.  It's there.  It's not up for debate because
     they've admitted it.
          We didn't have that at all.  What we had was
     addicted customers like Ms. Mannis [sic] who are
     vulnerable to these kind of messages because of
     denial, because vulnerability, denial is a real
     phenomena that comes with addiction, and it's like
     putting a -- having a computer virus come on the
     computer.  It doesn't mean it doesn't run.  It
     doesn't just quit running.  But it doesn't run the
     way it otherwise would.
          And the glitch, one of the big glitches it
     creates is this denial.  And they exploited it on
     purpose, for money, knowing people like
     Ms. McMannis were going to die. Twenty years, they're bragging, looking back
     to it.  Single strategy to defend on three major
     fronts:  litigation, politics, and public opinion,
     and brilliantly executed.  Holding strategy
     creating doubt about the health change -- charge
     without actually denying it.
          And they used what they seemingly -- they had
     spokespersons.  Remember the testimony of
     Dr. Proctor.  They had handsome-looking,
     good-talking, joking spokespersons that would go
     out to give credibility and give this message.
          And it was actually in secret or
     behind-the-scenes documents that weren't available
     to the public or to Ms. McMannis, for goodness'
     sake; that it was a shield and a front.  And they
     would have been in a deplorable position, except
     for their defensive operation.  It was operation
     stumbling block.
          And think about what the purpose of it was and
     the consequences of it were:  Controversy.
     Psychological crutch.  Self-rationale to keep
     smoking.
          Some factors are factors other than smoking
     may be involved, one which death certificates or
     classifications of such a disease are questioned, one showing that many lung cancers may be
     metastatic from some other organ.
          As part of the conspiracy, they were actually
     having papers to go out to doctors doing these type
     things to try to enlist the doctors to help.
          They paid $20 million to the AMA to keep them
     on the sideline.  The President of the United
     States, beloved President Kennedy, in '64,
     commissioned the Surgeon General to get an answer:
     Is this really causing lung cancer?  He didn't
     know.  But Ms. McMannis is supposed to know.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object,
     your Honor.  That calls for speculation.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, on his knowledge.
          MR. MITNIK:  And here's what it was.  A
     holding strategy.  Remember the document, "Doubt is
     our product," to give the impression to the Barbara
     McMannises of the world that there's a real
     controversy, that scientists can't agree, and wait
     and see.  It's perfectly fine for you to wait and
     see.  This stuff doesn't hurt you, if at all, for
     you to wait it out.  So just wait and see.
          Remember, let the scientists do the worrying
     while you go on enjoying driving your car, having
     your meals, and smoking your cigarettes.  That was the message that was so broad, Barbara McMannis
     couldn't have missed the fact that that was the
     buzz in this trickle-down effect of how it was
     designed.
          They had too many customers to get to go door
     to door and say, Look at this.  They shot across
     the bound, covering the United States with that,
     quote, controversy.  And the controversy was cooked
     up and made up, because here's what was concealed
     from Barbara McMannis and the rest of the America.
          Some people could accept, Hey, I'm going to
     believe what the Surgeon General says.  And some
     did.
          But why is there a question if you're going to
     believe them?  Why is that a subject for debate?
     Because they made it so on purpose to make money,
     knowing the consequences.
          And this case is about consequences.  And this
     case is about truth.  What was concealed?  The
     controversy was cooked up and made up.
          What else was concealed?  The scientists did
     agree.  Remember?  British Tobacco came over way
     back.  And everybody agreed in the industry.
     Remember all the way at '94, these defendants'
     heads of their corporations stood in front of Congress and raised their hands and swore to tell
     the truth and denied it all the way in '94.
          And you saw the evidence of everything they
     did in between and how they countered.  When the
     PSAs, the public service announcement, came and
     they started working, they came off the air so the
     freebie to the public health wouldn't run anymore.
          You saw how they countered it.  They came up
     with the Truth Squad, which was just one vehicle.
     And you saw the guy standing -- here's one of those
     spokespersons, looking good, standing there,
     talking good on the steps of Congress:  All these
     scientists say...
          And Bill Dwyer, standing with a bank of
     microphones.  Everybody knew.  How come it's a hot
     news item if Bill Dwyer is saying, Heaven forbid,
     if Califano gets into the more intimate business of
     ours.
          And they knew the truth.  And they said
     Barbara McMannis knew all she needed to know.  She
     didn't know that the controversy was made up.  She
     didn't know that scientists really did agree
     because they were loading up scientists to make it
     look otherwise.  And she didn't need to hear a
     scientist say it for that, they had gotten into society, that this is a controversial subject.
          And what else she didn't know is that it was
     not okay to wait and see because there was nothing
     left to wait and see about.  You need to do
     everything in your power to break free.  This stuff
     really does kill in a horrible way.  Not:  You
     heard it from somewhere.
          And is that material?  You're going to get --
     you've got an instruction -- I'm not going to slow
     to pull it out -- on materiality, that says -- in
     materiality says, for one of these -- for
     information that's concealed -- and, remember, if
     something's concealed, she can't have seen what's
     concealed.  It's concealed.
          But what was concealed was this information
     that scientists do agree the controversy is cooked
     up, made up, and it's not okay to wait and see.
          Would that have been material?
          Here's the materiality instruction.
          The material fact is one that is of such
     importance that a reasonable person would consider
     the same significant in their decision-making
     process.
          Would that not be important information for a
     reasonable person to know?  Would it not be significant to know, Hey, this whole thing's been
     made up by us?  Everybody's -- scientists really do
     agree.  And you cannot -- you do not have the
     luxury of waiting and seeing.  Get on it before you
     get deeper into the addictive cycle.  Get on it
     before you get deeper into the addictive cycle
     because the longer you do it, the deeper you get.
          And she started as a young person.  So she's
     hardwired.  But for goodness' sake, to have a
     fighting chance, start soon, not -- rather than
     later.
          And they were intentionally, quote, holding
     her and everybody else to keep them from trying, to
     convince them there was no real reason to try to
     stop.  You don't even need to try.  Wait and see.
          Would that have been material to know the
     truth of what we've seen in this courtroom, which
     clearly that book of secrets, those documents,
     weren't available to Ms. McMannis.
          So let's talk real quick about that.  And then
     I want to move forward.
          Whats is the evidence?  I said circumstantial
     evidence.  And, you know, sometimes circumstantial
     evidence can be more powerful than direct evidence.
     Let me explain that.  When I was younger, my daughter --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
     telling personal stories.
          MR. MITNIK:  All right.  I'll take my daughter
     out of it.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor -- I object, your
     Honor.
          MR. MITNIK:  Let me give you an example.
          THE COURT:  Let him give his personal
     experience.
          MR. MITNIK:  Sure.  Let me give you an
     example.  If somebody was sitting at a dining room
     table, working in the evening, and they had a
     daughter who liked to drink Coca-Cola before they
     went to bed and they were young and the Coca-Cola
     would get them ramped up from the caffeine and they
     didn't sleep good.  So they weren't supposed to
     drink Coke right before bed.
          And that the person, the youngster, was in the
     kitchen.  And the person, the father at the table,
     says, What are you doing in there?  Because they
     hear the refrigerator.  You're not getting into the
     Coke, are you?
          Let's hypothetically call her Jennifer.
          You're not getting into the Coke, are you, Jennifer?
          And she says, No, Daddy.
          Thirty seconds or later, you hear
     (indicating).  And the man gets up to go check on
     what's going on.  And there is a 2-liter bottle of
     Coca-Cola on the ground with the top off, fizzing
     all over.  And there is a glass in Jennifer's hand,
     and it's gotten all over her.
          And that man said, Jennifer, you didn't get
     into the Coke, did you?  Which is a dumb question.
     But it's calling for direct evidence.
          And the direct evidence was, No, Daddy.  But
     the circumstantial evidence is the liter, 2 liter
     of Coke, foaming all over.  Which is more
     believable?  Which is more persuasive?
          And on these circumstances, these defendants
     got Coca-Cola all over them.  So let's look at that
     evidence in this case.  Because we are talking
     about what their -- with these defendants, what
     they were -- you take what their aim was.  And then
     let's look and see, did it fit what their aim was?
          Their aim was to influence smokers like
     Ms. McMannis to do something that otherwise doesn't
     make sense.  Don't even try.  Suck hot smoke into
     your lungs when you're a kid, where you have to fight to get through it because it's nauseous to
     you at first.  And then do it every day, early in
     the morning, non-stop.  And do it for decades for
     as long as we can, till death do us part.
          Let's see.  Did she fit into this pattern,
     looking at the Coca-Cola?
          She started when she was 13 or 14.  The aim
     that they were trying was to get them to start
     young because people don't start unless they're
     young.  You saw the ads.
          She inhaled.  Engineering, additives, all of
     those things that are put in to make it less harsh
     and more inhalable, which speeds delivery and makes
     the likelihood of addiction go through the ceiling.
     She did just that.
          She made her way up to, not smoking casually
     as someone non-addicted, which wouldn't help their
     business model, as we saw, but to smoke it exactly
     the way they intended it.  Not as some abuser of
     the product.
          That product is designed to be used like she
     used it, all day, every day.  That's why they give
     dose packs of 20 and you're -- so you get you
     through the day so you can get back to your carton
     or more of them.  She used them exactly the way designed in this excessive manner, driven by a
     highly addictive drug.
          She was smoking at a time when 60 percent of
     the doctors were smoking.  She was smoking first
     thing in the morning, all day.  That was the
     influence that they wanted to exert.  That was the
     aim.
          Did she follow it?  Check.
          She started when she was 13.  Check.
          She inhaled.  Check.
          She smoked a pack or pack and a half a day, as
     their aim was, of the conspiracy.
          Remember, you've got public health saying,
     Don't.
          And they're over here saying, Oh, come on,
     Chicken Little.  Boy crying wolf.  Scientists can't
     agree.  Wait and see.
          Check.
          She switched to filters.  You saw the
     documents; psychological crutch.  You saw the
     documents; the illusion of filtration.  You saw the
     documents; that the public didn't realize they
     didn't work.
          But she switched right when everybody was
     switching to filters.  And to market it in an underlying way to give the impression it was a
     healthy alternative to trying to quit.
          And what it -- did it work?  Well, she's not
     here to come in here and say, That's why I
     switched, exactly that.
          And if she did, she'd be subject to cross
     examination if she was alive on "that's
     self-serving."
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, that's calling for
     speculation.
          THE COURT: Actions speak louder than words.
     She did it when everybody was doing it, exactly the
     way they designed it to be done.  Is that reliance?
     Does that prove the element that it had, and it was
     a legal cause?  That, in and of itself, is enough
     to prove legal cause without any of the rest of it.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object.
     Misstates the legal instructions.
          THE COURT: That, in and of itself, would be
     enough to show it was a legal cause.  She switched,
     rather than try to quit with all her might.
          Check.
          She smoked the most heavily advertised brands of the time, these defendants' products, Winston,
     Raleigh, Marlboro, just like they wanted her to do.
          Check.
          She went these long stretches without even
     trying to quit.  It makes no sense but for this
     powerful circumstantial evidence that was having an
     effect on her.
          For goodness' sake, addiction might override
     her; but you're trying more, unless you now have a
     reason to say -- and here's a powerful piece of
     evidence, and I'm going to check it before I say
     it -- her own sister calling her, and she won't
     accept that it came from smoking.
          You think this didn't give her that to prop up
     on, this message didn't get to her?  Where in --
     where else would that have come from?  Who else but
     this conspiracy, these defendants, was leading
     anyone to believe your doctor doesn't know what
     they're talking about?  Scientists can't agree.
          That was one of the really horrendous things
     about this, was that it took the natural family
     protection system, where family members would try
     to protect another, and it disarmed them.  Because
     how does a family member --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, this is all speculation.  It's not in evidence.
          THE COURT: How does a family member know
     more than these scientists?  And if they can't
     agree -- and it's been years now, and it's still
     this open debate -- how do you know, sister,
     husband?  How do you know?  They don't know.  And
     they disarm what should have been a natural
     protection system.  Smokers of psychological crutch
     itself, self-rationale to continue smoking.
          So she went long stretches in an irrational
     way without even trying, which is screaming
     evidence that this had an impact on her.
          Does that mean, okay, she's got no
     responsibility?  No.
          But does it mean they are responsible here
     too?  Yes.
          Failed quit attempts.  A, you have addiction
     and you have a conspiracy that's piggybacking on
     addiction and denial so that when someone does try
     to muster the strength to quit, they've got this
     unending, hammering message that there really is no
     reason, wait and see, in their ear, and everybody
     around them using the same product.
          Did it work on her?  Well, her quit attempts weren't very energized.  Could it just be because
     I'm just doing it for Donald?  Could be.
          But what is more persuasive and more
     convincing when you look at the power of the
     message, the aim of the message, and that she did
     exactly what they hoped?  Don't try, and when you
     do, don't sustain.
          Don't want to lose one cigarette a day.
          And she stayed on the defendants' money train
     all the way until it was too late, and to die.  She
     is a cigarette company success story.
          Now, I want to finish going through this on a
     couple of points, and I will save some time here.
          There is a -- there is a issue in here where
     it talks about the fault and the comparative fault.
     And the judge will instruct you on that law.
          But this is one of those times where, at the
     end of the evidence, I want to make a suggestion to
     you.  And at the end of the day, what I say to you
     or the other lawyers say to you isn't evidence.
     And you use your collective wisdom and your
     fairness to do what's fair and right and reasonable
     under the circumstances.
          But I do feel compelled to make some
     suggestion.  And I would suggest on that, where you look at the percentages of fault, that it be
     divided up 20 percent to my client.
          Remember, you heard the instruction from the
     Court about you factor in when they're young, when
     they start, that started this whole train running.
     An addiction can't be taken out of any of this
     story.
          And she was young, 13, 14 years old, when you
     get hardwired into the brain.
          And on the other hand, what do we have?  Well,
     we have two defendants, which actually one of them
     deals with two more, that it merged in with them.
     The American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williamson
     for which RJ Reynolds' responsible.  And if you
     take those four and my client and just made that
     even, which I suggest isn't even, but if you did,
     that's 20 percent and 80 percent, when you total
     those that are responsible for altogether.
          And then the last part of that is the part
     about the damages.  And I -- you saw from the
     instruction, the punitive damages, are they
     warranted, is it this phase?  It isn't this phase.
          If you find we met our burden of proof and
     find punitive damages are warranted here for the
     things that they've done, then we'll come back and ask you for one more day to try to accomplish that
     which we have set out to do in this case under the
     law, to get to the point of trying to deter and lay
     out that plan.  Now isn't the time.
          On this phase, I'm going to talk to you about
     the damages to Donald McMannis.  And in that
     context, here's what I would ask you.  And again,
     what I tell you on that, these are ultimately your
     decisions.  But I would be remiss if -- I feel, if
     I didn't give some suggestions to you to help in
     the process, to be added into the pot of processing
     all this information when you go back and do the
     all-important job of deliberating.
          And let me start the beginning of that with a
     very brief explanation.  Those damages that are
     compens-- not punitive damages.  Compensatory
     damages do not -- what that has to do with, is not
     how -- the proper framework is not how much are you
     going to get.  The proper framework is how much was
     taken, what is a reasonable value of your loss in
     what's called a wrongful death suit, for the loss
     of the companion and the suffering that it has left
     him, for 26 years.  It's been 20 years.  And the
     life expectancy was 6.7.  So six to seven years to
     go.
          And you have to look at it as a couple things.
     We don't come back a few years from now and do an
     update.  This is a verdict for all time.  So we've
     got to get it right today.
          And, we have to view the evidence in this
     specific case, and the circumstances of this
     specific case, because we're talking not about
     someone who had a lousy marriage, but an adoring
     relationship.  We know that.  We heard about how
     his sister -- Barbara's sister said, Mr. McMannis
     was a lost soul, withdrawn, and isolated.
          You heard, undisputed, he fairly quickly sold
     the marital home to move out of it.
          And that they had an adoring, devoted
     relationship to one another.
          Those are circumstances.
          So it would be a different set of
     circumstances if you had somebody that was, you
     know, really bickering and had separations and
     things.  We don't have that.
          We also have a man that now it has been
     20 years and has lost his soulmate and has not even
     dated.  And he is withdrawn and isolated, rather
     than in the golden years, having his wife there to
     share this time. Those are part of the circumstances that have
     to be weighed in looking at this.
          And we also have to look at the value of time.
     And the value of time, what do I mean by that?  We
     are talking about 20 years, past, and reasonable
     predictions of six to seven years into the future.
     It could have been more or less.  No one knows for
     sure, but that's the evidence to be considered
     here.
          And when you put that together, we don't live
     life in chunks.  We don't say, okay, I wake up and
     it's two days later, unless someone's in a coma.
     We live life moment by moment, hour by hour.
          So to look in that time in the context of the
     value of time and try to put some reasonable
     perspective on it, I would suggest, is one method
     to look at this.
          The other point that I want to make is that we
     have to look at this also in the circumstances that
     are part of his suffering, that are unique to him
     in this case, but they are this case, which was
     that the -- once that -- after she had died, and in
     the suffering in those months after she was
     diagnosed with a lung cancer to the point that she
     died, and then going forward, people have to
     process their grief and their loss.  And this was a
     loss of great value to him.  Something -- his
     greatest treasure was taken.
          Under circumstances where he has to process,
     in his grieving and his going forward, the
     helplessness that he felt to this product.  The
     helplessness that he felt to cigarettes.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object.
     That's not a proper basis when considering
     compensatory damages.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT: That is part of his grieving, is
     he doesn't start fresh after she dies, and forget,
     and the things that he has with him, going forward
     from her death, is the helplessness that he felt
     with the product that ultimately led to her death.
     And the information that he's learned that is part
     of his processing of his grief, about what was
     going on that he didn't know about at the time --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, objection.  That
     calls for speculation.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MITNIK:  I would suggest to you, if you take the circumstances of this particular case
     under this evidence that we're here in this
     courtroom on -- not some other case.  This -- that
     if you took $10 an hour over the -- including the
     20 years in the past, and the 26 to 27 years left,
     according to the life expectancy tables, and put it
     for both defendants, RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris,
     as a reasonable measuring stick, that that would be
     a reasonable way to look at it.
          And if you take that over the time frame we're
     talking about, that is a -- total, including both
     defendants -- that's a total of $5 million.
          And I would suggest to you, that's a lot of
     money.  But this case isn't about how much you're
     going to get.  This case is about what is the fair
     value for what was taken?  And I suggest to you,
     under the unique circumstances of this case, that
     that is fair and that is reasonable.
          Thank you.  I'm going to save a little time.
          Wait one second.
          Now, the last part of it -- you're going to
     have a jury stretch.  I say thank you and I -- kind
     of fits and starts here.
          Is the last part.  And do we have -- can you
     pull that instruction for me?
          You're going to be -- we're going to be asking
     you to find -- and this has a bit of a different
     burden.  Remember, I've talked extensively about
     the proper burden of proof.  More persuasive, more
     convincing.
          When now we're talking about are punitive
     damages warranted under the evidence in this case,
     and the law that the judge gives you, I want to
     talk to you briefly about that law.
          But the punitive damages, under these
     circumstances, have to be by the clear and
     convincing evidence.
          Can you give -- here it is.  Clear and
     convincing evidence.  This is a higher burden of
     proof before we can establish that punitive damages
     are warranted.  And it ought to be.  It's a serious
     matter.
          And clear and convincing is greater -- is --
     differs from greater weight of the evidence.  It's
     more compelling and more persuasive.
          It is the -- again, the full force and effect
     of the entire evidence in the case -- I'm sorry, in
     contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence
     that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion,
     and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue.
          That is the burden for us to prove to you that
     punitive damages are warranted in this case.
          And here's the factors that you look at on if
     punitive damages are warranted in the circumstances
     of this case as -- as, if we prove these things --
     as -- and here's the purpose of them -- to punish
     and deter, as punishment and as deterrents to
     others.  That's what I'm asking.  That is the other
     significant part of us being here.
          Punitive damages are warranted against the
     defendants if you find by clear and convincing
     evidence -- I wanted to tell you that first so you
     can be using that lens to listen to the
     circumstances -- if the conduct was so gross and
     flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human
     life or of the safety of persons exposed to the
     effects of such conduct.
          That is clear.  That is convincing.  That is
     precise.  That is exactly what they did.
          The conduct showed such an entire lack of care
     that the defendants must have been consciously
     indifferent to the consequences.
          How could it be otherwise?  They knew it was
     causing cancer.  And they set out on this, not just individually, but an industry-wide
     pool-your-money-and-resources conspiracy to get
     people to keep smoking in a holding strategy by
     deception.  You saw from the evidence they are
     masters of deception, and they did it for money.
     And they did it knowing the consequences.  How
     could that be -- not be -- how could that be any
     more clear.
          Where's the rest?
          The conduct showed such an entire lack of care
     that the defendants must have wantonly and
     recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of
     the public.  How can we answer that question by any
     other means than yes, with the clear and
     convincing, precise evidence we presented.
          The conduct showed such reckless indifference
     to the right of others as to be equivalent to an
     intentional violation of those rights.
          This evidence is crystal clear.  They did
     every one of those things.
          In determining entitlement, you also may
     consider similar harms suffered by other persons
     not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the
     reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the acts.
          And that is why we have put in evidence of
     the -- now up to nearly a half a million people die
     every year in the United States.
          And way back in the '50s, early '50s, is when
     they hatch this plot.  Right when those sales were
     coming down hard, nosediving.  The consumption
     graph, whichever one you use, was nosediving.
          And they got together at the Plaza Hotel, way
     back when, and they did not say what are we going
     to do to stop this.
          They said, wouldn't we be wonderful if we were
     the first to come up with a cancer-free cigarette
     and we got to create doubt and still fears.
          And they ultimately said it was never
     designed.  It was a victory.  It was a whole new
     strategy.
          And they celebrated how well it worked
     20 years later and then poured the fire on going
     forward, attacking the Surgeon General when he
     tried to say that.  Undermining faith.  Going off
     the air when ads and public service announcements
     were.
          Anything to keep people smoking and keep the
     money coming in.  Not reasonable money from like a
     cigar product, where someone is using it
     reasonably.  But from that non-stop-type usage that drives the sales through the ceiling that was
     driven by addiction because they were now in the
     business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug.
     And while they tried to get the fly in the ointment
     out, which is the disease -- they'd love to get a
     healthy cigarette.
          One thing you don't hear -- see is they're not
     taking the addiction out.  And you heard the
     evidence.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object and
     move to strike that.  Improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Over -- I'll sustain that
     objection.
          MR. MITNIK:  You heard evidence that they,
     from way back, could produce it with nicotine
     levels so low they weren't addictive --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Same objection, your Honor.
          MR. MITNIK:  It goes to reprehensibility.
          THE COURT: -- from way back, and they can
     grow it without it.  But while the disease is the
     fly in the ointment, the addiction is the secret
     sauce.
          And punitive damages are warranted because
     that's the set of circumstances today. And you saw the evidence.  While we sit here
     in court, RJ Reynolds' Web site is still
     trivializing addiction, saying it isn't the thing
     that causes harm.  It's just the burnt tobacco,
     creating this gap between the true culprit, the
     catalyst that kills the nicotine, and the
     cigarette, creating the illusion of safety for
     teenagers today.
          Thank you.


          (PLAINTIFF'S REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT)
          MR. MITNIK:  Okay.  I've got some replowing
     territory here, and I'm going to be -- I apologize
     to madam court reporter, I've got to move fairly
     quickly here, and bear with me, I'm going to talk a
     little fast.  I have more to say than I have time
     to say.
          First of all, I want to start with the law.
     I'm glad I get to get up and have the last word so
     I can point this out to you.
          Number one, they showed you, on the
     concealment, this part, and left this part out.
     And it is the essential part.  And by not putting
     on it on the ELMO doesn't change the law.  So let's
     see what the law is.
          In order to be -- and this is on plaintiff's
     claim for concealment.
          Legal cause, a legal cause, which I showed you
     both of these.  And then it says, in order to be
     regarded as a legal cause of Mrs. McMannis's death,
     the concealment by RJ Reynolds and/or Philip Morris
     need not be the only cause.  And it may be a legal
     cause of her death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other
     natural cause or some other cause.
          So the fact that she may have some choice left
     in the matter and is not a robot, does not change
     the fact that it's a legal cause, so long as it
     contributes and in rather than some trivial or
     unsubstantial way, but in a meaningful way.
          Number one -- and we have certainly shown
     that.  The switch to filters alone shows that.
     Switching to filters at the precise time.  And they
     say, she didn't say that she switched because of
     that.  She's not here.  It's a wrongful death
     claim.  She can't come in here and tell you why.
     But what we do know is -- what we do have is some
     evidence that helps us answer the question.
          The evidence is that people would have to,
     quote, remember the word compensate for the
     filters.  And what they would have to do, because
     they were addicted, was have to suck harder --
          MR. WEAVER:  Objection, your Honor, facts not
     in evidence.
          MR. MITNIK:  It most certainly is in evidence.
          THE COURT: That they would have to
     compensate, and that they were smoking harder to get it in, and that they were being promoted and
     touted as safer.
          So they're being promoted as safer.  She
     switches, at the time this information is coming
     out, from a product that she's addicted to and
     according to them is enjoying wonderfully, to
     something now that has a something on the end of it
     that makes you have to go, (indicating) harder to
     get it.
          I guess it could be a big coincidence.  But
     she would be a group of -- you saw the evidence --
     millions who switch for that very reason and just
     be that one odd person out.  It's possible.  But it
     is it likely?  What's more persuasive?
          So, no, she can't come in here and answer the
     question personally, but we've got plenty of
     evidence to suggest that wasn't just a big
     coincidence.
          Next on the law, they suggested on the
     punitive damages, and showed part of the
     instruction.  And again, I will show you the rest
     of the law.
          They said the conduct causing Mrs. McMannis's
     death was so flagrant and -- as to show a reckless
     disregard for human life, safety of others, in effect -- exposed to the effects of such conduct.
          The law is clear that in assessing whether
     punitive damages are warranted, that you look to --
     not just to McMannis, but harm to others.  There's
     an instruction on it I showed you before.  And it
     talks about disregarding the safety and welfare of
     the public, not just of Mrs. McMannis, and reckless
     indifference to the rights of others.
          So it is clearly harm that they have done to
     others showing that callous, reckless disregard to
     show punitive damages are warranted, including the
     continued marketing to teenagers today.
          Today.
          Still selling an addictive product to
     youngsters when the addiction can be fixed.
     Knowing they are starting, and all of the data
     shows, thinking they're going to stop and not be
     hurt, and not appreciate the seriousness of this
     addiction, all the while the defendant,
     RJ Reynolds, putting on their Web site today,
     nicotine -- can you pull that up while I'm
     talking -- that nicotine isn't a problem.
          Nicotine in tobacco products is addictive but
     is not considered a significant threat to health.
     And it is the smoke inhaled from burning tobacco which poses the most significant risk of disease.
          Separating into this artificial void that you
     can put all the additives in.  You can put all of
     the things they've done in.  You can put in all of
     the children smoking in.  You can put in whatever
     you want in this convenient gap because, by golly,
     this nicotine addiction stuff doesn't have anything
     to do with what's hurting you, kids.
          Punitive damages are warranted.  Sixty years
     ago, they did it to Barbara McMannis.  And they're
     still doing it today.  The difference is, when
     there was this scientific breakthrough as to the
     medical problems, the breakthrough was half the
     story and they didn't know the deep, dark black
     heart of the -- of the conspiracy was to hide the
     addiction was causing the disease.  That was the
     change.  That was never told to Barbara McMannis.
          The Surgeon General didn't even know it.  And
     when you look at the instructions -- can you give
     me the Engle instructions real quick?  Engle
     finding.
          Never mind.  Here, I got it.
          Give me one or the other.
          MR. WEAVER:  Pick one.
          MR. MITNIK:  The defendants concealed or omitted material information -- and this is
     important.  These are the findings that are binding
     in this courtroom; not otherwise known or
     available, knowing the material was false or
     misleading, or failing to disclose material facts
     concerning the effects -- health effects or
     addictive nature.  Not otherwise known or
     available.
          Now, let me talk about the evidence.  Does --
     has there been any evidence in this case that
     Barbara McMannis knew what they were up to, that
     she saw all these top secret documents we've shown
     you here in this courtroom.
          And would that be material to her to know how
     they were talking about addiction, how they were
     talking about rats in a cage, how they were talking
     about the death and the disease, how they were
     bragging about how successful they had been, how
     they called the arm that they use so much, T-I-R-C,
     and TIRC, and CTR at arms as fronts and shields.
          Would that be important and material to know
     what was going on behind the scenes to somebody
     growing up through this era?
          And they say nothing would have stopped her
     from smoking.  Well, addiction is a insipidus-type disease, and the longer or deeper you're injured,
     the harder it is.  You get more and more wired into
     it.
          And way back, this started -- in 1954 is when
     the conspiracy kicked off, what's more likely right
     than wrong and more persuasive, and it would have
     mattered for her to know the truth about all the
     additives and things they were putting in to make
     it as addictive, highly addictive as possible, and
     all the things they wrote, and had known it way
     back when it would have been easier and more
     successful than to say, hey, none of it would have
     ever mattered.
          And to suggest, what if somebody was -- got
     drunk and then wanted to say it was somebody else's
     fault.  Let's flip that.
          What if an adult took a kid and started
     serving alcohol for profit, and kept doing it until
     they got addicted, became an alcoholic; how fair
     would it be for the adult that did that to say it's
     all the kid's fault?  I take no responsibility,
     it's all his.
          There are three rules of personal
     responsibility:  One, first and foremost, hold the
     mirror up.  We hear a lot about personal responsibility and free will in America.  First
     rule, hold a mirror up to yourself before you start
     pointing the finger.  My client did that through
     her husband when we filed this case.
          Second, if you're going to talk the talk, walk
     the walk.  The clients have done it, didn't they?
          And, lastly, don't ever be a stumbling block
     to someone who was trying to deal with the
     responsibilities, trying to convince someone
     there's no reason to try to quit.
          And one of the most powerful proofs in this
     case that the conspiracy worked is the completely
     irrational conduct if you took addiction,
     piggybacking -- or, I'm sorry, the conspiracy
     piggybacking on addiction out of the picture, why
     would she ever go that long without trying to at
     least back down, cut back, if this conspiracy
     wasn't having impact and exploiting the denial that
     they stuck in there in the kid's brain with
     addiction?
          She smoked Lucky Strikes.
          I want to -- can you pull up 39?  This is
     important.  Again, I'm glad I get to get back up.
          They suggested to you that her sister only
     said that she didn't believe that she -- that Barbara would get sick from smoking.  And I had
     told you on the front end that she had said she
     didn't think her sister was and didn't think it
     would happen to her.
          Let's see what -- this is from the videotape
     that you saw with your own eyes.
          She didn't laugh.  She just sort of -- it's
     not a "ha, ha."  Like she sort of just commented
     like it's not going to happen to everybody, and she
     didn't really believe it could be cigarettes, you
     know.
          But did you tell her the doctor had told you
     that it was caused by cigarettes?
          Yes, I did.  Yes, I did.
          She didn't believe that her sister -- there's
     the actual proof and what the lawyers say in
     evidence.
          And then if you could give me 49, this is the
     actual transcript.
          Why do you feel that your mom was addicted to
     cigarettes?
          All the times that she attempted to quit, she
     couldn't.  And she chain-smoked.  I mean, when she
     was nervous, she chain-smoked.
          They want to say, Oh, she gets nervous, so you
     smoke more.  That's the drug.  And when she was off
     of work, she chain-smoked.  That's the drug.
          Fifty-one.
          How would you describe her?  Can you describe
     it -- that there were any changes in your mom's
     personality after surgery?
          She was getting more forgetful.  She was a
     little bit more uptight, seemed a little stressed
     out.
          Did your dad throw out all the cigarettes and
     ashtrays?
          Yes.
          Did your mom ever smoke again?
          Not that I know of.  She wanted cigarettes.
          Did -- so explain to the ladies and gentlemen
     of the jury how your mom was able to stop, and if
     she did just stop and without wanting to smoke.
          Answer:  She still wanted to smoke.
          How did she show you that?  How did she bring
     your attention?
          She asked me for cigarettes and I wouldn't
     give them to him [sic].
          And don't forget, they say there's no medical
     diagnosis of addiction.  When she was in the
     hospital, we don't have those records.  But what we do know is that they were prescribing repeatedly a
     NicoDerm patch, which is maybe just given to
     somebody for the fun of it, but is typically given
     for somebody that is addicted.
          She's going through chemo and has had her
     brain scooped out and is still asking for
     cigarettes.
          But what's addiction got to do with it, got to
     do with it?  This is just pleasure.
          The thing about Dr. Henningfield saying
     that -- he's not a doctor, so what's he doing in
     the courtroom talking to you about it?  I'm not
     going to take the time to pull the instruction.
          But when you get back there, look if it says
     anything about addiction according to medical
     doctors or addiction according to DSM.  It doesn't
     say anything remotely like that.
          Dr. Henningfield teaches doctors.  He's the
     one the US military goes through on nicotine
     addiction.  He's the one that the Surgeon General
     of the United States of America goes to, and NIDA,
     the National Institute on Drug Abuse.
          He's the guy that people go to to find out the
     roots -- that really knows addiction.  Not someone
     that dabbles in it in a psychiatric unit when someone happens to come there not for nicotine,
     that happens to be a smoker too.
          That's who we brought you.  And he assessed it
     and said she was highly addicted.  And all you're
     doing is assessing it in a court of law.  If we
     were in a hospital suite, that argument might fly.
     And, by the way, even under the DSM-IV, when you
     piece together my cross examination with Dr. Dorce,
     she said -- she described the difference between
     DSM-IV and DSM-5.  The early one actually talked
     about someone being addicted under the --
     dependency.
          And she said it took three criteria.  And I
     went earlier through and showed you there were more
     than three criteria if you were treating it fairly.
          So if she had been using the one book that did
     use addiction and done it fairly, she'd have had to
     tell you she was addicted too.
          And Dorce says, very important answer to a
     jury question -- one of the more profound answers
     during the trial, surprisingly from her, who's got
     all these cases for the cigarette companies.
          She says -- this was Mr. Geraghty.  It wasn't
     a jury question.
          Mr. Geraghty asked, Based on your training, your experience, and your medical practice, based
     on your review -- you can read it.  I'm tired of
     reading.
          What's your opinion?
          That she had -- that the reason why she's
     smoking, that she had benefits from the nicotine in
     the cigarettes.
          Even she had to admit that.  That's addiction.
     No matter how much she wants to say no.
          This is evidence in the case.  Addiction, to
     some extent, the argument revolving around free
     choice is being negated on the grounds of diction
     addiction.  This is how they were talking in
     private, back in '73.  1980, here's how they talked
     amongst themselves in private.
          The entire matter -- our lawyers remind us,
     the entire matter of addiction is the most potent
     weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung
     cancer case.  We can't defend continued smoking as
     free choice if the person was addicted.
          Today, nicotine can be addictive, but it
     doesn't cause harm.
          Remember, Dorce said occasionally she found
     someone in one of these cases to be addicted.  But
     in every single case with the same questions that you have to answer, you've now seen, that are --
     and was the addiction a legal cause?  Every time
     her answer was --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Objection, your Honor.  This
     wasn't in evidence.
          MR. MITNIK:  It most certainly is.
          THE COURT:  Just a moment.
         Every single time she answered
     the question, No, it didn't cause -- wasn't a legal
     cause.  Every time.  Because this same artificial
     divide is there between, okay, now -- now it's
     addictive, but so what.  It doesn't cause any harm.
          Do we need punitive damages warranted?  Is
     there justification to give us one more day and
     come back?  So under the facts and the law, we can
     participate in the process to encourage and
     motivate change?  Yes.
          MR. WEAVER:  Objection, your Honor.  Improper
     argument.
          THE COURT: Yeah.  The brands.  Lucky
     Strikes, in the 1950s.  That's the evidence that
     you heard.  That's RJ Reynolds -- or that was
     American Tobacco.  I can't keep it straight with American Tobacco and the other one, Brown &
     Williamson.
          Lucky Strikes, which is -- they're
     responsible.  In the 1950s.  And then she smoked in
     the '60s Raleighs, which is Brown & Williamson, for
     which R.J. Reynolds was responsible for.
          And then she smoked Winstons and Marlboros
     from the late '60s on.  And the testimony was,
     those were her primary brands.  So absolutely these
     are the defendants in the courtroom.  She did smoke
     some Chesterfields when she was sneaking a few out
     that isn't theirs, from way back when, a few
     cigarettes.
          But the primary brand she smoked, the
     defendants are in the courtroom and they're the two
     primary, largest defendants in the industry and are
     here for --
          MR. WEAVER:  Objection, your Honor.  Improper
     argument.  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  No.  I'll sustain.
          MR. WEAVER:  Cautionary, please.
          THE COURT: And why did she smoke?  It had
     nothing to do with ads, would be the suggestion.
     It's all just a big coincidence.  People don't realize typically how effective the ads are.  But
     you've now seen how they talked about it, that clip
     from Marlboro.  They're very powerful.  These
     people are not wasting all that money on something
     that isn't effective.
          Pull up 40, please.
          I'm going to leave that up and just let you
     all look because I want to flip through some notes.
     You-all don't need me to just read it.  This is
     testimony from her sister.
          I'm going to have him pull out some of these
     just to give you a picture because, remember, I
     said we had to be oriented to time and place; and
     it was a different time and place, to see what she
     would have been surrounded -- Barbara McMannis
     would have been surrounded with back at the time
     this was going on, unlike today, what she was
     surrounded with at the time that we're talking
     about today.
          While he's putting them out, withdrawal
     symptoms.  You heard about withdrawal symptoms.
     How would she even know if she had withdrawal?  She
     didn't try to quit enough times.
          Well, you heard the evidence that she had
     them, and she had them bad when she did.  But that's not the only time someone feels withdrawal
     symptoms.  What do you think -- I don't need to ask
     you what do you think.
          What did Dr. Henningfield tell you?  The
     reason it's so important in evidence why someone
     smokes first thing in the morning, to relieve
     withdrawal symptoms.
          That's why they smoke.  They're waking up and
     having the onset of withdrawal from being without
     overnight.
          This -- she would wake up sometimes and not
     make it to the morning and have a smoke in the
     middle of the night.
          But when she made it to the morning, every
     morning, first thing lighting up, that is to
     relieve withdrawal.  There's proof all through the
     case, every day for 40 years, of withdrawal.
          Maybe there would be a morning, maybe, one
     morning maybe she didn't have a cigarette.  Let's
     say I'm going to skip one today, but I'll have one
     at noon.
          You have no evidence, ever.
          I want to cover, before I -- I don't want to
     run out of time on this, the death issue, because
     that's a part of our proof.  Not -- this is by the greater weight of the evidence, more persuasive,
     more convincing force and effect of the evidence.
          One thing they said, there's no coughing or
     blood and no shortness of breath.  True.
          So why don't we pack up and go home?  Because,
     A, Dr. Villa told you, that's hit or miss.  It may
     be there or not.  But more importantly, let's leave
     Dr. Villa -- hey, we hired Dr. Villa.  So let's put
     him aside for a minute.  I'm not saying reject him
     because of that.  But for purposes of my point,
     let's put him aside for just a moment.  Do you
     think Dr. Brinson didn't know that?  Do you
     remember when their expert came in and said, Oh --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, it's calling for
     speculation now at this point.
          MR. MITNIK:  It's a reasonable inference from
     the evidence.
          THE COURT: Their own expert said you take a
     detailed history and you get all this information.
     Remember that testimony?  She's come to the
     hospital.  There is no evidence that we have in the
     records that we have or from the family of
     shortness of breath or blood.
          Yet Dr. Brinson signs in the official -- as the attending doctor, in the official hospital
     records that cause of death was lung cancer.
          Is that truly this big issue the defense is
     making?  And if so, how do we square that?
          What's the more persuasive evidence here?
          The suggestion -- the suggestion that you
     could -- the technology hadn't changed in 20 years.
     It's the exact technology in 20 years in medicine,
     common sense.
          And Dr. Villa said, which their doctor came
     and didn't say a word about this, was he was
     talking about sonography attachments that go on the
     end of the tube and go in.  And that that was not
     available for him.  And that that's what he was
     talkings about, the distinction.
          This is making an issue out of something that
     is totally apples-and-oranges different.  But it
     doesn't matter because then we hear about the ear.
          Here's another one.  Let's blame it -- let's
     draw questions as to the death certificate.  And
     let's blame it on, maybe it came from somewhere
     else.
          And in doing so, we hear about one daughter
     said that there was a cancer on her ear.  She did.
     And the other daughter said it turned out to be a mole.  She did not have some screaming melanoma.
          There, a picture's worth a thousand words.
     You saw the picture.
          Do you have to cut someone's entire ear off to
     get it?  Of course not.  But when someone's got a
     melanoma, you heard, they go get the margins out.
     They've got to make sure they don't just -- you
     don't cut it like a mole.  You cut a little mole
     out, and it goes off to the lab.  It's either good
     news or bad.  And if it's bad, it's got to make
     sure nothing is left.
          And if this was a melanoma, let's use a little
     common sense, that was so advanced that it ended up
     going to her brain and killing her, how big of an
     incision would it be to make sure the margins are
     clean?  And you saw the pictures.  There's nothing
     like that.  There was a mole.
          But once again, we don't need to see what
     Mr. Mitnik's piecing together evidence-wise.
          Why don't we go to Dr. Brinson, the attending
     physician, who would have, according to their
     expert, taken a very detailed history and examined
     her and looked.  And he doesn't say this came from
     the ear, a melanoma, or anything like that, lung
     cancer.  And in addition, the consent forms to treat say the same.
          This is not just Dr. Brinson, the attending.
     This is Dr. Brinson that, according to their
     expert, would have brought in all these consultants
     and specialists to have examined it and reported
     back to him and completed other tests, whatever
     tests need to be done or follow-up tests need to be
     done.  And we don't have a complete chart.
          But we know what his ultimate conclusion was,
     and that the undifferentiated non-small cell cancer
     is large cell cancer, and that that cancer is
     undisputed comes -- can come from cancer because
     their own expert said if, indeed, it was lung
     cancer, this cancer would have more likely than not
     come from smoking.
          They said that Dr. Villa said the death
     certificate's worthless.  He didn't say it's
     worthless.  He said sometimes it's done by doctors
     who don't know anything about the circumstances.
     But it's a whole different animal when it's the
     attending doctor.
          Verdict form.
          Can you give me the --
          Look, I don't want to be gimmicky for all this
     stuff.  And I almost say don't do it, because if it was a little gimmicky, I understand.
          But I want to make a point.  Here's the point
     I'm trying to make.  I can't figure out verbally
     how to get this point across, in all fairness,
     without some demonstration.  This is the best I can
     come up with.
          I can't put us in a time capsule and take us
     back into the '50s and '60s.  But this is the stuff
     that Barbara McMannis would be surrounded with.
          And in here somewhere -- could someone help
     me -- is -- here's one of these public service
     announcements.
          And you heard the difference in the budgets.
     So, yes, this is going to be out there somewhere.
          But all of this is here, and this isn't even
     talking about all of the money spent for them
     hammering away with their projects, coming out of
     TI and TIRC and CTR.  They created the point that,
     remember, strong will, intelligent.
          Well, the strong-willed and intelligent
     included people like Harry Reasoner that was
     reporting on it.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object --
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MITNIK:  The thing about her, Mr. McMannis said, the family heard that they were -- that her
     father died of a heart attack and stroke back in
     the '60s, and it was from smoking.  And that's his
     testimony.
          However, you also heard the testimony laying
     the circumstances out from Dr. Proctor.  They were
     still struggling about lung cancer back then.  This
     whole issue of heart attacks and strokes didn't
     come up until later from smoking.
          So I don't know whether Mr. McMannis --
     sometimes -- I can tell you sometimes people look
     back in time and transpose information looking back
     in time from what you know today.  But I don't
     know.  That was his testimony.
          But here's what I do know.  I do know that if
     they were told --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
     him saying "I know."
          MR. MITNIK:  I said "I don't know."
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Or "I know" or "I don't know."
          MR. MITNIK:  I'll leave out an "I know."  I
     don't know.  That's the honest answer.  I don't
     know.
          But I do know, this is one part and the
     evidence shows -- here we go.  That's where I said I know -- that the evidence shows, is that
     Mrs. McMannis, out when her sister, years later,
     had COPD and told her it came from smoking, she
     didn't believe it.
          Does that make sense?  No.  Does it sound like
     addiction?  Yeah.  Does it sound like addiction all
     by itself?  No.  It sounds like addiction together
     with a very powerful conspiracy hammering away at
     doubt, doubt, create doubt, doubt, create doubt,
     scientists and your sister, how would you know.
          We're years, '80s, and they still can't agree.
     How do you know where your doctor -- that's just
     one more person saying the same nonsense that's
     being said since '64 when the Surgeon General said
     it.
          Does that ever happen but for this conspiracy?
     Just common sense.
          Swimming in different pools.  That was one of
     the analogies.  This pool isn't different.  That's
     the pool she was swimming in, (indicating).
          There's no dispute she swam through the pool
     of the cigarette controversy era that was totally
     made up.  There's no question she switched to
     filters.  There's no question she smoked the most
     popular brands.  There's no question she smoked
     primarily their brands that were highly advertised.
          There's no question that she went years
     without trying to stop, which makes no sense if you
     take the conspiracy out.  Not try?  There's no
     question that she smoked to the point of no return.
          That's nonsensical if you take addiction and
     the conspiracy and the fraud out of the story.
          So she was a success story for the industry
     and fits to a T what they were -- their aim of the
     conspiracy was.  They had an aim, and then there
     was an outcome, and they are masters at influencing
     outcomes.
          And it's just a big coincidence?  That her
     outcome was exactly what their aim was.  Could be.
     Does that make more sense?  Is that more persuasive
     or convincing?
          THE COURT:  About five minutes, Counsel.
          MR. MITNIK:  Okay.
          Additional evidence that you saw.
          THE COURT:  And did you hear, sir?
          MR. MITNIK:  I'm sorry?  I did.  Five minutes.
     Yes, ma'am.  I'm sorry.  I did not mean to ignore
     you.  I'm just...
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. MITNIK:  What are you trying to do?  What do you all want?  I've got five minutes.  What do
     you all want?
          Dr. Dorce talked about there were some
     questions they brought up about -- let me hush.
          There's virtually no evidence -- this is out
     of the FTC report, 1967.  No evidence that the
     warning statements on cigarette packages had any
     significant effect.
          Even during the January, February '96 [sic],
     the first two months the warnings appeared on
     cigarette packs, cigarette sales were higher than
     they had been during the same months of the
     preceding year.
          You want to see screaming evidence and the
     power of that industry and this fraud, and this
     conspiracy and the power of nicotine addiction?
     Take a look at that.  On every cigarette.  And more
     sales.
          That could be that we've got a lunatic society
     that was just all suicidal, or it could be --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
     the comment, your Honor.  Improper.
          THE COURT: -- or it could be what they did
     and kept -- they didn't just say, gosh, we'll try it for ten years, it didn't work.
          No, their internal documents bragged in
     20 years how well it was and geared back up, and
     they kept spending all that money for 50 years.  I
     think it worked.
          And it's my client's wife who did exactly what
     they wanted.  Hers is just a coincidence.  Had
     nothing to do with that.  It's just a by God, she
     couldn't get enough of that smokey stuff.
          You can't substitute pleasure for addiction or
     disclosure of truth.
          Verdict form.
          I would ask you to go through this with the
     seriousness of heart and the respect for the
     process that you have given these proceedings.
          Did you find Barbara McMannis had lung cancer,
     that she was addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine, and that the addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine was a legal cause of lung
     cancer?
          This isn't a situation where we have a doubt
     campaign, because this isn't a criminal case.  This
     is a case where we have what is more persuasive,
     more convincing, what makes more sense, what's more
     likely right than wrong. I would suggest strongly we have met that
     burden.
          Yes.
          Please state whether Barbara McMannis's --
     what's -- whether Barbara McMannis's smoking each
     defendant's cigarettes containing nicotine was a
     legal cause of her death.
          Yes.  Yes.
          They were her primary brands, and included in
     the '60s and the '50s.
          The percentage of fault, I've already gone
     through that with you, that I would suggest, and I
     gave you my reasons for the suggestion.
          Please -- and please state whether the
     concealment or omission of material facts about the
     health effects or addiction, either one -- if you
     find they didn't tell the truth about addiction and
     concealed the truth about the power of nicotine
     addiction, and that that would have contributed to
     the circumstances that got her hooked, that leads
     to yes.  Even without the conspiracy.
          Then add in the evidence that the, in all
     likelihood, facts show actions speak louder than
     words.  Her actions suggest they did have an impact
     on her. And I would suggest the answer is clearly,
     under the burden of proof, yes, yes.
          Whether the concealment -- you can have two of
     them.  There's the concealment, and then the
     agreement to conceal.  And the answer, for the same
     reason, is yes.
          Those two questions, if you answer yes to,
     then we have the opportunity to talk about punitive
     damages being warranted, and only if those are
     answered yes.
          What is the total amount of damages?  I've
     talked to you about that.
          In determining the total amount of damages,
     you don't make any reduction for any fault.  That's
     a matter that the Court follows the law on.
          And then under the circumstances.  And I would
     suggest to you, under this evidence, it is
     significant and it is important to reach this last
     question, and that the law justifies it.
          The answer -- I skipped some for the sake of
     time and I'm being told, and he's right, the
     answers should be yes to all of them on this
     evidence.
          And if the answer is yes, then we reach the
     question, under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find clear and convincing
     evidence that punitive damages are warranted
     against each defendant.
          And you have seen the evidence here.  It is
     clear and convincing that what they did falls under
     those descriptions of the kind of conduct that
     warrants punitive damages and that when somebody
     does these things and continues to say things on
     their Web site like they say, that punitive damages
     are warranted, when they're still marketing to
     youth today, that punitive damages are warranted
     and that by finding yes to this, I'm asking you-all
     to give us one more day.  And that's it so that we
     can lay this out so that this trial where we are
     involved in this process permitted under the law,
     proven by the -- not just walking in here and
     saying it, but under the law the judge gave you and
     the evidence that we presented provides an
     opportunity to make a step that we can talk about
     in more detail if we get there tomorrow.
          THE COURT:  Sir, your time is up.
          MR. MITNIK:  Okay.  Can I -- yeah.  I'm being
     told I just misstated something.  Can I just
     correct this piece right here on the law?
          THE COURT:  Okay. MR. MITNIK:  Where it says, if you say --
     answer no to question two, four, and five as to
     both defendants, your verdict is for the defendants
     and you should not proceed further except to sign
     and date this verdict form and return it to the
     courtroom.
          So I'm asking you to deliberate on this
     seriously.
          MR. PRYSOCK:  The second part.
          MR. MITNIK:  And if you answer yes as to any
     of questions two, four, or five as to either or
     both defendants, please proceed to answer question
     six and then answer seven as to that or those
     defendants -- that that is the essential gateway to
     make this all happen.
