          (DEFENDANT PHILIP MORRIS CLOSING ARGUMENT)
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Good afternoon, ladies and
     gentlemen.  You know my name is Bill Geraghty, and
     along with Jeff Michael, we represent Philip Morris
     USA.
          And it has been a long trial.  And I want to
     start simply by thanking you for your jury service.
     I think I can speak on behalf of everyone involved,
     the Court, the parties, and the lawyers, we know
     you've been paying extremely close attention to the
     case.
          We know that the examinations have probably taken, at times, longer than you would have
     preferred.  But we know that you were paying
     attention because you asked a lot of questions
     yourselves.  I know that not all of your questions
     were asked, but many of your questions were asked,
     and it clearly indicates that you were paying a lot
     of attention to the evidence as it was presented to
     you.
          And I just want to join Mr. Mitnik in saying
     that we understand that you are making an
     incredible sacrifice of your time to be here
     with -- you know, at this point, we're going on
     three weeks; right?
          But our system of justice wouldn't work if we
     didn't have people like you who were willing to
     make those sacrifices.  So let me just say thank
     you here at the very beginning.
          We are getting very close to the end of the
     case.  And I'm sure that is music to all of your
     ears.
          And it is almost time for you to retire to the
     jury room and deliberate.  Judge Winesett has
     provided you with the legal instructions and a
     verdict form.  And then you will be asked to head
     off and deliberate and decide the issues in the case.
          But before you do that, this is my opportunity
     to summarize for you the evidence that you've seen
     and heard over the last two weeks.
          Now, when I spoke to you during my opening
     statement, which was almost exactly two weeks ago
     on Thursday, I told you that the plaintiff would
     spend a lot of time talking about statements and
     ideas made by Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds, many
     of which were made 30, 40, and in some instances,
     more than 50 years ago.
          And we told you we would not try to defend
     those statements.  That's what I told you two weeks
     ago.  Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds made statements
     and had ideas that today neither you nor I would
     say or think.
          But I also told you that if that was all this
     case was about, if all the plaintiff had to prove
     in this case was that cigarette company executives
     said and did inappropriate things, we wouldn't be
     here.  We wouldn't have spent the last two weeks
     here together.
          But we did.  And we did that, ladies and
     gentlemen, because this case isn't about all
     cigarette smokers.  It isn't about whether we believe people should smoke cigarettes.
          This case is about Barbara McMannis, about her
     life and her decisions.  And that's why you will
     see, when you actually get the verdict form, that
     all of the questions, all of the questions on that
     verdict form ask you specifically about Barbara
     McMannis; not all cigarette smokers and not the
     general public.
          Now, I want to remind you of what happened on
     Monday.  Mr. McMannis and his attorneys brought you
     Dr. Proctor, who already this year had testified in
     three other trials against Philip Morris and
     RJ Reynolds.  He told you he had earned $25,000 in
     this particular case alone.
          Dr. Proctor testified for over six hours on
     Monday, and he showed you the same documents and
     videotapes that he has shown in the 60 other cases
     in which he has testified.
          But after doing that for six hours, I actually
     had an opportunity to examine, to question
     Dr. Proctor.  And he told you, for the very first
     time, that he knew nothing about Barbara McMannis.
     Absolutely nothing about her.
          Dr. Proctor told you he had no idea what
     Barbara McMannis knew or didn't know, did or didn't do, or what she relied upon or didn't rely upon.
     Those were Dr. Proctor's exact words to you on
     Monday afternoon.
          But what did Barbara McMannis's family tell
     you?  The people that know her best.  Her husband,
     her two daughters, her younger sister.  Not a
     single person who knows Barbara McMannis walked
     into this courtroom and took that witness stand and
     told you that Barbara McMannis was somehow confused
     about the health risks of smoking, that she really
     didn't know, that she didn't believe that cigarette
     smoking caused lung cancer and other diseases.
          They all told you they believe she was
     addicted.  So don't you think that if she was
     confused about the health risks of smoking, they
     would have come here and they would have told you
     that from the witness stand.
          But, in fact, they told you the exact
     opposite.  They told you that Barbara McMannis was
     intelligent, independent, strong-willed, that she
     had a mind of her own.  That's what every single
     person who knew Barbara McMannis told you.
          They told you she was the kind of person that
     made her own decisions in life.  She did what she
     wanted to do no matter what anyone else said or
     thought about it.  That's the kind of person that
     she was.
          And that included smoking cigarettes.  You
     heard that Barbara McMannis enjoyed smoking
     cigarettes.  Now, I grant you, Mr. McMannis was
     reluctant to admit that when he testified on the
     witness stand.  He was reluctant to admit that.
          And, of course, I think after hearing all of
     the evidence over the last two weeks, you know why
     that is the case.  But eventually, even
     Mr. McMannis from the witness stand told you, my
     wife enjoyed smoking cigarettes for 40 years, for
     40 years.  The entire time that they were married.
          And, of course, your common sense tells you,
     your common sense tells you, of course she enjoyed
     smoking, and she did what she wanted to do for
     40 years.
          Now, let me say something about the findings
     from the earlier class action.  You heard about
     those Engle findings.  And I told you again, I'm
     not here to debate those findings.  But there's
     also no debate about this particular issue.
          Those findings do not tell you how to answer
     any of the specific questions on the verdict form.
     That's because, ladies and gentlemen, you get to decide, based on the evidence you've heard over the
     last two weeks, by your verdict in this case,
     whether you believe, based on the evidence, that
     those findings have any applicability to Barbara
     McMannis and the lifestyle choices that she made.
          After all, this case is about Barbara
     McMannis.  You just heard her husband, Donald
     McMannis, asking you to award him millions of
     dollars in damages for his wife's decision to smoke
     cigarettes, something that she enjoyed doing for
     years.
          You, ladies and gentlemen, are the only jury
     that has heard the story of Barbara McMannis and
     her life, and you get to decide the issues in this
     particular case.
          Now, you may remember that I told you two
     weeks ago during my opening statement that this
     case was about two words.  And the two words I told
     you were "control" and "responsibility".  Control
     and responsibility.
          And I asked you -- before I hurt myself here.
          I asked you to listen to the evidence.  We're
     going to walk through all of the evidence we've
     seen and heard about Barbara McMannis over the last
     two weeks.  I'm going to ask you again to ask yourselves the following series of questions as we
     review the evidence.
          Who was in control of Barbara McMannis's
     lifestyle choices?
          Who was in control of her decision to smoke
     cigarettes?
          Who was in control of her efforts to quit
     smoking?  Whether she was ever motivated to quit
     smoking, before she was diagnosed with cancer in
     1995?
          Was Barbara McMannis addicted?  And if so, was
     she someone whose addiction was so strong, so
     substantial in the language of the instructions the
     Court will give you, that it prevented her from
     quitting smoking --
          MR. MITNIK:  Objection, your Honor.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  -- that it prevented her --
          MR. MITNIK:  Hold on.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Can I finish the statement,
     please?
          THE COURT:  You need to make it come within
     the law.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Okay.
          Was her addiction so strong, so substantial,
     that it hindered, hindered her ability to quit when she was motivated to do so?  Ask yourself that
     question as you listen to us review the evidence.
          And, finally, did Barbara McMannis rely on
     anything that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said or
     failed to say about the health risks of smoking?
          We walked through the significant events of
     Mrs. McMannis's life because this case is about
     her.  And we're going to do that again in just a
     few moments.  And I will show you that everything
     we told you about Barbara McMannis at the very
     beginning of this case has turned out to be true.
     I talked to you at the very beginning about what I
     called the sources of evidence.  The sources of
     evidence.
          We asked you to pay close attention to the
     important sources of evidence.
          And what did I mean by that?  The testimony of
     Donald McMannis, the plaintiff in this case, both
     here at the trial and two years ago when he gave
     his deposition under oath, and the testimony of
     Barbara McMannis's family.
          And as you saw throughout the course of this
     trial, much of what Mr. McMannis and his lawyers
     told you about her was contradicted.  Contradicted
     by what Mr. McMannis himself said on the witness stand when he testified and what he said in his
     deposition two years ago in 2012, by what Barbara
     McMannis's own family members told you, and by what
     your common sense now tells you, what your judgment
     now tells you about the way people behave, what
     motivates people to do the things that they do.
          And Mr. McMannis's testimony was contradicted
     on important issues, like whether his wife knew
     that cigarette smoking was dangerous for many
     decades before she was diagnosed with cancer;
     whether she ever motivated efforts to quit smoking
     until the last year or two of her life; and whether
     she believed, not whether her family members
     believed, but whether Barbara McMannis herself
     believed that she was addicted to cigarettes.
          And I ask you to pay close attention to those
     inconsistencies in the evidence because you get to
     decide what testimony you choose to believe in this
     case.  Judge Winesett gave you the instructions.
     There's an instruction on the believability of
     witnesses.  And in deciding what testimony you
     choose ultimately to believe, you can consider --
     and these are right out of the judge's
     instructions -- the interest the person has in the
     outcome of the case and the reasonableness of the
     testimony of the witness considered in light of all
     of the evidence in the case and in light of your
     own experience and common sense.
          So as you think about the evidence you've
     heard, please remember that you get to decide
     whether you find each witness to be believable or
     whether you find that some of the things they said
     during the course of the trial were motivated by an
     interest, an interest they have in the outcome of
     the case.
          And the judge told you, you can believe all of
     what a witness says, part of what the witness says,
     or none of what the witness says.  That is your
     job, ladies and gentlemen, and your job alone in
     this case.
          Let me talk about the burden of proof.  Judge
     Winesett has instructed you that Mr. McMannis has
     the burden to prove that something that Philip
     Morris said or failed to say had a direct
     connection to and a substantial impact on the
     decisions that Barbara McMannis made about
     cigarette smoking.
          And after hearing all the evidence in this
     case over the last two weeks, ladies and gentlemen,
     you know that Barbara McMannis wasn't paying attention to anything that cigarette companies were
     saying.  Mr. McMannis told you that flat-out.  He
     told you that flat-out about his wife.
          Juan, would you pull that first slide, please?
          I have some boards, and I have some on the
     slides.  And this first one is a slide.
          This is what Donald McMannis told you about
     his wife.  He said, Barbara McMannis was the kind
     of person who was going to smoke cigarettes, no
     matter what you told her, no matter what you told
     her.
          Barbara McMannis wasn't waiting for Philip
     Morris or RJ Reynolds to tell her, Smoking is
     dangerous; you need to quit.  Barbara McMannis was
     the only person making those decisions in her life.
          I don't think it's coming up on your screen,
     is it?  Okay.  I'm sorry about that.
          It doesn't come up here?
          MR. WEAVER:  Just there.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Oh, back there.  I'm sorry.
     I'm blocking it from you.  I'm going to use boards
     for most of what I'm going to do here.  So that's
     the only, hopefully, glitch there.  I apologize for
     that, ladies and gentlemen.
          Barbara McMannis wasn't waiting for Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds to tell her that smoking was
     dangerous, that she needed to quit.  She was the
     only person making those decisions.  You heard her
     family say she was independent, intelligent, and
     strong-willed.
          And, of course, after hearing the evidence,
     you know that that is how Barbara McMannis chose to
     live her life and that her attitude about cigarette
     smoking was no different.  No different, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          Barbara McMannis knew that cigarette smoking
     was dangerous for decades, decades before she was
     diagnosed with cancer in 1995.
          You heard that Barbara McMannis and her entire
     family knew back in 1964 that her father died from
     smoking cigarettes.
          She knew that her younger sister had been
     diagnosed with COPD.  She knew that her best
     friend's husband had been diagnosed with the same
     disease, COPD, and that that was caused by smoking
     cigarettes.
          Ladies and gentlemen, you actually asked some
     of the most important questions of Donald McMannis
     during the course of this trial.  And, frankly, the
     answers that Mr. McMannis gave to the questions
     that you posed tell you everything you need to know
     about how to decide the issues in this case.
          What did you ask Mr. McMannis?
          Now, I paraphrased a little bit the language
     of your questions because I couldn't fit them all
     on one board.  But these were among the questions
     that you asked, ladies and gentlemen.  And in red,
     these are the direct answers that Mr. McMannis gave
     to your questions.
          One of you asked Mr. McMannis if Mr. McMannis
     knew -- if Mrs. McMannis knew smoking caused the
     sister's COPD.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Counsel, I cannot see
     those.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  It's the same -- you have the
     slide there, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  And these are in order?
          MR. GERAGHTY:  They should be exactly in
     order, yes, ma'am.  That's -- you've got it.  Thank
     you.  Sorry about that.
          All right.  Sorry about that, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          You asked Mr. McMannis:  Did Mrs. McMannis
     know that smoking can cause illnesses?
          His answer, under oath, was:  "I'm sure she knew it.  I'm sure she knew it."
          One of you asked him a question, a very
     probing question:  Is there any difference between
     being strong-willed and having strong willpower?
          And, of course, Mr. McMannis gave the answer
     that I think we all would agree with:  "I don't
     believe there would be a difference.  I don't
     believe there would be a difference."
          One of you asked him:  Did Mrs. McMannis smoke
     after January 1995?  In other words, did she quit
     smoking?
          His answer was:  "Not that I know of.  She
     never did."
          He told you:  "She never smoked a cigarette.
     She never asked for a cigarette.  She never said
     she wanted a cigarette.  She never talked about
     cigarettes after January of 1995."
          And finally, one of you asked:  Did
     Mrs. McMannis verbally tell you everything she
     enjoyed?  And you'll remember, I had this dialogue
     with Mr. McMannis:  "Did she enjoy smoking?"
          And he said I didn't know.  But of course, he
     knew she enjoyed boating, fishing, camping, lots of
     things.
          And Mr. McMannis's answer to that question, again, tells you everything you need to know.
          He didn't actually come out and say it in
     words, but I knew.  I knew she did.  Of course, he
     knew she did.  They lived together for 39 years.
     They smoked cigarettes together for 39 years.  Of
     course, Mr. McMannis knows that his wife enjoyed
     smoking cigarettes.
          Donald McMannis, the man who filed this
     lawsuit and knows her better than anyone else, told
     you that his wife wasn't interested in quitting
     during most of the 39 years of their marriage.  He
     said she never told him she wanted to quit smoking
     until the last year or two of her life.
          And, of course, he also told you that she
     never actually tried to quit smoking until the last
     year or two before she passed away.
          That, ladies and gentlemen, is the undisputed
     evidence in this case.  There's absolutely no
     dispute about any of those facts because
     Mr. McMannis himself told us all those things.
          Barbara McMannis enjoyed smoking cigarettes
     for many decades.  And she was simply not
     interested in quitting.  That's why she smoked.
     And that's why she never tried to quit.
          If she didn't enjoy smoking cigarettes, if she was truly some tortured smoker that hated the fact
     that she was addicted to these cigarettes, don't
     you think at some point she would have tried to
     quit in the first decade, the second decade, the
     third decade that she was smoking?  But the
     undisputed evidence is she never did.
          Donald McMannis told you that his wife -- that
     if his wife was truly motivated to do something,
     she would be able to do it.  That's the kind of
     person, he told you, she was.
          And when Barbara McMannis was finally
     motivated to quit smoking in January of 1995, when
     she was told that she probably only had a month
     left to live, she quit smoking and she quit for
     good.
          But the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is
     all of those decisions over the course of all of
     those years were made by Barbara McMannis and only
     Barbara McMannis, notwithstanding whatever
     Mr. McMannis told you.
          We have the right to make decisions for
     ourselves.  We have that right in this country.
     Even decisions that today, with the benefit of
     hindsight, we might say were not in our best
     interests. We believe in free will.  That is a
     fundamental principle upon which this country was
     founded.  You haven't heard anything, any evidence
     to suggest that nicotine robbed Barbara McMannis of
     her free will.
          But with that right, with the right of free
     will comes the obligation to accept personal
     responsibility for the consequences of your
     decisions.  Let me take one more second and talk
     about the burden of proof, and then we're going to
     walk through the evidence you've seen and heard
     about Barbara McMannis.
          You've seen documents.  You've seen medical
     records.  You've heard several days now, weeks of
     testimony from the witnesses.  Mr. McMannis bears
     the burden to prove all of his claims in this case
     by what is called the greater weight of the
     evidence.
          So what does that mean?  Well, Mr. Mitnik
     referred to tipping the scales.  But what it means
     is that Mr. McMannis was required to bring more
     persuasive and more convincing evidence than the
     mountain of persuasive and convincing evidence that
     we have presented to you over the last two weeks
     that Barbara McMannis was always in control of her own decisions.
          Plaintiff has simply failed to carry the
     burden that Barbara McMannis was addicted, that her
     addiction was a legal cause of her disease, that
     she had lung cancer.
          And we're going to walk through all of that
     evidence in just a moment.
          Now, to kind of help walk through, we're going
     to go back to the 1930s to help walk through all of
     the significant events in Barbara McMannis's life.
     We've created a timeline.
          And we're going to use this timeline to walk
     through Barbara McMannis's -- can you see that
     there on the end?  Is that a little bit better?
     I'm sorry about that.
          So real quickly, just to orient you here,
     everything above this blue bar here right in the
     center of the timeline, everything above, these are
     events, significant events that occurred in Barbara
     McMannis's life.
          And everything below the blue bar is something
     that occurred here in the United States important
     with respect to cigarette smoking and health.
          So let's start here in the beginning.  You
     heard that Barbara McMannis was born in 1935 in a small town called Zanesville, Ohio.  She was the
     oldest of four children.  You heard she had very
     strict parents.  Her mother had a strict rule:  You
     cannot -- you do not smoke cigarettes.  That was
     her mother's strict rule.
          Let's drop below the blue bar here for a
     minute, and let's talk just briefly about the
     things that were going on here in this country with
     respect to cigarette smoking and health before
     Barbara McMannis was even born.
          Mr. Mitnik told you, he just told you a few
     moments ago, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds somehow
     hid the fact that cigarette smoking was dangerous
     and potentially addictive, from the American
     public.  And most of the American public didn't
     know any of that for 50 years.
          Well, after hearing the evidence you've heard
     over the last two weeks, you know that is simply
     not the case and certainly not the case as far as
     Barbara McMannis is concerned.
          Dr. Proctor told you -- Dr. Proctor told you
     yesterday:  Smoking and tobacco had been associated
     with cancer, cancer, lip, mouth, and oral cancer,
     going back to the 1860s.  It's not even on the
     timeline. Dr. Henningfield told you that it was well
     known, well known that cigarette smoking can be
     addictive and difficult to quit more than 100 years
     ago.
          He told you as far back as the 1850s and
     1860s, people were smoking hand-rolled,
     roll-your-own cigarettes.  They were inhaling those
     cigarettes, and they were addictive, just as
     addictive and just as dangerous as manufactured
     cigarettes.  That's what Dr. Henningfield told you.
          You heard that the State of Florida actually
     banned the sale of cigarettes in this state, in the
     state of Florida, in 1899, in part because they
     were dangerous and they were addictive,
     particularly to the youth and to women.  That's
     what Dr. Proctor told you.
          He said cigarettes were recognized as the very
     worst form of tobacco addiction, as far back as
     1907, 1907, by the Florida Department of Health.
     We showed you that document.  I originally showed
     that to you during Dr. Henningfield's examination.
     This was published in 1907.
          You heard that if we go back a hundred years
     ago, people referred to cigarettes as "coffin
     nails."  Later, in the '50s, they referred to cigarettes as "cancer sticks."  They called
     cigarette smokers "nicotine fiends," and they said
     they had "nicotine fits."
          Donald McMannis told you that when he was
     growing up in Zanesville, Ohio, in the 1950s,
     before he ever met Barbara McMannis, he had heard
     the term "coffin nails, cancer sticks, and nicotine
     fiend," and he understood exactly what those terms
     meant.
          Later on in the 1930s and '40s and 1950s, we
     showed you many articles, a number of which were
     from "Reader's Digest", that talked about the
     health risks and addictive nature of smoking.
     Dr. Proctor told you that "Reader's Digest" was the
     most popular magazine in the United States in the
     1930s, '40s, and '50s.
          Gloria Cullipher, Barbara McMannis's younger
     sister said, we received "Reader's Digest" in our
     home in the 1940s and 1950s.  That's what Gloria
     Cullipher told you.
          As we move into the early 1950s, you heard
     about some of the scientific research that was
     being published that specifically linked cigarette
     smoking with lung cancer.
          Dr. Proctor told you that these studies -- this is part of that mouse skin-painting study.
     They were front page news on newspapers and
     magazines all across the country.
          Dr. Proctor told you just yesterday:  This
     information was so widespread, so widespread that
     by 1954, when Barbara McMannis was 18 years old,
     90 percent of the American public had heard that
     cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer.
          90 percent in 1954.
          This was the kind of information that was
     being published here in the United States, around
     the time that Barbara McMannis starts stealing
     cigarettes out of her father's pack.
          So let's go back up above the blue bar.  We're
     here in the late 1940s.  We know that both her
     mother and her father smoked cigarettes.  Her
     father is a heavy smoker of Chesterfield.  Her
     mother is a lights cigarette smoker.
          Despite her mother's rule that her children
     should not smoke, you heard that Barbara McMannis
     starts to steal cigarettes from her father's pack
     of cigarettes.  And she goes to the bathroom and
     hides and smokes.
          She knows she should not be smoking, and that
     is why she is hiding her smoking from her parents.
     Later on, you heard that her mother finally catches
     her smoking and punishes her by destroying the
     cigarettes.
          But Gloria Cullipher also told you -- she told
     you that at a very young age, her sister was
     headstrong and she wanted to be her own boss.  So
     she continues to steal cigarettes from her father.
          Barbara McMannis was so determined to be her
     own boss that you heard, she drops out of school
     when she's about 16 years old.  She runs off and
     marries a man, Walter Longstreth, that she had just
     met.  This is in about 1952.
          Walter Longstreth joins the military, and the
     relationship ends not long thereafter.  So Barbara
     McMannis eventually returns home to live with her
     parents.
          In about 1954, Barbara McMannis and her
     younger sister, Gloria Cullipher, enrolled in a
     beauty school in Columbus, Ohio, which is about
     40 miles away from where they lived in Zanesville.
          Gloria Cullipher told you that when they were
     in Columbus during the week, they lived with their
     Aunt Beatrice.  And Aunt Beatrice had the same rule
     that Barbara McMannis's mother had:  My nieces are
     not permitted to smoke cigarettes. But you heard Gloria Cullipher say that she
     and her sister continued to smoke one or two
     cigarettes a day while they were living with their
     aunt in Columbus, Ohio.  She was sneaking
     cigarettes while living with her aunt.
          That brings us to about 1955.  And in 1955,
     Barbara McMannis meets the plaintiff, Donald
     McMannis.
          Now, I want to back up and explain one part of
     this.  You heard that the cigarettes, the
     cigarettes that they were stealing from their
     father, the cigarettes that they were stealing when
     they were living with their Aunt Beatrice, were
     Chesterfield cigarettes.  Chesterfield cigarettes.
     And you heard had that Chesterfield is not a brand
     that's made by either Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds.
          Chesterfield was made by a company called
     Liggett & Myers, a company that is not a defendant
     in this case.  And it is a brand that you heard
     that Barbara McMannis smoked from the time she
     started smoking in the '50s and into the 1960s.
          The important point I want to make here,
     ladies and gentlemen, is that the brand that
     Barbara McMannis started smoking and continued
     smoking for a number of years was a brand that was not made by either Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds,
     yet the plaintiffs still wants you to hold these
     companies responsible for that decision, for her
     decision to smoke those Chesterfield cigarettes.
          Now, I told you in 1955, she meets Donald
     McMannis.  And you heard that Donald McMannis was a
     regular cigarette smoker himself at that point.
          And he told you that for the next 39 years
     they were married, they smoked cigarettes together
     almost all of the time.  He was a cigarette smoker
     almost the entire time, until the last few years
     that they were married.
          Now, we talked about this during the course of
     the trial.  But you heard that in the late 1950s
     when she meets Donald McMannis into the 1960s,
     until they moved to Florida, Barbara McMannis works
     at several different glass factories.
          She works on a conveyer belt -- Mr. Mitnik
     told you this -- where she has to pack glasses,
     moving quickly on a conveyer belt, into a box.  Her
     job does not permit her to smoke cigarettes.  So
     for six-, seven-, eight-hour shifts, Barbara
     McMannis does not smoke cigarettes.
          I told you two weeks ago, ladies and
     gentlemen, that the evidence would show that
     Barbara McMannis could control where, when, and how
     much she smoked.  And the fact that she worked at
     glass factories for ten to 15 years in Ohio; never
     once complained to her husband; never said, You
     know what?  I don't like this job because I can't
     smoke.  I'd rather work someplace where I can smoke
     at the same time.  She never said any of those
     things.
          The evidence shows, ladies and gentlemen,
     Barbara McMannis controlled her smoking.
     Cigarettes did not control her.
          Now, that brings us to the early 1960s.  And
     let me go to the next page of the timeline here.
          We're in the late '50s, early 1960s.  And in
     1959, you heard they moved from Zanesville to
     Lancaster, Ohio.  In 1961, their first daughter
     Connie Boykin is born.  And that brings us to --
     let's start here, in January of 1964.
          You heard that in January of 1964, the Surgeon
     General of the United States issues a landmark
     report that concludes that cigarette smoking causes
     lung cancer.  You heard it was front page news in
     every newspaper across the country.  It was the
     lead news program -- the lead news story on every
     television station. We showed you a clip from the CBS News
     coverage of that report with Harry Reasoner in
     1964.
          So every American, including Barbara McMannis,
     was told in 1964 that cigarette smoking causes lung
     cancer.  That was more than 50 years ago, ladies
     and gentlemen, more than 50 years ago.
          Dr. Proctor told you yesterday, this was the
     turning point, the beginning of the end of
     cigarette smoking in this country.  He told you
     that with the release of that Surgeon General's
     Report in 1964, per capita cigarette consumption --
     remember the chart that I actually showed him --
     per capita cigarette consumption started to fall
     with certain blips.  And it's continued to steadily
     decline, and it is at its lowest point that it's
     been since the 1930s.
          That's what Dr. Proctor told you.
          Dr. Henningfield told you that since the
     release of that report, 65 million Americans have
     quit smoking, one of the greatest public health
     successes, one of the greatest public health
     successes in history.
          Later that same year, though, Barbara McMannis
     received a far more powerful and more personal warning that cigarette smoking causes disease.
          You heard that her father, Raymond Eppley --
     let me see if I can find this here for you.
          You heard that her father, Raymond Eppley, was
     a heavy chain smoker.  And he died suddenly in
     October of 1964 of a heart attack or a stroke.
          And here is what Donald McMannis told us about
     what everyone in the family believed.
          I asked him the following question:
          "Barbara McMannis's father died of a heart
     attack or stroke in the early 1960s?
          "Answer:  Right.
          "And he was 59 years old?
          "Answer:  Right.
          "And her father died from smoking cigarettes?
          "Right.
          "Okay.  So that -- the entire family believed
     that her father's death was caused by the fact that
     he was a heavy cigarette smoker."
          And Mr. McMannis told you:  "Right."
          That was in 1964, ladies and gentlemen,
     51 years ago.
          Two years later, in 1966, Congress passes a
     law that requires the very first warning label to
     appear on all packs of cigarettes.  The warning label read:  "Caution:  Cigarette smoking may be
     hazardous to your health."
          "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
     health."
          Mr. McMannis told you, he and his wife saw
     that warning; and they understood exactly what it
     meant, exactly what it meant.
          Here is his testimony.
          We put the warning label up above here.  But
     here's what I asked him during my examination.
          "Now, both you and your wife, Barbara
     McMannis, saw this warning, did you not?"
          His answer:  "Yes."
          "And you understood what that warning meant;
     right?
          "Yes.
          "You understood that that warning meant that
     if you smoked cigarettes, you could develop
     diseases like cancer; correct?"
          His answer, unequivocally:  "Yes."
          That's what Mr. McMannis told you under oath.
          Now, shortly after he said this on the witness
     stand, Mr. McMannis said something different.  He
     admitted that he knew that smoking was bad for his
     health, but he told you what he meant by bad was,
     that cigarettes would make you skinny.  That's what
     he told you, ladies and gentlemen.
          But, ladies and gentlemen, everyone has told
     you, the Court has told you, we all agree, use your
     common sense and your judgment.
          Judge Winesett has instructed you that you can
     reach conclusions and draw inferences from the
     evidence you've heard based on your common sense
     and judgment.
          Mr. McMannis said all those things to you.
     But we all know that he and his wife knew as far
     back as 1966 that cigarette smoking caused lung
     cancer.
          And how do we know that for sure?  How do we
     know that for sure?  Well, what happened one year
     later in 1967?  Just one year later.
          In 1967, Donald McMannis decides to quit
     smoking.  He decides to quit smoking.  And Donald
     McMannis testified that he decided to quit smoking
     in 1967 because he knew cigarette smoking was bad
     for his health, and he was concerned about his
     health.
          Now, Mr. McMannis tried to deny on the witness
     stand, but he also told you that when he quit
     smoking in 1967, he encouraged his wife to quit at the same time.  He encouraged her to quit because
     they both knew that cigarette smoking caused lung
     cancer.  And he was concerned about her health.
          The evidence you've now heard is Mr. McMannis
     quit smoking cold turkey for about three or four
     years in 1967.
          But Mr. McMannis also told you that even
     though he talked to his wife about quitting
     smoking, she did not try to quit smoking in 1967.
          Mr. McMannis told you that it was his idea,
     not hers, his idea that she should quit smoking in
     1967.  He told you he left town for two or three
     days.  And when he came back, she was smoking
     cigarettes.
          Mr. McMannis acknowledged to you, my wife was
     not motivated to quit smoking in 1967.
          Both of the experts you've heard from,
     Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Dorce, already told you,
     many smokers enjoy smoking, and many are simply not
     interested in quitting.  They both told you, if you
     don't want to quit, you are not going to quit.
          Barbara McMannis did not want to quit smoking
     in 1967.
          She knew smoking was dangerous.  But she was
     31 years old.  She enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and
     she was in good health.  So unlike her husband, she
     decides, I'm going to keep smoking.
          In 1969, you heard that Mrs. and Mr. McMannis,
     they moved to Florida.  Around the same period of
     time in 1970, there was another warning label that
     goes on cigarette packs.  It says, "Warning:  The
     Surgeon General has determined that cigarette
     smoking is dangerous to your health."
          In 1971, all cigarette ads are taken off of
     television and radio in the United States.
          And one year later, in 1972, this warning
     label is required to appear on every single print
     ad for a cigarette, in the newspaper, the magazine,
     or a billboard.
          Now, at about the same period of time, you
     heard that Donald McMannis actually starts to smoke
     cigarettes again.  And you heard the story.
          Mr. and Mrs. McMannis would go out on their
     boat.  They liked to fish.  Sometimes her cigarette
     would either not light because it got wet or it was
     windy, and she'd ask her husband, can you help me
     light the cigarette.  And Mr. McMannis said, after
     doing that several times, after puffing on the
     cigarette, he said to himself, you know what, I
     like the taste of this, I don't think I'm going to give it back.  And he started smoking cigarettes
     again.
          And Mr. McMannis's decision to start smoking
     cigarettes again in 1971 or '72 is instructive
     because, frankly, it contradicts everything that
     Mr. Mitnik told you during his closing argument.
          Donald McMannis said, I decided to smoke --
     start smoking cigarettes again because I liked the
     taste and I wanted to.
          When he made that decision in about 1971 or
     1972, he was a 39- or 40-year-old adult.  He knew
     that cigarette smoking caused disease.  But he made
     a decision to start smoking cigarettes again
     because he enjoyed them, because he enjoyed them.
          It was his decision.  He wasn't brainwashed by
     Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds.
          And so, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. McMannis
     knew all of that.  He had that experience when he
     refused to acknowledge initially that his wife
     enjoyed smoking.  But you now know after hearing
     all of the family testify, of course she enjoyed
     smoking.
          Deborah McMannis told you that.  Connie Boykin
     told you that.  Connie Boykin said, my mother loved
     coming home after a long day, taking her shoes off, putting her feet up, cracking a cold beer, and
     smoking cigarettes and watching TV.  She enjoyed
     doing that every day that she worked.
          Now, that brings us to the early to mid 1970s.
          And in this period of time, we're going to
     talk about this, you heard that their oldest
     daughter Connie Boykin, Barbara McMannis catches
     her oldest daughter smoking cigarettes in about
     1973 or 1974.  To teach her a lesson that smoking
     is bad for her, Mr. and Mrs. McMannis force Connie
     Boykin to smoke an entire box of Swisher Sweets
     Cigars.  And Connie Boykin told you, I don't think
     I got to the bottom of the box.  I got so sick, I
     heaved my guts out.
          Two years later, they catch Deborah McMannis
     smoking cigarettes.  They teach her a lesson the
     same way.  They force her to sit down and smoke so
     many cigarettes that she's going to get sick.
          Now, during the course of the testimony you
     heard, Mr. McMannis, Deborah McMannis, and Connie
     Boykin all tried to tell you, well, the reason our
     parents didn't want us to smoke had nothing to do
     with health reasons.  It had nothing to do --
     nothing whatsoever to do with the fact that
     cigarette smoking causes disease.  That's what they told you.
          Again, ladies and gentlemen, you didn't check
     your common sense and your judgment at the door
     when you walked into this courtroom two and a half
     weeks ago.
          We know, from the deposition testimony,
     Barbara McMannis believed her father had died from
     smoking cigarettes back in 1964.  That's why we
     played for you -- we read you the testimony of Dawn
     McMannis, the third daughter, who you didn't see
     testifying here.
          And what did you hear from Dawn McMannis in
     that very short passage we read?  My parents caught
     me smoking too.  They told me, don't smoke.  And we
     asked Dawn McMannis, why did they tell you, don't
     smoke?  Because it was bad for me.  It was bad for
     me.
          Of course you know.  Parents don't want their
     children to smoke because they know it's dangerous.
     And Mr. and Mrs. McMannis knew the same thing, and
     they told their children.  They told their
     children, the reason you shouldn't smoke is because
     it's bad, for your health.
          Now, Mr. Mitnik tried to tell you that all of
     these warnings and health messages that we've been talking about now over the last 20 years somehow
     were drowned out by statements made by cigarette
     companies.
          But the evidence you heard shows just the
     opposite.  Remember what both Dr. Proctor and
     Dr. Henningfield told you.  Between 1964, when this
     first Surgeon General's Report came out, and in
     1979, right about in here, both Dr. Proctor and
     Dr. Henningfield told you 30 million Americans quit
     smoking.  30 million.  That's 2 million people
     every single year.
          They've heard the same information as Barbara
     McMannis.  Dr. Henningfield told you, according to
     his criteria, many of them were addicted.  But
     30 million make the choice to quit, and they quit
     for good.
          Now, Mr. Mitnik tried to tell you, well, you
     know, but Barbara McMannis was fooled into
     believing that filters were safer for her, that
     somehow a filter on a cigarette meant she was not
     putting her health at risk by smoking cigarettes.
          You haven't heard any evidence from any one of
     Barbara McMannis's family members that she ever
     believed anything like that.
          As a matter of fact, what you heard was the warning labels, the same warning label goes on an
     unfiltered cigarette and a filtered cigarette.
          That's the evidence you heard in this case,
     ladies and gentlemen.
          According to the testimony you've heard, she's
     smoking Winston cigarettes and Marlboro cigarettes
     in the 1970s, they have filters on them.  When
     she's telling her children cigarette smoking is bad
     for you.  That's the evidence you've heard in this
     case, ladies and gentlemen.
          That brings us to 1982 or 1983.  You heard
     that her younger sister, Gloria Cullipher, is
     diagnosed with emphysema, a lung disease that you
     know can be fatal and is caused by cigarette
     smoking.
          Gloria Cullipher told you on the videotape, I
     was a chain smoker.  I was smoking two packs-plus
     of cigarettes per day.  But when the doctor told
     me, you know what, if you don't quit now, you may
     not be around in more than a year, she quit smoking
     cold turkey, just like that.  And she urged her
     sister to quit smoking too.
          Now, Mr. Mitnik has made a big deal out of
     what Gloria Cullipher said.  And I want to put two
     things in perspective.  Gloria Cullipher told you two things, two things that I think are important.
          First she told you -- and I'll read this
     passage.  She says, "My sister didn't try to quit
     for the first time until 1993 or 1994."  That's
     what Gloria Cullipher told you.
          She also told you, you know what, when I would
     tell me sister "that my COPD is caused by smoking,
     what she said to me was, it's not going to happen
     to everybody.  It's not going to happen to
     everybody."
          She didn't say, you know what, I don't believe
     it, it doesn't cause COPD.  She says, it's not
     going to happen to everybody.
          And that's a reaction that many people have
     when they know that they're engaging in a behavior
     that presents a risk to their health.  And that was
     Barbara McMannis's attitude.
          Now, that brings us to 1980 -- or into the
     1980s.  We're on the last page of the timeline
     here.
          In 1985, you know the warnings on the
     cigarette packs change again, and there's now a
     series of four rotating warnings, one of which
     says, "Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart
     disease, and emphysema."  That's in 1985, ladies
     and gentlemen.
          But at this point, this warning isn't telling
     Barbara McMannis anything she hasn't already known
     for decades, for decades.
          We go back above the blue bar here.  I'm kind
     of going a little bit back in time.  But you heard
     that for many years after moving to Florida,
     Barbara McMannis worked cleaning hotels,
     time-shares, condominiums, and offices.
          Her daughter Connie Boykin told you that when
     she would clean these offices and time-shares, she
     wasn't allowed to smoke when she was cleaning.
          Connie Boykin told you, we would work at
     night, six, seven hours, cleaning offices.  We
     didn't smoke cigarettes.  They might take a dinner
     break about halfway through, and she said her
     mother would smoke one cigarette.
          So again, for a long period of time,
     substantial years, long hours during the course of
     the day, Barbara McMannis controlled where, when,
     and how much she smoked.
          That brings us to the late 1980s and into the
     early 1990s.  You heard Dick Boggs, Barbara
     McMannis's best friend's husband is diagnosed with
     emphysema. Mr. and Mrs. McMannis saw that Dick Boggs had
     emphysema.  And, of course, they knew, they knew
     that cigarette smoking was the reason why he had
     that disease.  This is now the third person very
     close to Barbara McMannis who has got a
     smoking-related illness.
          And you heard me ask Donald McMannis.  I said,
     Mr. McMannis, did it ever occur to you, when you
     saw Dick Boggs to say, you know what, look at Dick.
     Maybe you should quit smoking.
          And Mr. McMannis's answer was -- tells you
     everything you need to know.  Mr. McMannis said,
     you know what, I never said that to her because it
     wouldn't have made a difference what I said to her.
     It wouldn't have mattered.  She had a mind of her
     own.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, that shows you that
     nothing that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds might
     have said about cigarette smoking would have
     mattered to Barbara McMannis.  Only Barbara
     McMannis was going to make the decision whether or
     not she was going to quit.
          You also heard that Mr. McMannis himself
     starts to experience pretty serious breathing
     problems in either the late '80s or early 1990s. He had a really bad cough.  He was coughing so
     hard, his daughter said she could hear him throwing
     up.  He couldn't breathe.
          So Mr. McMannis says to himself, you know
     what, I'm going to quit.  Cigarettes are getting
     the best of me.  That's what he told you.  And
     Mr. McMannis quit smoking for good, cold turkey,
     somewhere in about 1990.
          Now, Mrs. McMannis decides, I'm not going to
     quit smoking.  I enjoy smoking, I'm healthy, I'm
     going to continue.
          But her husband has told her, you know what, I
     would prefer that you not smoke and I would prefer
     that you not smoke around me.
          And from that point forward, Barbara McMannis
     basically stops smoking around her husband.  And
     Mr. McMannis told you he retired in about 1992 or
     1993.  He was home more often.  They spent more
     time together.
          But Barbara McMannis stopped smoking around
     her husband.  She moved into one room, their
     Florida room, where she smoked outside.  She never
     smoked when they were in the car together.
          The key point, again, is when she needed to,
     when she had a reason that was more important,
     Barbara McMannis could control where she smoked and
     when she smoked.
          Now, that brings us to about roughly 1993,
     1994.  The time is not completely precise.  But
     this is when Mr. McMannis told you that he believed
     his wife quit smoking for a short period of time.
          He said she went to a hypnotist.  He took her
     to the hypnotist.  And although he doesn't know for
     how long she quit -- because she wasn't smoking
     around him; he wasn't around her all the time -- he
     believes it was for about two or three days.  Two
     or three days.  That's what he believes.
          He finds her smoking on their back porch in
     the Florida room with one of their daughters.  And
     that's how he knows that his wife has decided to
     resume smoking.
          Now, I thought I heard Mr. Mitnik say that
     Barbara McMannis experienced all of these
     incredible withdrawal symptoms.  Well, remember
     what all of the experts told you, Dr. Henningfield
     and Dr. Dorce.  You only experience withdrawal
     symptoms if you stop smoking.
          Dr. Dorce told you, nicotine is out of your
     system in two or three days.  Any withdrawal
     symptoms that a smoker might experience, they're gone in two or three or, at most, four weeks.
          But they're telling you she experienced severe
     withdrawal problems when the evidence you heard was
     she never quit for more than a day or two or three.
     That's the evidence you've heard.
          And from this point forward, as I told you,
     from this point forward, Mr. McMannis never says
     another word to his wife to encourage her to quit
     smoking again.
          And he testified the reason he never
     encouraged her again to try to quit was because,
     from his perspective, from their perspective, it
     was her decision, her decision whether she would
     smoke cigarettes or whether she would quit.
          Now, that brings us to January of 1995.  And
     you heard that in January of 1995, Barbara McMannis
     collapses.  Her husband finds her unresponsive, and
     she's rushed to the hospital.
          The doctors find a tumor in her brain.  She's
     diagnosed with cancer.  And she is told that her
     condition is terminal, meaning there is no cure.
          Now, after being told she only has months left
     to live, Barbara McMannis stops smoking.  She stops
     smoking.
          Mr. McMannis told you he was with his wife
     almost every day after she got out of the hospital.
     And he said she never smoked a cigarette.  She
     never asked for a cigarette.  She never talked
     about the cigarettes.  She never mentioned the word
     "cigarette."
          So she quit smoking for good in 1995, a few
     months before she passed away.
          Now, I told you -- because they mentioned
     Gloria Cullipher, I wanted to read this to you.
          The first time she had ever tried to quit
     smoking, tried to quit smoking, in all the evidence
     you heard, was 1993 or 1994.  Even Gloria Cullipher
     agrees with that.
          She was asked the following questions:
          "When is the first time that you recall your
     sister, Barbara, trying to quit smoking?
          "Answer:  About two years before she died.
          "What was that?  About 1993?
          "I don't know.
          "1993 was the first time you recall your
     sister, Barbara, quitting smoking?
          "Yes.
          "Is that correct?
          "Yes."
          That's what her sister told you. The first time that she ever told her husband
     that she was interested in quitting, the first time
     she expressed any motivation to quit was only a
     year or two before ultimately she passed away.
          When she was motivated in January of 1995,
     when she was determined, Barbara McMannis quit
     smoking and she quit for good.  And those
     qualities, those intangible qualities, motivation
     and determination, she always had those within her,
     always.  That's the kind of person that Donald
     McMannis and his family described.
          Now, one of the issues you're going to have to
     decide, and you've already heard Mr. Mitnik go over
     this -- is whether Barbara McMannis had lung cancer
     caused by cigarette smoking or, rather, a cancer
     that started in another organ in her body.
          This is an important issue because if you
     find, if you determine that the plaintiff has
     failed to prove to you by persuasive and convincing
     evidence that Barbara McMannis had lung cancer,
     your verdict is for the defendants.
          The plaintiff and his attorneys want you to
     believe that she had lung cancer because she smoked
     cigarettes.
          Their own expert, Dr. Villa, told you 85 to
     90 percent of long-time, heavy cigarette smokers do
     not develop lung cancer.  Do not develop lung
     cancer.
          Now, you did hear Mr. Mitnik mention the death
     certificate.  And no question, ladies and
     gentlemen, the death certificate says that Barbara
     McMannis had lung cancer.
          But Judge Winesett instructed you -- you heard
     it -- that that death certificate is not
     prima facie evidence that Barbara McMannis had lung
     cancer.
          You simply consider that along with all of the
     other evidence that you've heard during the course
     of this trial.
          And remember what Dr. Villa himself told you,
     the plaintiff's expert.  He told you, without an
     autopsy, without an autopsy, a death certificate is
     essentially worthless because they can be
     unreliable and prone to error.  That's what the
     plaintiff's own expert told you.
          So what was the evidence you heard?
          Well, on these points, frankly, Dr. Villa and
     Dr. Iannotti, the doctor we brought yesterday, said
     exactly the same thing.  They told you, Barbara
     McMannis never had any symptoms to suggest that she had lung cancer.  No respiratory problems.  No
     shortness of breath.  No chest pain or tightness.
     No coughing up of blood.  Nothing other than a bad
     headache.  That was her only complaint.
          Second, both Dr. Villa and Dr. Iannotti told
     you that the doctors who cared for Mrs. McMannis
     back in 1995 never found cancer in her lungs.  They
     never found cancer in her lungs.
          You saw the pathology records.  I won't repeat
     all that.  But they all very clearly say, No
     malignant cells seen.
          Now, Dr. Villa did try to tell you -- he tried
     to tell you, Well, those tests, they don't mean
     anything.  They were just kind of blindly looking
     for samples in her lungs.
          Ladies and gentlemen, ask yourself this:  Do
     you really think, do you really think doctors are
     just poking with needles and brushes and washes in
     Barbara McMannis's lungs?  Do you think that's the
     way medicine is practiced?  Of course not.
     Dr. Iannotti told you.  He told you that technology
     we have available today was available in 1995.
          When they did the bronchoscopy, they had the
     benefit of CT-scan-guided technology.  They were
     looking in a particular part in Barbara McMannis's lungs.  They had targeted a particular area.  And
     they took not one, not two, four samples, four
     samples during the course of the bronchoscopy and
     the sputum.  Every single one of them came back, No
     malignant cells seen.
          Now, you heard that we looked at the one
     pathology that -- sample that was positive that we
     have comes from the brain tumor, the brain tumor.
     And you heard that that was diagnosed by the
     pathologist as metastatic, undifferentiated,
     non-small cell carcinoma.  You now know metastatic
     means it spread to the brain from someplace else.
     Undifferentiated non-small cell carcinoma, all of
     the doctors told you that kind of cancer can arise
     in any organ in the body.  Any organ in the body.
          So when the doctor says, Undifferentiated
     non-small cell carcinoma, Dr. Villa told you, that
     means he has no idea where in her body that cancer
     started.
          Now, we've gone through all of this here.
          You heard that after being discharged from the
     hospital, Barbara McMannis receives palliative
     care, radiation, and chemotherapy.  You heard that.
          We don't have any of the medical records to
     give us any real clue as to the specifics of any of that.
          But in April of 1995, you heard Barbara
     McMannis, unfortunately, passes away.  You know
     that no autopsy was performed, and virtually no
     medical records were collected.
          And, ladies and gentlemen --
          MR. MICHAEL:  One hour.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  -- that's the story.
          MR. MICHAEL:  One hour.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  That's the story that brings
     all of us here together today and has brought us
     here for the last two weeks.
          Now, I told you two weeks ago; I told you at
     the beginning of my presentation that this case was
     about two words, control and responsibility.  And
     even though that's what this case is about, you're
     not going to see those two words on the verdict
     form.
          With the time I have remaining, I would like
     to walk through the questions on the verdict form
     and explain to you how the evidence will help you
     answer each of those questions.
          And remember, now, on these questions we're
     going to talk about, the plaintiff bears the
     burden, not only to bring you evidence, but to bring you credible, reliable, and believable
     evidence.
          Okay?  A famous US senator was once quoted as
     saying that everyone is entitled to his own
     opinion, but not to his own set of facts.  The
     facts are what the facts are.
          And one of you put that question very squarely
     to Mr. McMannis.  And I'd ask you to think about
     that as we walk through the questions that you're
     ultimately going to be asked to answer on the
     verdict form.
          And this is important as you consider those
     questions.
          So let me put this first question.
          The first question you're going to be asked to
     decide on that verdict form will say, "Do you find
     that Barbara McMannis had lung cancer, that she was
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and
     that an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
     was a legal cause of lung cancer?"
          And it says "lung cancer" here because they're
     presuming, if you get this far, you've already
     answered this question.
          So this is one question, but there's really
     three separate pieces to the question. So I put together this demonstrative just to
     try to walk you through this and explain what it is
     I'm going to be talking about here.
          There's really three separate pieces to the
     question.  The first is a medical question, a
     medical causation question.
          Has -- has Mr. McMannis proven that his wife
     had lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking?
     That's the fist part of the question.  The second
     part of the question is, Mr. McMannis must prove
     that Barbara McMannis was addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine.
          Part two of the question.
          Third part is, Mr. McMannis must prove that
     the claimed addiction was a legal cause of Barbara
     McMannis's lung cancer.
          Three separate parts to one question.  And if
     you determine that the answer to any one of these
     three parts is no, then your answer is no; and that
     is a verdict for the defendants in this case.
          So let's talk about these questions, if we
     could.
          Let's talk about the medical question, first.
     And we've already talked a little bit about some of
     the evidence during the course of the presentation I gave you during the timeline.
          So let me highlight just a couple of points.
     Point number one is, plaintiff bears the burden to
     prove that Barbara McMannis had lung cancer and
     that it was caused by cigarette smoking by the
     greater weight of the evidence.
          It is Mr. McMannis's burden to prove that to
     you.
          Based on the medical records that we have
     available to us, ladies and gentlemen, based on the
     medical records, you can only say two things for
     sure in this case:  One, Mrs. McMannis had a tumor
     in her brain; and, number two, number two, that the
     doctors did not find any cancer in her lungs.
          That's all the medical records tell us in this
     case.
          We showed you those pathology reports from
     Fawcett Memorial Hospital.  Every single one of
     them said, No malignant cells seen.  All of those
     tests were negative for lung cancer.  Negative for
     lung cancer.
          And the important point was, they were
     looking.  They were looking, ladies and gentlemen.
     This wasn't some blind look into her lungs as
     Dr. Villa would have you believe. And the only witness you heard from, from the
     plaintiff, the only witness who testified was
     Dr. Villa.  And you know that he never examined
     Barbara McMannis.  He never treated Barbara
     McMannis.  He never ran any diagnostic tests.
          But he tells you 20 years later, based on the
     few records we have, that she had lung cancer.
          But Dr. Villa also acknowledged to you, ladies
     and gentlemen, that based on the evidence in this
     case, no doctor in any hospital in the United
     States of America would diagnose or treat Barbara
     McMannis for lung cancer.  That's what their own
     expert told you.
          What else did Dr. Villa tell you?  Dr. Villa
     and Dr. Iannotti both told you, the pathology
     reports are negative for cancer.  No question about
     it.
          Dr. Villa said he assumes, because we have a
     death certificate, he assumes that there was a
     tumor somewhere in Barbara McMannis's lungs.  He
     told you that was an assumption he made for
     purposes of his testimony in this case.
          But Dr. Villa also told you, he admitted, if
     we had done an autopsy, and we had actually looked
     into Barbara McMannis's lungs and there was no
     evidence of a tumor in her lungs, I would change my
     opinion.  I would say the same thing as
     Dr. Iannotti, Barbara McMannis had a cancer of
     unknown primary.
          And ask yourself, ladies and gentlemen, as you
     listen to the evidence on this issue, and when you
     retire to deliberate, if the information we have
     about Barbara McMannis is not enough in a hospital,
     why should it be enough for you in a court of law
     when the plaintiff is asking you to award him
     millions of dollars in damages?
          Dr. Villa also told you two important things.
     He told you that Barbara McMannis had a diagnosis
     of presumptive breast cancer back in 1975 and that
     she had been diagnosed with cancer on her ear and
     had cancer removed from her ear.  Dr. Villa told
     you those things.
          We brought you Dr. Iannotti.  And he told you,
     he agrees with Dr. Villa on one very important
     point, ladies and gentlemen.  Based on the evidence
     we have in this case, based on the evidence we have
     in this case, the evidence, it is impossible to
     medically diagnose Barbara McMannis's primary
     source of her cancer.  That's the evidence we have.
          Dr. Iannotti told you that Barbara McMannis has what doctors refer to as a cancer of unknown
     primary.
          In situations like this, doctors perform a
     differential diagnosis.  They list all of the type
     of problems that could be the cause of the
     plaintiff's condition.  And they do the best with
     the information they have to eliminate all of the
     suspects, to narrow it down, to arrive at a firm,
     conclusive diagnosis.
          But both Dr. Villa and Dr. Iannotti told you,
     you know what, even when we have all the medical
     records, even when we have all the medical records,
     the best technology available, sometimes we can't
     eliminate all the suspects.
          Connie Boykin testified in this case.  This
     was last week, on Wednesday.  My mother and my
     father both told me that my mother had cancer on
     her ear and she had the cancer removed.  That's
     what Connie Boykin told you all under oath in this
     case.
          Mr. McMannis then got up the very next day and
     denied it.  Denied it.
          Why would Mr. McMannis deny, in this
     courtroom, during this trial, what he told his
     daughter years and years ago when no one was thinking about a lawsuit?  Take that into
     consideration, ladies and gentlemen, when you think
     about this particular issue.
          I told you in my opening statement, and I
     think the evidence now demonstrates very clearly,
     no one can tell you today based on the evidence we
     have what kind of cancer Barbara McMannis had.  And
     the plaintiff has simply failed to carry his burden
     to prove to you that Barbara McMannis had lung
     cancer.
          And if you agree with that, ladies and
     gentlemen, your verdict is for Philip Morris and
     RJ Reynolds.
          The second part of the question asks you to
     determine whether Mrs. McMannis was addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine.  Again, if you
     answer no to this question, your verdict is for the
     defendants.
          Let me remind you that the Court has not given
     you a definition of addiction or a set of criteria
     to determine whether Barbara McMannis herself was
     addicted.
          Now, at the very beginning of this trial,
     during opening statements, Mr. Mitnik stood up, and
     in an effort to persuade you that Barbara McMannis was addicted, he told you that the evidence would
     show that Barbara McMannis smoked two packs of
     cigarettes a day and sometimes as many as three.
     That's what you were told in the opening statement
     by plaintiff's counsel.
          Dr. Henningfield told you the same thing when
     he testified.  But that's not the evidence you've
     heard in this case.  Mr. McMannis got up on the
     witness stand.  And what did he tell you?  My wife
     smoked, I think, about the same amount as me, a
     pack a day.  One pack a day.
          He told you, you know what, I really only saw
     her smoke six or seven cigarettes per day.  And he
     admitted to you that after he quit smoking in the
     early 1990s, he really didn't see her smoke that
     often.  That's what Mr. McMannis told you.
          The only evidence you ever heard that she ever
     smoked more than that came from Connie Boykin, her
     oldest daughter.  And what did Connie Boykin tell
     you?  She told you there was two months, a
     two-month period in 1982 when her mother was out of
     work.  And she said she was nervous, stressed,
     anxious because she was out of work.
          And during that period of time, Connie Boykin
     said, you know what, I noticed my mother smoking more cigarettes than she had before.
          But what did Connie Boykin tell you?  She
     said, when my mother found work two months later,
     she went back to smoking the same amount of
     cigarettes she always smoked.
          No one told you that she was some chain smoker
     who smoked two to three packs per day.  No one said
     that.
          Ask yourself, why would Mr. McMannis's
     attorneys and his experts tell you that Barbara
     McMannis smoked two and sometimes up to three packs
     per day when Donald McMannis himself told you that
     wasn't true?
          It's because they want you to believe that she
     was addicted.
          They brought you Dr. Henningfield.  And while
     Dr. Henningfield certainly is well qualified on a
     number of topics, he told you, I'm not a medical
     doctor.  I'm not asked to diagnose people as being
     addicted to anything.  That's not what he does.
          Dr. Henningfield also told you that he's
     testified in about 45 to 50 cases just like this.
     And guess what?  Every single case in which
     Dr. Henningfield testified, he said, the smoker was
     addicted. So would you expect him to say anything else
     in this case?
          Of course not.
          We brought you Dr. Daphne Dorce, a
     psychiatrist and a board-certified addiction
     medicine specialist.  She told you every single day
     she sees patients, she sees people who are using
     drugs, hard drugs, illegal drugs, OxyContin,
     heroin, cocaine, alcohol.
          She evaluates them.  She determines whether
     they're addicted, and she comes up with a treatment
     plan to try to help them stop using those
     substances.  And many of those people also smoke
     cigarettes.
          She provided you with a real medical criteria
     to determine whether someone is addicted, the
     DSM-5.  She put it on the board.  She answered all
     the questions I had.  She answered all the
     questions Mr. Mitnik had.  She answered all of your
     questions about that.
          Dr. Dorce gave you a definition that asks you
     important questions, asks you about the behavior of
     the person.  Are you really addicted if you can
     control where, when, and how much you smoke?
          Are you really addicted if you can stop smoking, refrain from smoking around your loved
     ones, your mother, her mother, Elizabeth Maxwell,
     or her husband, Donald McMannis.
          And keep this in mind, ladies and gentlemen,
     unlike Dr. Henningfield, Dr. Dorce told you she's
     testified in cases just like this one where she
     found that the cigarette smoker was addicted, was
     addicted based on the facts in those particular
     cases.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, you've used the hour and
     15 minutes.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you.
          So let's take a look at the evidence real
     quick.
          Each of Mr. McMannis's family members, Donald
     McMannis, his two daughters, they told you, they
     told you that Barbara McMannis was addicted.  But
     they also told you that she never tried to quit
     smoking until 1993 or 1994.
          And Mr. McMannis acknowledged, ladies and
     gentlemen, his wife never told him she was
     addicted.  The two of you were smoking for most of
     the 39 years you were together; right?  Now, in the
     39 years you were married, isn't it true that
     Barbara McMannis never once told you that she believed she was addicted to cigarettes?
          She never told me.
          So when you evaluate this question of whether
     Barbara McMannis was addicted, keep in mind that
     it's the plaintiff who was telling you that his
     wife was addicted, the same person who's asked you
     now to award you $5 million in damages.
          But he admits that his wife never told him she
     wanted to quit smoking and never tried to quit
     smoking until the last year or two of his life --
     of her life.
          And ask yourself, is that evidence sufficient
     in a court of law, or is something more required?
     Tangible, credible, believable evidence from a
     source that does not have an interest in the
     outcome of the case.  I think the answer should be
     obvious, ladies and gentlemen.  And I think your
     answer to this second question should be no.
          But even if you get beyond the second
     question, you still have the third question.  And
     that third question, your work is just beginning,
     because even if you find she was addicted, you
     still have to prove that addiction was a legal
     cause, that the claimed addiction to cigarettes was
     a legal cause of her lung cancer. Now, the Court gave you that instruction for
     legal cause.  And Mr. Mitnik gave you an analogy.
          Let me give you an analogy that I think
     explains better than the language, what we mean by
     this concept of legal cause.  Imagine someone walks
     across the street and they get hit by a bus.  The
     bus is the medical cause of their injuries.
          But in order to know legal cause, you need to
     know more.  For example, was the light green when
     the person tried to cross the street in front of
     the bus?  Was the person paying attention when she
     tried to cross the street?  Or was she talking on
     her cell phone?  Or texting?  Or listening with
     earbuds to music?  Did the person know that the bus
     was going to come every single day for the last
     39 years and yet still cross in front of the
     streetlight?
          You need to know those sorts of things in
     order to know legal cause in this case.
          And, in a case like this, the question of
     legal cause really boils down to the issue of
     quitting.  Ask yourself, based on all the evidence
     you've heard, was Barbara McMannis's claimed
     addiction so strong, so substantial, that it stood
     in the way of a committed and determined effort on her part to quit smoking?
          The evidence in this case is undisputed, that
     Barbara McMannis never made an attempt to quit
     smoking until 1993 or 1994.
          All of the witnesses agree with that, ladies
     and gentlemen.  Mr. McMannis told you that for most
     of the 39 years that they were married, she wasn't
     interested in quitting.
          If you decide, if you decide, ladies and
     gentlemen, that Barbara McMannis could have quit
     smoking whenever she was truly motivated to do so,
     then addiction is not a legal cause of her disease.
          Rather, it is Mrs. McMannis' decision to smoke
     cigarettes for years in the face of all those
     warnings, and her decision not to try to quit until
     the last year or two of her life.  That, ladies and
     gentlemen, is the one and the only legal cause in
     this case.
          And, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, to answer
     that question, you need to go no further than the
     plaintiff's own experts.
          Dr. Henningfield.  What did he tell you?
     65 million people have quit smoking in this country
     since 1964.  3,000 a day, 1.2 to 1.3 million
     smokers every single year. He called it one of the biggest public health
     successes in history.
          And he told you that the overwhelming majority
     of these people, by his criteria, would be
     addicted, but that 90 percent of them, 90 percent
     of them quit cold turkey without any assistance
     whatsoever.
          That's what Dr. Henningfield told you.
          All of the experts agree, anyone can quit
     smoking if they're motivated and determined.
          During the course of this trial, you heard no
     evidence that Barbara McMannis was any different.
          In fact, recall what her family told you.  She
     was independent.  She was intelligent.  She was
     strong-willed, and she had strong willpower.
     There's no question about any of that.
          The truth is, that for most of her life,
     Barbara McMannis enjoyed smoking cigarettes and
     simply did not want to stop smoking.  Otherwise,
     she would have tried at some point prior to 1993.
     That's the evidence you've heard in this case.
          Now, Mr. McMannis and his lawyers talked a lot
     about nicotine, and I'm sure Mr. Mitnik will talk
     about nicotine and brain receptors.  All of those
     things you heard about.  But you haven't heard any evidence, ladies and gentlemen, any evidence that
     nicotine prevented Barbara McMannis from
     understanding that smoking is dangerous or that it
     prevented her from exercising her free will and
     making a decision to stop when that's what she
     decided she wanted to do.
          Mr. McMannis claims his wife was addicted, but
     addiction did not force her to smoke.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, that's what this
     first question, the last part of this first
     question is all about.  That's what this last part
     of this question is all about.
          You've heard all the evidence.  You know that
     Barbara McMannis was always in control, not Philip
     Morris, not RJ Reynolds, and not the nicotine in
     cigarettes.
          And your answer to this question should be no
     for all the reasons we've just explained.
          Now, there's going to be a question number two
     on the verdict form.  But because my time is
     running a little bit short, Mr. Weaver's going to
     talk about.  Question number two.  I want to talk
     to you briefly about this question of comparative
     fault, which will be the third question on your
     verdict form. Now, I don't think you're going to get that
     far, ladies and gentlemen, in your deliberations.
     But I want to respond because Mr. Mitnik did
     address this issue.
          You'll be asked to state the percentage of
     fault that you assign to Barbara McMannis, Philip
     Morris, and RJ Reynolds.
          Mr. Mitnik told you that Barbara McMannis --
     that her husband, on her behalf, accepts some
     responsibility for her smoking-related decisions,
     but only 20 percent.  Only 20 percent.
          That's what he told you.
          What does it mean to accept responsibility for
     the decisions we make in life?  Let me give you an
     example.
          For those of you who may drink alcohol,
     perhaps maybe once or twice you've had an
     occasion --
          MR. MITNIK:  Objection, your Honor.  Are we
     going to start putting jurors' issues --
          MR. WEAVER:  Speaking objection, your Honor.
          MR. MITNIK:  Golden rule.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I'll rephrase the question.
          THE COURT:  Go ahead.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Imagine someone who drinks alcohol, ladies and gentlemen.  We've all drank
     alcohol; right?  We've all had the experience.
          Imagine someone one night drinks a little too
     much alcohol, one too many drinks, and they wake up
     the next day with a hangover.  You wake up.  Your
     eyes are bloodshot.  Your eyes are bleary.  You go
     to the mirror, and you look yourself in the mirror.
     And you say, You know what?  I'm only 20 percent
     responsible for the decision I made to have those
     drinks last might.  No one says that, ladies and
     gentlemen.  No one says that.
          Was anyone else responsible for the decision
     that Barbara McMannis made?  The answer is of
     course not.  Of course not.
          The facts of this case show loud and clear
     that Barbara McMannis got up every single day, made
     her own decisions in life, and no one else made
     those decisions for her.
          The evidence shows that she did not even try
     to quit smoking until the last year or two of her
     life.
          Accepting responsibility means simply that,
     accepting full responsibility for the consequences
     of one's actions.  And that's what you should put
     down for Barbara McMannis if you get beyond this question.
          Now, again, I don't think you will get that
     far, but there's a question four and a question
     five.  And because Mr. Mitnik addressed it, I would
     like to talk briefly about it.
          These questions are going to ask you to state
     for each defendant whether the concealment or
     omission of material information about the health
     effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes
     or both were a legal cause of Barbara McMannis's
     death.  And then there's a companion question five
     that refers to the agreement to conceal
     information.
          There is a line for you to check yes or no as
     to both question four and question five.
          Let me make two quick points about these
     questions four and five.  Mr. Mitnik got up here
     and one of the first things he told you was, You
     know what?  We accept responsibility.  It shouldn't
     be all their fault, and he pointed to us, and he
     said, It's not.
          Well, ladies and gentlemen, they've made two
     claims in this case.  The claims that are part of
     question four and question five.  If you answer yes
     to either one of those questions, then they are asking for 100 percent of all the damages they've
     requested; the percentages of responsibility that
     Mr. Mitnik talked about in response to question
     number three go completely out the window; and
     plaintiff gets 100 percent of any damages if you
     decided to award damages.
          And the judge told you that in the
     instructions.
          Is that accepting responsibility?  Well, we
     have two claims where we accept responsibility.
     But we have two other claims, the fraudulent -- the
     fraud and the conspiracy where we're not accepting
     any responsibility.  That's the plaintiff's
     position in this case.
          Now, what these questions, four and five, are
     really asking you, the gist of it is the following:
     Did Barbara McMannis make any decisions about
     cigarette smoking because of a statement made by a
     cigarette company?
          You heard Dr. Henningfield testify.  You heard
     Dr. Proctor testify.  But the case -- the evidence
     in this case is undisputed.  Not a single person
     testified that Barbara McMannis ever heard, ever
     saw, ever read a single statement about smoking and
     health made by Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds or any tobacco entity.
          You never heard any one of her family members
     come in here and say, You know what?  Barbara
     McMannis didn't believe that smoking caused cancer.
     She didn't believe it was dangerous because she had
     heard what the defendants said.  No one told you
     that.  No one told you that.
          And the evidence demonstrates that nothing
     anyone said, not her husband, not her sister, not
     her best friend, influenced Barbara McMannis's
     decisions about smoking.  Barbara McMannis knew
     smoking caused serious diseases like lung cancer
     and that she needed to quit for decades, decades
     before she was diagnosed with cancer in 1995.
          She knew her father had died from smoking in
     1964.  She had seen all of the warnings that were
     on packs of cigarettes for decades, decades, ladies
     and gentlemen.
          You heard it from Mr. McMannis himself.  He
     said, It wouldn't have mattered what you said to
     her.  She was going to smoke whether you told her
     to or not.
          For many years, Barbara McMannis didn't listen
     to what anyone told her about cigarette smoking.
     So why would any of us believe that she would have paid attention to anything that Philip Morris or
     RJ Reynolds might have said?
          The answer to both questions four and five on
     the verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, should be
     no.
          Now, I want to talk very briefly about
     damages.  I don't think you will get this far on
     the verdict form.  But I want to respond to what
     Mr. Mitnik said.
          He asked you to award $5 million to
     Mr. McMannis.  And when I heard Mr. Mitnik ask for
     that amount of money, I was trying to think, well,
     okay, what can I say to you?  How can I put that in
     some sort of perspective so you have an
     understanding of what that amount really means?
          So a typical family here in Florida makes
     about $50,000 a year.  $50,000.  So are you going
     to go to work --
          MR. MITNIK:  Objection, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I think I'm allowed to respond
     to the plaintiff's --
          THE COURT:  Would you like to approach?
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Sure.
          (A discussion was held at the bench and out of
the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. MITNIK:  This is a person.  You can't go
     into argument -- that's exactly what the law is.
     He's making the argument for, look how much you're
     going to get.  Let's talk about what -- other
     people's annual income, how much money, annual
     income has nothing to do with compensating for the
     losses in the courtroom.  And there's no evidence
     in here what the annual income of people in
     central -- or around here.
          THE COURT:  What is the basis?  Or I'm going
     to sustain it.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Let me ask a hypothetical, your
     Honor.  He said $10 per hour for both defendants.
     I think I'm allowed to respond --
          THE COURT:  The income of people in Florida?
          MR. GERAGHTY:  He gave a hypothetical story of
     his daughter.  Let me give a hypothetical story.
     I'll --
          THE COURT:  You asked the jurors about
     drinking.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I rephrased it when your Honor
     told me to.  I'll make it more general.
          THE COURT:  I just want to -- you can't go to
     evidence that's not here.  That's the basis and I'm sustaining that.
          There's no evidence that they're going to --
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I'll just say, imagine there's
     a family that makes $50,000 a year.  I'm allowed to
     tell them that and then explain how much money
     they're asking for.  I'm totally allowed to do
     that.
          MR. MITNIK:  It's irrelevant, and it's against
     the law.  You can't -- it is a play on prejudice,
     that the burden -- the evidence in this case is
     harm to him, not look how much this would be to
     somebody else, because here's the annual income.
     This is -- we can't talk about their annual income.
     I don't want to get up on rebuttal and talk about
     their income.
          THE COURT:  Just go somewhere else on that
     one.  Thank you.  Okay.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you.
          (The sidebar discussion was concluded.)
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Mr. Mitnik asked you for --
     asked you to award Mr. McMannis $5 million in
     damages, totally divorced from any sense of
     reality.  He gave you no guidance, any sense to
     appreciate what that money is or what that money is
     actually being asked to address. Here's the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen.
     If you decide that Mr. McMannis is entitled to
     recover damages, you use your best judgment about
     what you think is a fair amount and come to that
     amount based on the evidence you've heard, and
     that's what you record.
          But I want to make sure everyone understands
     two things.  First, Mr. McMannis is not asking you
     to award him damages for any medical expenses paid
     for the treatment his wife received in 1995.  He's
     not asking for that.  And so there will be nothing
     on the verdict form for you to put that.
          But in a case like this, ladies and gentlemen,
     in which the evidence shows that Barbara McMannis
     enjoyed smoking cigarettes, enjoyed using a product
     for 40 years, and frankly didn't try to stop using
     the product for nearly 40 years, there should be no
     question that millions of dollars, let alone
     hundreds of thousands of dollars, should be within
     the calculation.
          That's what the evidence shows in this case.
          Now, the final question on the verdict form,
     ladies and gentlemen, asks you whether, by clear
     and convincing evidence, that punitive damages are
     warranted against the defendants in this case.  And
     if you answer no to that question, you never get to
     the issue of punitive damages.
          Let me talk briefly about it so you understand
     what you're being asked to decide.
          You are not being asked to decide the amount
     of punitive damages.  The issue here is whether, by
     clear and convincing evidence, the plaintiff has
     shown that he's entitled to punitive damages.
          So don't spend one moment thinking about the
     amount.  The question before you right now is
     whether Mr. McMannis has shown, under the evidence
     and the law, that he is entitled to punitive
     damages.
          If you were to decide that he is, there would
     be another phase of this trial.  Plaintiff would
     present evidence.  Philip Morris would present
     evidence.  RJ Reynolds would present evidence.  All
     of the parties would present evidence.  We have
     additional arguments.  And then you would get to
     the amount stage.
          Now, I want to make sure that if you get this
     issue, you clearly understand what you have to
     decide.
          When you look at the instructions, clear and
     convincing evidence is defined. It's a much higher standard of proof than the
     greater weight of the evidence.
          With respect to punitive damages, you will see
     that the evidence must be precise, explicit,
     lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it
     produces a firm belief or conviction without
     hesitation about the matter in issue.  In other
     words, you need to be really, really, really
     convinced that punitive damages are appropriate.
          And let me tell you one more thing.  You have
     to decide, if you get there, that punitive damages
     are warranted based on the conduct that relates to
     Barbara McMannis.  This case is about Barbara
     McMannis.  It is not a class action anymore.
          Now, based on the evidence in this case,
     nothing that the defendants did or did not do
     harmed Barbara McMannis in any way.
          Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds manufactured and
     sold cigarettes.  That alone cannot be the basis
     for liability in this case.
          Barbara McMannis always had the information
     available to her to make a decision whether she
     wanted to smoke cigarettes or whether she wanted to
     quit.
          And the evidence you've heard is that Barbara McMannis always had the ability to quit smoking
     when she was motivated to do so.
          She simply did not want to quit until the last
     year or two of her life.  And there is no evidence
     that you've heard during the course of this trial
     that anything that the defendants said or didn't
     say, did or didn't do caused Barbara McMannis to
     begin smoking or to continue smoking.
          Dr. Proctor spent two days -- a day and a half
     talking to you about the culture of smoking and the
     tobacco companies.  But he admitted to you that he
     knows nothing about Barbara McMannis, what she
     knew, why she smoked cigarettes.
          Given the evidence you've heard, ladies and
     gentlemen, the plaintiff has simply not met his
     burden to prove to you that punitive damages are
     warranted in this case.
          So your answer to that question should be no.
          Now, I'm going to sit down here in a minute,
     and you're going to get to hear from Mr. Weaver.
          And after that, Mr. Mitnik will have one more
     opportunity to speak to you.  And that's because,
     as you've heard, the plaintiff bears the burden of
     proof.  And because he has that burden, he has an
     opportunity to speak to you on what is referred to as rebuttal.
          Now, I don't know exactly what Mr. Mitnik will
     say, but I can imagine he's going to say a lot of
     very critical things of Philip Morris and
     RJ Reynolds.  I'm pretty positive of that.
          But as you listen to the things that
     Mr. Mitnik says, ask yourself -- ask yourself every
     time Mr. Mitnik says something, what does this have
     to do with Barbara McMannis?  A woman who you now
     know lived her life exactly the way she wanted to
     live it, who enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and who
     never tried to quit smoking until 1993 or 1994.
          The truth is, ladies and gentlemen, we do
     enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this
     country.  We have the right to make decisions and
     lifestyle choices that are not always in our best
     interests, that come with health risks.
          And with that freedom comes the obligation to
     take personal responsibility for the consequences
     of those decisions.
          And in the end, ladies and gentlemen, that's
     what this case is all about.
          Are we going to hold Philip Morris and
     RJ Reynolds legally responsible for the decisions
     made by an intelligent, independent, and
     strong-willed person?  That's what this case is all
     about.
          And based on the evidence, ladies and
     gentlemen, I think the answer is clear.  Based on
     the evidence you've heard in this case, in Barbara
     McMannis's case, the evidence supports one and only
     one true verdict.  And that is a verdict in favor
     of Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
          So, ladies and gentlemen, this is my last
     opportunity to speak to you.  And I simply just
     want to say thank you very much.  You've been
     extremely patient this afternoon with me and
     patient during the course of the entire trial, and
     I can't tell you how much I appreciate that.
          Thank you.


            (DEFENDANT R.J. REYNOLDS CLOSING ARGUMENT)
          MR. WEAVER:  May it please the Court?
          I think I'm actually going to have a few
     minutes to spend with you today.  I'm very grateful
     for that opportunity.  I feel like I should start
     out by re-introducing myself to you all over again,
     but I won't do that because you know who I am.
          I've been on the other side of the courtroom.
     I'm always the last to go.  I'm sometimes
     forgotten.  But I do have some things that I need
     to talk to you about.
          In some ways, it's almost like being at home
     with my family.
          Hopefully, you recall my opening and you
     recall what I told you about how the facts of this
     case and how plaintiff cannot stand on one side of
     the podium and advocate to you that the tobacco
     companies are bad, come on the other side of the
     podium and advocate to you that Barbara McMannis
     was a smoker and that that's all there needs to be.
          There has to be a connection.  There has to be
     some sort of link between the two sides of the
     podium.
          Mr. Mitnik talked about the impact of things
     during his closing statement.  He said that what the tobacco companies did impacted people.
          Well, we're not here to talk about people.
     Mr. Geraghty noted that in his closing.  We're not
     here to talk about the evidence that those jurors
     in Miami heard years ago when they reached a
     decision that ultimately resulted in the Engle
     findings.
          We're here to talk about Mrs. McMannis.  "What
     was the message that was put out?"  Mr. Mitnik
     rhetorically asked you.  What was the message that
     was put out?
          The plaintiff's burden of proof in this case
     is not to simply ask rhetorical questions about
     what message was put out.  A burden of proof
     requires that he establish that the plaintiff prove
     what Mrs. McMannis heard, not what's out there, but
     what she heard and what she did and what she relied
     on.
          I think a burden of proof is more like some
     glasses, instead of scales that you need to tip.  I
     look at a burden of proof as being a glass with
     which you need to fill with individual pebbles that
     constitute your evidence in the case.
          And once you get up for compensatory damages
     purposes to the greater weight of the evidence, the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of
     the entirety of the evidence, you've exceeded the
     halfway point of the glass.
          We'll talk more about clear and convincing
     evidence, a much different, a much more difficult,
     a much more stringent burden.
          Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds are separate
     companies that compete with each other.
          The plaintiff has chosen to bring specific
     claims against my client as well.  As a result,
     that's why I have two glasses there, because
     plaintiff has a burden as to each defendant in this
     case.
          Now, I wish, even after saying just this, that
     I could look at you and say -- and point to
     Mr. Geraghty and say, "What he said."  And I will
     to a certain extent, but there are very particular
     issues I would like to address.
          Gloria Cullipher was the first fact witness
     that you saw in this case.  And Mrs. Cullipher said
     that her sister, Barbara's, first cigarettes were
     unfiltered Chesterfields stolen from their father
     and smoked in their bathroom in the late 1940s.
          By the early 1950s when Barbara McMannis moved
     out, she was a regular Chesterfield cigarette smoker.
          Dr. Proctor, on my questions, conceded that in
     the '30s, '40s, and beyond, Chesterfield was a
     quite popular brand in the United States.
     Dr. Proctor noted, as does this pack, that
     Chesterfields are made by Liggett & Myers.
          Gloria Cullipher also told you that the only
     other brand of cigarettes she saw her sister smoke
     was unfiltered Lucky Strikes after McMannis
     moved -- Mrs. McMannis moved to Florida in 1969.
          That's very important.
          Mrs. Cullipher says, I saw my sister smoke two
     brands of cigarettes, Chesterfield and Lucky
     Strike.  And I didn't see Lucky Strike until after
     they moved to Florida in 1969.
          Now, Mr. McMannis told you that when he was in
     the Army, he smoked Lucky Strike.  And he thought,
     when he returned from the service and began a
     relationship with Mrs. McMannis, then Ms. Eppley,
     that he thought she was smoking Lucky Strike.
          But you may recall that Mr. Geraghty asked him
     specifically if he had a recollection of the brand
     she was smoking in Avondale, Ohio, in the 1950s.
     And Mr. McMannis said he didn't.
          And then I got up and I asked Mr. McMannis whether or not he had a specific memory of
     Mrs. McMannis smoking Lucky Strike in the '50s.
     And he said, No, I don't.
          Mrs. McMannis -- Mr. McMannis, excuse me, also
     told you that Mrs. McMannis smoked Old Gold made by
     Lorillard Tobacco Company.  So we know that a
     significant portion of the brands that
     Mrs. McMannis smoked in her life, especially in the
     early years of her life, from the late 1940s until
     sometime after they moved to Florida in 1969, were
     manufactured by companies not present in this
     courtroom.
          Based on the evidence, ladies and gentlemen,
     it is a reasonable conclusion for you to reach that
     almost half of the cigarettes she smoked in her
     entire life were not those of either Philip Morris
     or of RJ Reynolds.
          We also know that you did not see one piece of
     evidence in this case that Barbara McMannis smoked
     brands made by RJ Reynolds or Philip Morris until
     after she was an adult.  Until after she was an
     adult.
          Now, there's no question that Mrs. McMannis
     smoked some quantity of cigarettes that were
     manufactured by my client, RJ Reynolds.  But plaintiff's burden was to establish with evidence
     that cigarettes made by Philip Morris or
     RJ Reynolds were a substantial contributing factor
     in what the plaintiffs believe was lung cancer that
     caused her death.  I'll address this issue again in
     a few minutes.
          No expert has come into this courtroom, ladies
     and gentlemen, and said that Mr. Geraghty's client
     or my client's cigarettes directly, in a natural
     and continuous sequence, produced or substantially
     contributed to Mrs. McMannis's lung cancer, if she
     had lung cancer, or to her death.
          Now, Drs. Henningfield and Dorce -- Dorce,
     excuse me, all told you that anyone can quit
     smoking.  You heard evidence that over 60 million
     people have already quit.  Dr. Henningfield and
     Dr. Dorce also agree that quitting takes
     motivation.  And without motivation, a person is
     unlikely to quit.
          Plaintiff showed you a slide.  And I want --
     can I have the ELMO, please?
          And I want to talk to you about this.  Here's
     the slide that plaintiff showed you, that Barbara
     McMannis was addicted to nicotine.  And they listed
     the individuals, Dr. Jack Henningfield and the four
     fact witnesses.  And way down here, they put Daphne
     Dorce.
          Now, I want to talk about that for a minute.
     And let's go back to the slides, please.
          Make no mistake.  Dr. Henningfield knows a lot
     about pharmacology.  He knows a lot about
     epidemiology, but he is not a medical doctor.  You
     heard Dr. Henningfield concede, admit, agree that
     addiction is a medical diagnosis with specific
     medical criteria.  And Dr. Henningfield told you
     that he does not diagnose or treat people with
     addictions.
          One of the first questions Mr. Geraghty asked
     Dr. Henningfield, a Ph.D., is:  "Well, you said
     several times on Friday that addiction is a
     disease?
          "Yeah.
          "So it's a medical diagnosis?
          "Yeah."
          That leaves Dr. Daphne Dorce, the only medical
     doctor who talked to you about addiction.
          Dr. Dorce is a board-certified medical doctor.
     She believes that addiction is a medical diagnosis.
     And she explained why Mrs. McMannis did not satisfy
     the medical criteria of the DSM-5, the Diagnostic Statistical Manual, fifth version.
          Mrs. McMannis was not addicted, ladies and
     gentlemen.  But even if you were to find that she
     was, you still have to determine whether the
     addiction was a legal cause of her disease and
     death.
          Think about all the evidence that you've heard
     in this case.  Mr. Mitnik, in his closing argument,
     used the word vulnerable, claiming that
     Mrs. McMannis was a vulnerable person or part of a
     vulnerable population.
          But you've heard no evidence of vulnerability.
     You've not heard that she was fragile or helpless,
     powerless, or controlled by nicotine addiction,
     left with no choice.  And of the medical records we
     have, none of them diagnose her as being addicted.
          Barbara McMannis enjoyed smoking and was not
     motivated to quit until she got sick in 1995.  No
     witness described her the way plaintiff would have
     you believe she was.  That's just not who Barbara
     McMannis was to the fact witnesses.
          So despite having the burden of proof on these
     issues, plaintiff has not established that
     Mrs. McMannis had lung cancer, that she had -- I'm
     sorry -- had lung cancer that was caused by smoking
     either Reynolds or Philip Morris's cigarettes, that
     she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, or
     that her addiction was a legal cause of her disease
     or death, such that, but for the addiction, she
     would not have gotten a smoking-related disease and
     died.
          Plaintiffs spent a long time with both
     Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Proctor talking about
     company conduct.  And since Mr. Geraghty talked to
     you about medical issues already, I would like to
     focus on the company conduct for a couple of
     minutes.
          More specifically, you need to be asking
     yourselves in deliberations, I would submit, ladies
     and gentlemen, whether there is a direct and
     substantial connection between the testimony about
     tobacco company conduct and Barbara McMannis.  You
     can't just have them swimming in different pools
     that are next to each other.  There has to be that
     nexus.
          So when you go back to the jury room to
     deliberate this case and you look at your notes and
     the evidence, you should always be asking yourself
     a very simple question:  What does the -- what do
     the historical documents and the witness testimony have to do with Barbara McMannis and the decisions
     she made about smoking?
          Dr. Proctor came to this courtroom -- I was
     going to say from Stanford University, but it was
     actually from the other side of the state where he
     was testifying -- and he admitted to you that he
     knew nothing about Barbara McMannis.
          I would submit, ladies and gentlemen, that the
     plaintiff is wishing that your passions about what
     was in the company documents will carry the day.
     But there has to be the link, ladies and gentlemen.
     And it was plaintiff's job to show you how the
     conduct was connected.  Seventeen days after you
     showed up for the first time for jury selection,
     there hasn't been a link established.
          We know that Barbara McMannis heard consistent
     messages throughout her life that smoking could be
     hazardous.  She kept up with current events.  She
     made informed choices.  Simply put, there should be
     no doubt that she possessed the requisite knowledge
     about the hazards of smoking.
          She knew the risks.  Dr. Proctor showed you a
     lot of different advertisements, advertisements
     with Santa Claus, with movie stars, with athletes.
     But what evidence did you hear about whether those advertisements impacted Barbara McMannis?
     Mr. McMannis testified that he, like Barbara,
     Eppley at the time, grew up in a very rural part of
     Ohio called Zanesville.  Mr. McMannis told you that
     he did not remember being exposed to advertising in
     the '30s, '40s, or '50s.
          Not when I was growing up.  That came later on
     in life, when Mr. Stevens asked him about ads.
          It must have been sometime in the '60s.
          Gloria Cullipher noted that they did read the
     newspaper, and they went to the movies.  But in the
     videotaped deposition you saw, you heard no one
     asking Ms. Cullipher questions to establish a
     satisfaction of a burden of proof.  You heard no
     one asking her questions about identifying ads that
     she saw.  Why is that?
          The plaintiff has the burden of proof, ladies
     and gentlemen.  It's that simple.
          We know that her first regular brand was
     Chesterfield.  They chose that brand because they
     stole it from their father when they began their
     smoking.
          Concealment is one of the issues that you're
     going to have to link to Barbara McMannis.  You
     have to look at the Engle findings, if you get that far, and you have to ask yourself, Was the
     concealment a legal cause?
          And when you look at instruction number nine,
     you'll see that it contains the requirements that
     there had to be material information concealed that
     establishes the legal cause to Barbara McMannis.
          You'll see, I believe it's instruction ten,
     that material information means of such importance
     that a reasonable person would consider the same
     significant in their decision-making process.  It
     has to concern the health risks or addictive nature
     of cigarette smoking or both.
          And if so, it has to directly and, in a
     natural and continuous sequence, produce or
     contributed substantially to producing
     Mrs. McMannis's death.  So that but for the
     concealment, Mrs. McMannis's death would not have
     occurred.
          Plaintiff has failed to prove a link to
     Barbara McMannis.  It's just that simple.
          Now, Dr. Henningfield talked about ammonia.
     He talked about pH.  And he talked about one
     document in particular that I want to highlight
     with you.  It's called root technology.
          He made a number of references to the use of ammonia.  And he referenced this document from
     Brown & Williamson, one of the predecessors of my
     client, RJ Reynolds.
          Dr. Henningfield wanted you to think that this
     was a secret.  But then on cross examination, I
     showed him one of the appendices, the list, the
     three-page list of the various root technology
     patents.  And we looked at three of them.
          And Dr. Henningfield, when he was talking to
     you about how the manipulation of pH, the adding of
     ammonia might affect the level of pH and might
     affect something called the nicotine kick, that
     that was somehow a secret.
          He told me, though, that the nicotine kick was
     directly related to the satisfaction of the smoker.
     And when we looked at the patents, ladies and
     gentlemen, the patent clearly disclosed to the
     public and to all that the compounds of ammonia
     affect the pH, can increase the pH of the total
     particulate matter delivered upon smoking -- that's
     the smoke -- and increase levels of strength
     perception.
          So the ammonia issue is not an issue.
     Plaintiff has not brought you any evidence that
     Mrs. McMannis would have acted differently if she had only seen the root technology document or even
     the patents that are publicly available.
          Now, I want to also talk to you about the
     question of whether punitive damages are
     appropriate in this case.
          As you deliberate on question number nine,
     please don't forget that it's plaintiff's burden to
     establish a link.
          Mr. Mitnik, in his closing, talked about how
     the defendants should share in responsibility for
     what they did and how they went about it.  What
     they did and how they went about it.
          And he showed you instruction number 14.
          May I have the ELMO, please?
          Instruction number 14 is the one that talks
     about punitive damages.  And I believe that I
     highlighted what Mr. Mitnik showed you.  And he
     read you what was highlighted in yellow.  But what
     wasn't highlighted?  The conduct causing
     Mrs. McMannis's death.
          This case is about Barbara McMannis.  And
     there has to be a connection to Barbara McMannis.
          Even when you look at the following
     instruction, on entitlement to damages that
     Mrs. Mitnik showed you, when -- and this is 15. When considering entitlement, you may consider any
     harm the conduct of Reynolds and Philip Morris
     caused to Mrs. McMannis.
          THE COURT:  You have five minutes, Counsel.
          MR. WEAVER:  Caused to Mrs. McMannis.
          Let's go back to the slide, please.
          THE COURT:  Did you hear me, sir?
          MR. WEAVER:  Thank you, Judge.  I apologize
     for not acknowledging.
          Mr. Mitnik talked about Mrs. McMannis being
     caught in a net.  But the evidence doesn't place
     Mrs. McMannis in the net.
          Youth marketing was another topic the
     plaintiffs spent an awful lot of time on.  But the
     evidence is that youth marketing had no effect on
     Barbara McMannis.  She was smoking Chesterfield
     cigarettes from 1948 until perhaps as late as 1969
     or 1970.
          I would submit to you that there's no evidence
     in this case that Barbara McMannis smoked a brand
     of cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds or Philip
     Morris before she was 18.  And if you accept the
     possibility that Mrs. McMannis did not smoke a
     Reynolds brand cigarette until Lucky Strike in 1969
     in Florida, as Gloria testified, she was 34 years old when she first smoked a Reynolds brand.
          She made and continued to make informed
     decisions about whether to continue smoking.  And
     she did not make an effort to quit until 1993.  She
     was personally responsible for those decisions.
          Finally, and I'm going to go through this a
     little faster.
          Let's remember some of the history that
     Dr. Proctor told us about.  Let's see the cancer
     scare.  Do you remember these two articles?
     Dr. Proctor talked about these articles from the
     early 1950s.  And he testified that it was a giant
     story.  It caused a stock market crash.  He told
     you that "Cancer by the Carton" was possibly the
     most important article of the decade.
          The scare in 1952 and 1953, according to
     Dr. Proctor, caused the most significant decline
     ever in absolute cigarette consumption as a result
     of this widespread publicity of the deadly harms of
     smoking.
          What are the chances that Barbara McMannis was
     unaware of the cancer scare that gripped the
     nation, according to Dr. Proctor, at this time?
          Mrs. McMannis was not caught in a net.
          One last point on whether punitive damages are warranted.
          The evidence will show that both Philip Morris
     and my client, RJ Reynolds, spent a tremendous
     amount of time and money working to reduce the
     hazards of cigarettes and make other products
     available to the public.
          Do you remember the Nordine Study?  Provide
     other products, away from conventional cigarettes,
     which meet the same needs cigarettes now meet,
     without the harmful effects.
          Dr. Henningfield told you about Next
     cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris in the
     1980s.  That used a special chemical process
     similar to that for decaffeinating coffee.
          You may recall the testimony that
     Dr. Henningfield agreed that Philip Morris went so
     far as to buy General Foods just to get the
     technology from Sanka so they could make next a
     denicotinized cigarette.
          He also explained that Reynolds invested over
     a billion dollars to develop Premier and Eclipse.
     Revolutionary technology.  You actually held one of
     each in your hands.
          "The Lancet" said, "Premier would seem to be a
     near perfect, low-tar cigarette.  There is no doubt that it would be less harmful than most other
     brands on the market."
          Reynolds tried.  Philip Morris tried.  The
     products are still available.
          Ladies and gentlemen, let me just say one
     thing about the verdict form, and I will conclude.
          Can I have the ELMO, please?
          Question number three talks about the
     percentage of fault.  You cannot hold Philip Morris
     or RJ Reynolds responsible for smoking cigarettes
     that were manufactured by Lorillard or Liggett &
     Myers.
          As a result, you'll have to take that into
     consideration and use your own common sense and
     judgment about how that plays in, should you even
     get this far.  I don't think that you will, but
     should you get this far.
          We're not going to show this slide, Ms. Terio,
     but you heard with Dr. Henningfield about the John
     Quincy Adams letter.
          Well, we know historically that John Quincy
     Adams' father was also a guy named John Adams, our
     second president.
          Before he was president, he was a simple
     lawyer in Boston.  And he was asked, in 1770, to defend the British soldiers that were accused of
     inciting what we now know is called the Boston
     Massacre.
          And in arguing to the jury in that case, Adams
     said, "Facts are stubborn things.  But whatever may
     be our wishes, our passions, or our inclinations,
     these things can never change the facts and the
     evidence."
          If you focus, ladies and gentlemen, on only
     the things that are connected to Barbara McMannis,
     your task is simple.  And I would submit,
     respectfully, that it would require a no answer to
     all the questions.
          But even if you look beyond that, if you focus
     on things that aren't connected to Barbara
     McMannis, you will be permitting your passions,
     your wishes, or your inclinations to dictate the
     outcome.  Mrs. McMannis -- Mr. McMannis has not
     given you any basis on which to second-guess
     Barbara McMannis's decisions.
          In any event, Barbara McMannis was 100 percent
     responsible for her own choices, for her own
     decisions, and we should not second guess that.
          I want to thank you for your time.  I want to
     thank you for your service.  And thank you for your patience.
