MR. BIGGER: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. BIGGER: Hey. Good afternoon, everybody
You'll be happy to see, this is a very thin outline. There is not a lot in here. I'm certainly not going to talk to you guys as long as I did yesterday, No. 1, because everything I talked to you about yesterday, all the evidence, all that stuff we talked about yesterday and all the stuff you had during the trial, you're going to have all that back there again with you. And so everything we talked about yesterday, the evidence listed, if you want to look at the documents, look at what they did again, you can do that. That's available. Okay. So I'm not going to spend an enormous amount of time with you.
Let me at the outset again say thank you on behalf of myself and my client, Mrs. Nally, and most of all on our team, thank you guys for going that point two miles and coming to this phase, recognizing that what this company and this industry has done for all those years, and did, was just wrong, and it needed to be accounted for. And we appreciate that. We appreciate you coming to do this.
Regardless of how much I might desire to talk to you guys, how much I enjoy that, because that's what lawyers do -- we talk, right? -- and I would
love to address all of the details of Dr. Potts' testimony, all the things that he had to say, I don't think it's necessary. I mean, the most important thing and the easiest thing to say is all the stuff he came and talked to you about, that's -- except for the Eclipse, and I will mention that in a moment -- everything else is after Joe Nally died.
You guys probably know the saying, Too little, too late. But there is no reason those things he talked about couldn't have been done during Joe Nally's lifetime when it would have actually made a difference to the only person we're here to talk about, the only case we're here talking about, is this case. That's when it would have made a difference. They didn't change one iota of the strategy they had about concealing and conspiring during his lifetime.
How we got here and what they are being punished for, you guys already decided. Based on the clear and convincing evidence we presented to you, you guys decided that punishment was necessary and that it needed to happen.
There is going to be a part of the verdict form that's going to say, or the jury instructions
that's going to say you can decide to do nothing. And I'll talk about that in a moment. And you can. Why you would say from the
clear and convincing evidence that punishment is warranted and then think that you shouldn't give anything, it's up to you decide. That option is there.
I will submit to you that there is nothing that has changed. Everything we talked about yesterday that led to you deciding that Mr. Nally's death was a result of the concealment, the conspiracy, their defective products, all that is the same. All of it is the same, folks.
And, in fact, that's exactly what we're asking you to punish them for, for fraudulently and conspiratorially killing Mr. Nally. That's why we're here. You again have in your hands a tremendous opportunity.
If you can put that first slide up, Jeff.
I do not have very many of these, so don't be nervous.
You again have in your hands a tremendous opportunity. This is from the 2014 Surgeon General's report we put into evidence. It's one of those few documents that we added today, the
two.
But just read this. This is what the Surgeon General's concluding even now, even today, in the latest version of his report.
This year alone, nearly one half million adults will still die prematurely because of smoking. Annually, the total economic cost due to tobacco are now over 289 billion, and if we continue our current trajectory, 5.6 million children alive today who are younger than 18 years of age will die prematurely as a result of smoking.
Because it's still a pediatric disease, folks. Despite what they say about the fact they don't target youth, you guys saw the documents.
You know that the MO has not changed. It's the same MO. It may be harder for kids to get it, but kids still get it. And their business is still dependent upon kids getting it.
In order to free the next generation from these burdens, we must redouble our tobacco control efforts and enlist nongovernmental partners and society as a whole.
And, folks, that's where you guys come in. Okay? You are being enlisted. We are asking you
to do something, to send a message to Winston-Salem, to Reynolds. Okay? Give it to Dr. Potts. He can take it with him when he goes back. But send a message to them that says what you did here to this family, to this person, was wrong. It's warranted of punishment and we're going to give punishment, a fair and just punishment, one that is reasonable and appropriate based on the evidence.
Okay. And when I say nothing has changed, I want you to understand, that's not just my words. Again, let's look at Reynolds' words. Okay?
If you can go to their website, Jeff.
We proved our case in the liability case before this on their words from their document. Look at their words from their website. Okay?
You heard about how they added Lorillard, how they acquired Lorillard for Newport? You look at their website that says what we made and what their growth brands are. Okay? Their growth brands.
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company focuses its marketing support on Camel and Pall Mall to accelerate the brands' market share growth and drive the brands for long-term accelerated growth and profit.
Newport, the one that they got from Lorillard, that they spent billions of dollars.
You will see in those 10-Ks, if you look at their financials, they spent billions of dollars to acquire Lorillard.
Newport. You remember the documents. Our business is built on the high school student.
Okay? That was Newport's business model.
Camel. And Camel and Pall Mall. Those were the ones that you remember them saying, we --every brand is built upon getting the next generation of young adults who are 12 to 18 years old and getting them smoking our brands. Okay?
He came and talked to you about ZONNIC and VUSE and these other products. Folks, if you look at those financials, you will see that the billions of dollars they're making every year, they're being made on Camels and Newports and the Pall Malls. Okay? Traditional cigarettes.
That's still where they're making all their money.
And you saw in the Surgeon General's report, if we don't stop these current trends, 5.6 million more kids under the age of 18 are projected to die. And it's because of this strategy. This is still where their strategy is. Okay?
I know it's 2016, and you're probably going to hear that's the old Reynolds, we're a new Reynolds. And maybe they do have different people who come into courtrooms, different people who work there, but if you look at their words on what they're focused on, on what their business is focused on, it's the same. Okay? This will be in evidence. You can look at this. Again, not my words, their words. It will be in evidence as part of their website. You can look at it.
What we are going to ask you to do is to send a message. That is what punitive damages are for. Okay? It's for punishment to the company, but also deterrents to others. You know, others in their industry, but other companies in general.
You know. Companies, whatever they might be, that they would understand that you can't do these sort of things and operate businesses this way in America without there being consequences. That's what we're going to ask you to do, is to send that message that will punish Reynolds and deter others.
And so in thinking about, you know, what they're likely to say to you and what they had Dr. Potts say is that that was the old Reynolds.
Okay? We have changed now. We're different.
I want to remind you of just one document from the ones that we saw. Because I think Dr. Proctor told you it was the most important document in all of the story of the conspiracy.
If we can go to that one, Jeff.
Remember this? Maybe you don't. But the brilliantly conceived and executed strategy --okay? The holding strategy. Remember the three pillars Dr. Proctor told you about: Litigation, politics and public opinion. Okay? That litigation strategy was one of the three pillars of the conspiracy. It was one of the reasons they did all the things they did. And they knew it was a holding strategy. Okay? They knew exactly there was a holding strategy.
Don't think for one second that not punishing this company for what they did to Joseph Nally, Sr., and to Marlene Nally, all those years of lies and deceit, not punishing them today because it took that long to expose their deceptive conduct, their lies, their concealment, it took that long to get there, isn't going to be rewarding them for that holding strategy. It's going to reward them completely for exactly this strategy they planned
and hatched all those years ago, that when they're finally exposed and brought here for accountability, just because many years have passed, that you guys would doing nothing. Okay? And I don't think that's going to happen. I don't believe it is.
Think about this thought for a minute, though.
Can you go to who's who?
You remember all these. These are the people, just some of them that Dr. Proctor talked to you about who were involved in this 50-year conspiracy for all those years. Okay? Look at their faces. All right. These are not children. These were not, you know, young folks who were making bad decisions. Their executive function was fully formed by the time they were doing what they were doing. If you look at them all, all grown men.
If you do not punish Reynolds and give them an adequate punishment for this phase, you will be essentially patting all these guys on the backs and telling them, Hey, that holding strategy, it was brilliantly conceived and executed, because they're still -- today, they're getting off
punitive damages because it took too long. Okay? Don't let that happen, please. Please.
Again, if you do that, you will be pinning a little blue ribbon on each of these folks' chest and telling them, Great job, it worked. You have avoided the consequence of your deceit, of your wrongdoing for all these years, because your holding strategy held out long enough.
Folks, when people do things that result in another person's death, even if they hide for a while, even if they go on the lam, they get caught, there are consequences. Okay? There are consequences even if it takes a long time to get there.
It's not an excuse to say we waited so long that now there is different people working there and those people are gone. Those are the people who did what you-all saw in this case. And they did it for money and they did it to Mr. Nally and they did it to Mrs. Nally and left her a widow.
Go to the next one, if you can, Jeff.
So this is the ultimate question. Okay?
This is what your punitive damages question --this verdict form has one question on it. It's just the amount. And we're not in the
clear and convincing stage anymore. Okay? This is the same as every other issue in the case.
It's the greater weight of the evidence.
So what does the greater weight of the evidence show is a fair and just amount? The evidence? What does it show is a fair and just punishment for Joseph Nally, Sr.'s death, for their killing of Joseph Nally, Sr? Okay.
Think about this thought. By law, by law, not one penny of your compensatory verdict was punishment for their decision to kill Joseph Nally in 1953 when he was 25 years old and they launched that conspiracy. Okay? That went on for all those years. Not one cent of your compensatory award was for that. Not one penny was punishment for their decision to ridicule the public health authorities and other officials, the Surgeon Generals.
Dr. Hammond, that individual who in 1954 wanted to sound the alarm because he saw what was happening, he wanted to get the message out. They wanted to conceal the message. He wanted to get it out. They could have joined hands with him and shouted together. And they didn't. And not one penny of the amount you have given was for that.
Okay?
Not one penny of that award was for their determined resolve to do whatever it took to continue that reprehensible activity for nearly 50 years so that Joseph Nally and the 19,999,999 other people would die those horrible deaths from smoking-related disease. Okay? It wasn't punishment for that. That was compensation.
But if you allow Reynolds to convince you otherwise and say that you have given enough, that your compensatory award is already punishment to Reynolds, or they already understand its punishment, then you'll be giving her less than that one penny per second we talked about. Okay? You will be cutting those pennies up, cutting them in half, cutting a piece of them off. And that would be less than the full and fair justice you already gave her. You will be taking that back away. That would be injustice, to take away the full and fair justice that you gave her. Okay?
We said at the beginning not every case is a punitive damages case. In fact, most cases aren't. What you-all saw in here, Dr. Proctor coming in and telling you that no person or corporation ever in the history of time has had an
ability with a single decision to save 20 million lives. Okay? That was -- that was the power they had. And they chose to use it for evil rather than for good. That's why this case, that's why a case involving someone like Mrs. Nally and her husband and the consequences of their life deserve punishment.
The most important thing for you to realize, though, as much as I'm stressing about the importance of punishment, a punishment is only effective if it has to be carried out. Okay?
It's only effective if it's going to have to be carried out. You know, you tell your kids, I'm really going to punish you for this, but then you don't actually punish them, you just tell them it, and then, you know, you don't punish them, they're not going to get the lesson. They don't get that lesson. The punishment has to be carried out.
They have to be grounded or whatever, spanked or whatever it might be, whatever you do, you actually have to do it, you can't just say it. Okay? So it has to be carried out to be effective.
With that thought in mind, as much as, though, perhaps based on what you have seen and
what this conduct was and how bad it was, maybe we want to ask you for a lot of money for it, for hundreds of millions of dollars. Okay?
We don't. We want a lawful award. We want a lawful award that is fair and just as punishment. But it needs to be lawful. And there are laws that govern that. Okay? It can't be outrageous. It can't be crazy.
What a lawful award would be in this case.
And when you look at punishment, look at what happened to Mrs. Nally and look at the relationship between the compensatory award and what a punishment would be, a lawful award in this case would be a range somewhere between $12 million and $18 million. Okay? You can give less. Again, just like with the compensatories, that's a suggestion. You can give less than that if you think that's what the evidence warrants.
All right? Do not give more. All right. I'm not saying you want to, but don't. Do not give more than 18. All right? Because we have to have a lawful award. The punishment has to stick. And that punishment would fit the crime. Okay?
You heard there is other cases, there is other people. If they want to have their juries
decide their cases, they will. This is about this family and what Reynolds did to this family and the decisions they made and how deplorable they were. Okay?
So 12 to 18, but don't go above 18. You can give less, whatever you think is right. You guys are the collective jury, you will make the right decision. And we're confident in that, whatever it is.
I don't have a good story or a good analogy like I did at the other closing to leave you with other than just to say we appreciate you. We appreciate your jury service. We're thankful for what you have done. If it wasn't for folks like you who would come in and take your time to do this, we would never have justice in America. So we do appreciate you. And we just ask that you would, again, do what you can, do what you think is fair, do what you think is right based on the evidence. All right? Thank you, folks.



MR. BIGGER: Briefly, Judge.
There is a saying that we have in our line of work, and it's called, Justice delayed is justice denied. We say that oftentimes. And that's exactly what Mr. Geise is trying to convince you of -- okay -- that justice delayed should be justice denied. I don't think any of our kids are going to lie and cheat and conspire for 50 years. But if they did, if they do, we'll probably punish them for a while. They will probably keep getting punished, even if they tried to change and do things right, because that's awful stuff.
But don't let justice delayed be justice denied here, folks. Okay? Don't let that trick work, please.
The Ebola thing, the Kentucky Biophosphate [sic] thing, I think maybe four people died of Ebola in this country while 480,000 are dying of smoking-related diseases. I think Dr. Potts at
some point said he's not aware of technology that would allow them to reduce the cancer deaths from smoking. I'm aware of it. It's called a garbage truck. You back it up to the factory, and you carry out the promise that you said, When we learn there is something wrong with our product, we'll stop making it, if we can't take it out. That's the way you do it. That's the technology.
The idea that somehow your work, folks, wiped out a percentage of responsibility is -- I don't know. Their conduct, folks, under the law, if you're a liar and a cheat, it's 100 percent their responsibility. You saw that in the law. The law wiped that out. Their conduct wiped that out. Nothing you-all did wiped anything out, just to be clear. And I'm not sure where that was coming from, but the law handles all that. Okay? You guys followed it appropriately.
The 12- to $18,000,000, if you take the time to go through their financials, there is a big, thick 10-K there. If you want to go through it, you can. And you will see that's a couple of days of revenues at most for these companies, maybe even a day and a half -- okay -- of the revenue these companies make. That's why that's a
reasonable and fair and just number. They sold cigarettes to him for 50 years. And Mr. Geise's idea is to give him a refund as punishment?
Folks, a couple of days' revenue is an appropriate and fair and just measure of punishment for what they did for 50 years. All right? That's why that's a reasonable number based on the evidence, if you want to look at the 10-Ks and see those. The figures are reported in millions, so you will see like 10,000 million. That's 10 billion, just so you understand when you see those financials. If you want to look at that, you can see. Take your time and look at it. That's fine.
A refund is not an appropriate measure of a punishment that is warranted in this case. And I hope you understand that.
Thank you very much, folks. We look forward to receiving your verdict, whatever it may be.
