          MR. SMITH:  May it please the Court and
     counsel.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I want to start by,
     on behalf of Colette, her family, thanking you
     for the work and effort that you have put in
     thus far.
          You have been an amazingly attentive group, and I want to say that absent only
     military service, there is no greater
     expression of citizenship in our country than
     the willingness to do what you have just done,
     and that is, sit as a jury, and what you're
     about to do, and that is, to decide a verdict.
          I had decided to follow a series of
     remarks, but as you note, he was hitting a
     timer, and that tells you I'm on a time clock
     just like everybody is today.  For you all,
     that is really good news.
          What I want to do is I want to go back and
     tell you how I'm going to proceed and how this
     case is going to unfold for you.
          First of all, there is the verdict form,
     and that is going to be the work that you have
     to engage in late this morning or this
     afternoon.
          As you heard, the first three questions
     are central questions to the outcome of the
     case because they are the ones that deal with
     the Engle issue, whether or not Garry O'Hara
     was a member of that Engle class which was
     decided by the Florida Supreme Court.
          Those first questions are critical.  If we don't win on those first three questions, the
     case ends.
          We believe the evidence is overwhelming in
     support of our position there.  We will first
     talk about that.
          Secondly, there is the issue that will
     come up, and that is, what are the other
     matters that we must prove on the individual
     counts?
          And then finally, the damages that you
     ought to render.
          I would like to start out, because it's
     been a while since you've heard of some of
     this, the first question that you are going to
     have in front of you on the verdict form will
     be the following.  Let me tell you -- back up
     just for a moment.  I want to tell you what a
     class membership for a moment is not about.  Do
     not be confused on this.
          Class membership is not about fault,
     awareness, who knew what when.  It is not about
     the fault of either party.  It is not about
     whether someone can quit smoking.  It is not
     about whether smokers may share some of the
     responsibility.  It is not about reliance on statements of the tobacco industry.  That is
     not what the first three questions are about.
          They are very specific, and they are the
     ones that get us to class membership, because,
     remember, when we get to class membership, you
     then are guided and you are bound by the
     instructions that were given to you from the
     Engle Court, which the Court has read again for
     you this morning.
          The first question:  Did Garry O'Hara have
     primary lung cancer?  Question No. 1.
          On this, we think the evidence is not the
     more persuasive, it is preclusive of any other
     conclusion.
          Let's go back for just a moment and take a
     look at the evidence that we have regarding
     this.
          First of all, remember Dr. Rene Ledbetter,
     going back now 21 years ago, Dr. Rene Ledbetter
     was the oncologist at the military base here in
     Eglin who made the initial diagnosis.
          He had at that time, we know, the
     radiology.  He had the pathology.  He had the
     records.  And he performed the examination.
          He also, you need to recall, at that time had the radiography available and showing --
     and the reason why is because, if you remember
     Colette's testimony, she said when they went in
     the office, he actually put it up on the
     screen, and he showed it and he pointed out.
          Now, that radiology is gone.  We all know
     that.  But this is what Rene Ledbetter said
     back then.  He said it is primary lung cancer
     and it is adenocarcinoma.
          This is what he said before you in this
     trial. ANSWER:  Chest x-ray and the CT to me
     indicated that Mr. O'Hara had primary lung
     cancer.
          QUESTION:  What kind of cancer did the
     pathology studies indicate to you?
          ANSWER:  Adenocarcinoma.
          QUESTION:  For Mr. O'Hara, did you
     diagnose a primary site for his adenocarcinoma?
          ANSWER:  Yes.  Lung.
          QUESTION:  Would it have been the business
     practice of Eglin Hospital to present
     Mr. O'Hara's case to the tumor board? ANSWER:  Yes.
          QUESTION:  How confident are you today,
     Doctor, that when you saw Mr. O'Hara in the
     summer of 1995 that he had adenocarcinoma of
     the lung?
          ANSWER:  I'm absolutely 100 percent
     confident." Now, remember the tumor
     boards.  There were actually two.  Tumor boards
     are where you take to a group -- it's made up
     of radiologists, pathologists, surgeons if they
     are necessary, and other clinicians are
     present.
          We know from what all of the radiologists
     have told us for both sides that it is the
     clinician who makes the final call.
          He was the clinician.  He went before the
     tumor board.  Twenty-one years later, he's
     absolutely certain that his diagnosis was
     correct.
          But the family is clinging to hope, that
     we all would do under similar circumstances,
     and said we are going to get a second opinion,
     and they went to MD Anderson. You will recall from their witnesses that
     MD Anderson is one of the renowned cancer
     centers in the nation, and they have an Orlando
     location, at which time they saw Dr. Robert
     Marsh.
          Now, this two months later, 400 miles
     away, and this is what we have from Dr. Marsh. QUESTION:  To what degree, if any, did
     smoking play in his lung cancer?
          ANSWER:  I think this is a smoking-related
     cancer.  He had a smoking history.
          QUESTION:  After all these questions about
     the pathology tests that we reviewed or that
     you reviewed with opposing counsel, and the
     radiology films, is there any doubt as you sit
     here today as to whether Garry O'Hara's cancer
     was primary to the lung?
          ANSWER:  To my mind, no.
          QUESTION:  Explain to us one last time,
     Doctor, to your mind why not.
          ANSWER:  Clinical live history, former
     smoker, presentation with bone pain.
     Adenocarcinoma in an adult is often from a primary lung cancer.  He did not have other
     signs or symptoms to suggest other primary
     cancer elsewhere.  Biopsies were done.  I
     consider the cytokeratin stain to confirm a
     lung primary and be consistent with that.
          QUESTION:  Any question in your mind that
     he had non-small cell cancer?
          ANSWER:  No question in my mind.
          QUESTION:  No question that it was primary
     to the lung?
          ANSWER:  No question in my mind. Beyond that, what did we do in
     this case?  We brought in a radiologist.  A
     radiologist, Dr. Sider.  Dr. Sider testified --
     and let's back up about him for a moment.
          Dr. Sider has taught at some of the major
     medical schools in this country:  Northwestern,
     UCLA.  He has been so recognized for the use of
     radiology in the diagnosis of lung cancer that
     he was invited to present to the world -- as a
     presenter to the World Health Conference in --
     in the Netherlands on that very issue.  He's
     published hundreds of articles on the subject
     of diagnosis of lung cancer. We brought him in and had him take a look.
     Remember what he said:  I don't normally
     testify in cases where I don't have radiology.
          I'm normally brought in -- I promise you,
     they'll get up and say, you know, he's the guy
     that said the truth is in the film.
          That's right.  That was another case where
     there was film.
          I asked him, why is it that you are
     willing to come down in this case?  And his
     answer was, and you recall from your notes,
     because this case is so clear.
          What did he say at the time? QUESTION:  Do you have an opinion as to a
     reasonable degree of medical certainty whether
     Mr. O'Hara had primary lung cancer, metastatic
     to the mediastinum, to the brain and to bone?
          ANSWER:  Yes.
          QUESTION:  You know that there were
     diagnoses from the medical records by a doctor
     at Eglin and then a doctor at MD Anderson.  You
     were aware of that?
          ANSWER:  Yes. QUESTION:  And from those records, these
     clinicians at the time diagnosed him with
     primary adenocarcinoma -- adenocarcinoma of the
     lung, the primary site being the lung.  Do you
     agree that they got the diagnosis right at that
     time?
          ANSWER:  Absolutely. But just to be sure, we had it
     taken to another doctor.  The files were
     reviewed by another, Dr. Gary Strauss, the
     Tufts Medical Center, a man who has been
     published in the literature time and time again
     in the New England journal, in the American
     journal.  The preeminent medical journals, he's
     been there, he's published, he's done the
     research.
          This is what he said. QUESTION:  Do you have an opinion,
     Dr. Strauss, as to where Mr. O'Hara's primary
     site of this adenocarcinoma was?
          ANSWER:  Yes.
          QUESTION:  And within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, where was Mr. O'Hara's
     primary site in your opinion?
          ANSWER:  Well, I think it was -- it was
     primary lung cancer.  Addiction would have
     caused his death because if smoking caused his
     lung cancer, addiction caused his smoking.  You
     only smoke because you're addicted to nicotine.
          So you have to get that next cigarette
     that provides the substance to which you are
     addicted to.
          And it's the carcinogens in tobacco, it's
     not the nicotine in tobacco, but it's the
     carcinogens in tobacco that are related to the
     development of the lung cancer. Four doctors testified primary
     lung cancer.  Two of them were -- gave their
     testimony about decisions they made before
     there was an Engle case, before there was any
     litigation.  They weren't working for either
     side.  They were treating a patient.  And that
     was their decision then, and that is the one
     they stick by today.
          And when I asked their radiologist,
     Dr. Sowers:  Do you contend that they fell below the standard of service that you would --
     professional standard you would expect of them?
          No.
          It's an easy question.  It was primary
     lung cancer.
          But what are they going to jump on?
     They'll jump on, well, let's talk about, there
     was a -- there were some other people treated,
     there were some other doctors' notes at
     different various points in the -- in the
     diagnosis process.
          Let's take a look at how many doctors.
          Dr. Persons, June 23rd:  Lung cancer,
     diagnosis last week.
          Dr. Kit Kuss, the person who signed the
     death certificate they will inevitably try to
     make so much of, what did he call it?  Lung
     cancer, metastatic.
          Dr. Christopher Jefferson:  49-year-old
     with adenocarcinoma, that should be, of the
     lung.
          Dr. Kit Kuss, again, in November:  Lung
     cancer.
          Go again.
          Dr. Kit Kuss, on November 20th, less two months before his death:  Terminal lung cancer.
          Dr. Thomas McKnight:  Metastatic lung
     cancer to the bone with relief from Toradol.
          That's the medical records.  That's the
     only organ that's been identified.
          Now, they come forward and say, well, we
     think it's unknown cancer.
          Of course, you've heard the statistics on
     that.  Their person says it's about 5 percent
     are unknown.  Our person says about 1 percent
     are unknown.
          It doesn't matter.  The fact is that
     95 percent of them are from known sites, and
     every doctor, every doctor ultimately reached
     the same conclusion:  It was lung cancer.
          I want to go back and remind you, because
     it was brought up in opening, obviously they
     have a -- Reynolds has a right to defend in any
     way they want to their case, and they can do
     what they want to in the way they present their
     defense, but I want you to note, remember back
     in 1968, under the Tobacco Health and Research
     memo.  This document, in 1941, was a memo that
     was designed to tell people how to prepare the
     white papers, what kind of stories they were looking for.
          MR. MONDE:  Your Honor, excuse me.  May we
     approach?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          (Thereupon, the following proceedings were
     had at sidebar:)
          MR. MONDE:  I object to tying this
     document to continuance efforts today to defend
     this lawsuit.  The only purpose for using that
     document is to suggest that and infer the
     conspiracy continues and that the conspiracy
     continues to this case, in the defense of this
     lawsuit here.  That is not permissible.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.
          MR. SMITH:  Your Honor, I prefaced, they
     can defend any way possible.  This is in
     evidence.  It goes directly to the point.
     These are themes that this company has used for
     years.
          It doesn't go to their defense.  They can
     defend in this case.  I made it very clear to
     the jury.
          This is in evidence, and those are the
     themes that they were -- as far as 1968, saying
     these are the kinds of things to look for. THE COURT:  You did preface by saying they
     can defend any way they want; let's look at
     what they've done.
          I think you can distance from the defense
     of this lawsuit.  Again, you need to restate
     that separation if you're not talking about the
     lawyers or the defense of this lawsuit, but
     that you are talking about the conduct that has
     led up to this lawsuit.  You need to clarify
     that.
          MR. MONDE:  Your Honor, on that point, so
     that I don't need to interrupt again, I
     anticipate there is going to be some argument
     that the witness that the defense called claims
     that there was a remaining controversy about
     these issues, there was remaining doubt about
     the primary location of Mr. O'Hara's cancer.
          He's going to use those terms of
     controversy, doubt, further research needed, to
     argue an inference that a conduct continues to
     this day.
          I object to that line.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  You can make fair
     comment on the witness' testimony.  Again, he
     can make fair comment based upon inferences reasonably drawn from the evidence.  You are
     correct.  You can't -- he cannot -- to the
     extent that you're saying that the -- that he
     is speaking about the defending of the lawsuit,
     no.  But their testimony, if one of them makes
     a statement that there's still a controversy
     about a finding, whether cigarettes cause
     addiction, that is fair game.
          MR. MONDE:  Agreed.  As long as it is not
     tied to defending the lawsuit.
          THE COURT:  Correct.  Thanks.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and
     the following proceedings were held in open
     court:)
          MR. SMITH:  Again, I want to make sure you
     understand.  I'm not arguing that they can't
     defend themselves and their defense in this
     case is not based on the evidence that they
     have found in this case and what want to argue
     in the case.  I think it is evidence that we
     dispute.  I think on the issue of lung cancer
     it is easy.
          I also, however, want to go back and
     remind you that the themes of the tobacco and
     health research memo back in 1968, some of the themes, these were the stories that you should
     be looking for.
          They were going to put out the health and
     research documents, if you recall, those
     documents, they said:  Criteria for selection.
          And they said:  First report should be on
     new research, if possible.
          Then it drops down and says:  Stories,
     other examples, one in which death certificates
     or classifications of such disease are
     questioned.  One showing that many lung cancers
     may be metastatic from some other organ.
          Those were what they were talking about as
     the theme that they were looking for their
     health and research in 1968.
          They also said in this document that what
     they were looking for is:  The important type
     of story is one in which casts doubt on the
     cause and effect theory of disease and smoking.
          They were also looking for headlines in
     those days of controversy, contradiction, other
     factors and unknowns.
          Ladies and gentlemen, as it relates to the
     lung cancer in this case, it isn't by the
     greater weight of the evidence; it's by the overwhelming weight of the evidence.
          So the next question that we -- oh, and
     skip that for a second.  I'll get back to it.
          I want to go back just for one second to
     question No. 2.
          Question No. 1 is primary lung cancer,
     four doctors, and every doctor who treated him
     said it was lung cancer.  They said it back
     then when all of the evidence was there, and
     they were the clinicians.
          Number 2:  Was Garry L. O'Hara addicted to
     cigarettes causing nicotine?  Another question.
          One of the things the Judge read to you
     and you will take back with you, and you came
     into this courthouse with and no one can take
     away from you is your common sense.
          And in this case, apply your common sense
     and experience to the evidence.  You're allowed
     to do that.
          Play the evidence on addiction for a
     moment. QUESTION:  Have you -- have you reached an
     opinion as to whether or not Garry O'Hara was an addicted smoker during the time period that
     ended in 1982?
          THE WITNESS:  Yes.  It would belie common
     sense to suggest that Mr. O'Hara was not
     addicted.  I mean, he was an over-a-pack-a-day
     smoker for over two decades.
          He certainly meets the criteria of being
     heavily addicted.  Based on the Heaviness of
     Smoking he was addicted, which is a
     well-validated measure of the strength of
     addiction to the cigarettes that has been
     tested many times in large studies following
     people for decades.
          So it is my opinion he was addicted.  He
     was heavily addicted. This is Dr. Cummings from the
     Roswell Center, one of the preeminent cancer
     research centers in the country, ran the
     largest quit line in the nation, has been
     published throughout the world, has been
     featured in the Surgeon General's Reports.
          His opinion:  He was heavily addicted.
          And this is why.  He used what is the
     Heaviness of Smoking Index.  He told you why they used that, because it's the greatest
     predictor, greatest predictor of whether or not
     someone is heavily addicted.
          Does he smoke in the morning within the
     first five minutes?  Answer to that from
     everybody in this case, during the period of
     time he smoked, it was the first thing he did.
     Even he had to go outdoors.  It was the first
     thing he did.
          Number 2, did he smoke 21 to 30
     cigarettes?  Well -- 31 or more, rather.
          The answer is he smoked two packs a day
     for as long as we had them measured for you,
     which goes back to 1967.
          He smoked, in fact, sometimes three packs
     a day, because his wife, Colette, wasn't
     necessarily aware of all the health problems.
     What she was aware of is they were on a budget,
     and it was an expensive process.
          She was the one who did the shopping.  She
     went to the BX.  She went to the commissary.
     She bought the cigarettes, and she says he was
     smoking at a rate of two to three packs.
          We have a medical record in here that is
     supportive of that, which they have -- everybody has seen it.  It said -- his record
     at the time was that he had 18 years of smoking
     two packs a day.
          Now, that would make it 18 years or
     thereabouts when he started.  He was 17 when he
     went into the military.  We have pictures of
     him smoking then.  But what we really know is
     nobody becomes a two-pack-a-day smoker
     overnight.
          If you just assume, if you just assume two
     packs a day, that's 36 pack years of cigarettes
     he smoked.  That's more than the heaviest part
     of the index.
          Dr. Hurt, who ran the Mayo Clinic
     nicotine-dependence center; Dr. Hurt, who has
     been The Lancet -- published in The Lancet, the
     New England Journal of Medicine, American
     Medical Association, this is what Dr. Hurt
     said. QUESTION:  Have you formed as opinion as
     to whether Mr. O'Hara was addicted to the
     nicotine contained in cigarettes manufactured
     and marketed by RJ Reynolds and other cigarette manufacturers?
          ANSWER:  I am.
          QUESTION:  And what is that opinion?
          ANSWER:  It is an opinion based on the
     valid criteria that has been validated both in
     the way of producing outcome whether a person
     stopped smoking or whether or not they relapsed
     to smoking.
          QUESTION:  For purposes of my next
     question, I want you to assume that there has
     been a medical opinion that Mr. O'Hara died
     from adenocarcinoma of the lung.  Will you make
     that assumption?
          ANSWER:  Yes.
          QUESTION:  Based upon your opinion that
     Mr. O'Hara was addicted to the nicotine
     contained in cigarettes manufactured and
     marketed by RJ Reynolds and others, are you
     able to give an opinion to a reasonable to
     degree of medical certainty regarding whether
     Mr. O'Hara's addiction to nicotine
     substantially contributed to his death from
     lung cancer in 1996?
          ANSWER:  It did.  So the addiction to
     nicotine leads to continued smoking, and it's the continued smoking that delivers the 7,000
     chemicals, 60 carcinogens, which ultimately
     ended up in this case with lung cancer, and
     other diseases as well. Two world renowned experts
     evaluated and said he was addicted, and in the
     case of Dr. Hurt and in the case of
     Dr. Strauss, both medical doctors, it was his
     addiction that led to this death from lung
     cancer.  It is the addiction that leads to the
     death.
          Now, I don't want to leave this for a
     moment to mention Dr. Ticknor, that they
     brought in.  Dr. Ticknor.
          They brought in an expert who used the
     DSM.  You had it explained by Dr. Hurt why the
     DSM was really not appropriate for diagnosis.
     You heard -- read from the DSM the problems
     with using it
          But, honestly, if you applied your common
     sense to the facts that you've heard in this
     case, and as I was watching him put up the
     things that he was saying no, no, no to, the
     obvious answer for most of us was yes, yes, yes.  He met almost every one of those
     criterion.
          But Dr. Ticknor, this is the expert they
     bring before you, he -- and you can evaluate
     experts any way you want to.  He's never
     published an article that had the word
     "smoking" in it.  He's never done any research
     on the issue of the brain and nicotine.
          Beyond that, he says he's an
     addictionologist.  There are four various types
     of medical or professional psychiatric
     associations that certify people in addiction
     medicine.  He's not certified by any of them.
          He's a self-described addictionologist.
     He's actually a general psychiatrist whose
     practice is primarily things other than
     addiction.
          And that's what Reynolds brings to you to
     offset the testimony of people who have spent
     their entire life in research, in writing and
     handling nicotine dependence; and in the case
     of Dr. Hurt, the largest nicotine-dependence
     center in the nation.
          Now we go to the third question.  The
     third question is whether or not the addiction caused disease.
          Go ahead, put it that. QUESTION:  We should also give priority to
     one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is
     killing more than 300,000 Americans each year. That was the Surgeon General
     of the United States, C. Everett Koop, telling
     you what we now know from the -- what's called
     the Hecht Chart, the first step in the progress
     to lung cancer.
          The first step, when you're traveling the
     road that ends in lung cancer, is nicotine
     addiction.
          That's the finding of the Surgeon General
     of the United States.
          And how much did he smoke?  Well, we have
     done some calculations.  He smoked 18 years or
     more, but we're going with the 18 years.
     That's in the medical records.  He smoked two
     to three packs per day.  That would be 18,250
     cigarettes a year.
          Look over here at how much actual time he would have spent -- by the way, Dr. Ticknor
     said he did not spend substantial time.  He
     would spent about 12 years in the practice of
     smoking, because to smoke at that rate, if you
     sleep seven to eight hours a day, you're
     smoking at a rate of 64 percent of the time
     that you're awake, you're smoking a cigarette,
     and that's what he did during the time that he
     was addicted to the nicotine contained in their
     cigarettes.
          Now, folks, the first three questions are
     easy.
          Garry O'Hara started smoking as a teenager
     while the brain was developing in adolescence.
     Even their expert says that's why younger
     people who start smoking become more addicted
     and more heavily addicted, because the brain is
     formulating.  You remember the -- the biology,
     the neurobiology that Dr. Hurt told us about.
          When they met, meaning Colette, in 1965,
     he was smoking all the time.  By 1967, when she
     began to make the purchases, she says he was
     smoking three packs per day.
          He smoked first thing in the morning,
     within five minutes.  He smoked two to three packs per day for 18 years or more.
          He had made multiple quit attempts.  He
     made multiple quit attempts and he relapsed.
     Multiple quit attempts and relapsed.  You heard
     his children talk about, as young as they were,
     they can remember dad was always in the process
     of trying to quit smoking.
          He dreamed of smoking after he quit.  He
     smoked outside.  He would go out in the rain
     and snow because he wanted to not be around
     Frank, the oldest boy, who had lung problems,
     asthma.  He would go outside and smoke.  He
     would smoke for long periods of time.  He left
     his family inside to do so.
          He had 400 to 600 doses of nicotine to his
     brain every day, and he said to his wife at one
     point, when she was chastising and admonishing
     him and he was trying to quit, that he couldn't
     live without them.
          And finally, Valerie recalls that
     10 years, 10 years when they were running
     together, after he had quit smoking, after he
     had the last cigarette that we know of, this is
     what happened.
          (Thereupon, a video clip played as follows:)
          QUESTION:  You were about to relay a
     story.  This is about 10 years after your
     father was smoking?
          ANSWER:  Correct.
          QUESTION:  You would have been by that
     time about 20 years old?
          ANSWER:  Yes.
          QUESTION:  Go ahead and relate that which
     you were about to relate of what he told you
     that.
          ANSWER:  Okay.  He was -- we were running,
     and he was telling me about a dream that he had
     the night before about smoking.  And I said,
     well, it's so crazy that you're still thinking
     and dreaming about it after all these years.
          And he said to me, I'm addicted and I will
     always be addicted until the day I die.
          QUESTION:  Why is it that you remember
     that conversation so well?
          ANSWER:  Well, it just affected me so
     intensely because I -- just the fact that
     something could have so much power over
     someone.  You know, he told me he would think
     about smoking a cigarette and want a cigarette every day for the rest of his life.  It was
     that powerful. That ought to be enough to
     suffice any requirement that he was an addicted
     smoker.
          Now, remember this, the fact that he quit
     smoking, by their expert, and all of the
     experts, the fact that he finally overcame
     that, the fact that after many failures he made
     it, he was a success story in that sense,
     albeit it was too late to save his health,
     doesn't mean he wasn't addicted.  In fact, what
     he know is he struggled with addiction for
     years and years afterwards.
          Reynolds knew that the chemical nicotine
     they kept in their -- kept addicted smokers
     smoking, it was no secret to Reynolds.  They
     weren't telling the public this.  They wouldn't
     tell the public this.  They wouldn't even admit
     it in 1994 under oath.
          Let's go back.  Remember, they were in the
     business of selling nicotine, effective in the
     release of stress mechanisms.  In designing any
     cigarette product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery.
          Nicotine, a potent drug, our industry is
     based upon design, sale, manufacture of
     attractive dosages forms of nicotine.  We
     provide a product that is an essential
     commodity in a habitual act.
          That's four documents of which there are
     stacks of documents you will take back.  You
     remember them.  You saw them.
          They talked about their product as a
     pharmacological product.
          Tobacco products contain and deliver
     nicotine, a potent drug.  Our industry is based
     upon it.  It is an essential act.
          And I want you to see how they actually
     felt about this behind closed doors.  They
     never told anybody else.
          Put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in
     a cage, the rat will push the lever and smoking
     is the cigarette -- and smoking is the
     cigarette -- is the lever pushed.  Smoking the
     cigarette is the lever pushed.
          That's it.  That's what they thought.
          They got them young; they kept them
     hooked. Addiction is not free choice.  You have
     heard doctor after doctor say that.  It is not
     a matter of free choice.
          If it was, they know themselves they would
     be out of business, because, remember, the
     Nordine study, where Claude Teague said:  Guys,
     we'd be out of business if they really could
     quit.
          There's no indication in any advertisement
     that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly
     for a while, this is from the FTC in 1967,
     smoking is no longer a matter of choice for
     him, but becomes a matter of need.
          This is a document, 1980:  Cigarette
     smoking is more addictive than using heroin,
     hooking two-thirds -- that's the CTR.  A
     letter, the CTR:  We can't defend continued
     smoking as free choice if the person was
     addicted.
          In 1980, they knew that.
          The two factors refute the argument
     smoking is a matter of free choice.  This is
     from the Surgeon General, 1989.
          Most smokers start smoking as teenagers
     and then become addicted. To the extent -- this is Brown &
     Williamson, '73:  To the extent the argument
     revolves around free choice is being negated on
     the grounds of addiction.
          They knew their business was built on
     addiction.  Their business was addiction.  It
     sustained them.
          So we have the first three questions.
          These were the major conclusions of the
     Surgeon General in 1988.
          Tobacco didn't agree with it.  Reynolds
     didn't agree with it.  Reynolds wouldn't even
     testify to it in Congress in 1994.
          This is what they said:  Cigarettes and
     other forms of tobacco are addicting.  Nicotine
     is the drug that causes addiction.
          That's it.  It is like heroin and cocaine.
          That's what the Surgeon General found in
     1988.
          And this is what the Surgeon General found
     more recently:  Nicotine addiction is the
     fundamental reason that individuals persist in
     smoking and using tobacco products.  That's
     what they said.
          Without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse.  We would all
     lose our jobs and our consulting fees.
          And this is what Claude Teague at RJ
     Reynolds said in 1982:  That is to say, if the
     exit gate from our market suddenly opened, we
     would be out of business overnight.  We cannot
     ever be comfortable selling a product that most
     of our customers, most of our customers, would
     like to quit.
          Legal cause.  Legal cause is -- a legal
     cause of cancer is if it directly and in
     natural and continuous sequence produces or
     contributes substantially to producing such
     cancer so that it can be said that but for the
     addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine,
     the cancer would not have occurred.
          That is easy in this case.  He had prime
     lung cancer.  He was addicted.  You saw the
     sequence that was drawn by the Surgeon General.
     In that natural sequence, he had it, he quit
     smoking, but he had done so much harm that the
     fuse had been lit, and in 1995, he was
     diagnosed with lung cancer attributable to
     cigarette smoking.
          Now, what -- where does the put us?  That puts us at the -- by the way, you'll hear this
     several times today:  In order to be a legal
     cause of cancer, addiction to cigarettes need
     not be the only cause.  Such addiction may be a
     legal cause, though it operates in combination
     with the act of another, his own acts, or some
     other cause, if such cause occurs at the same
     time as the addiction and the addiction
     contributes substantially to producing such
     cancer.
          It is not -- it doesn't have to be the
     only cause.  It doesn't have to be -- it has to
     be a substantial contributing factor.  That's
     it.
          So the answer to No. 1 is yes.
          The answer to No. 2 is yes.
          The answer to No. 3 is yes.
          And that brings us to the Engle
     instructions.  The Engle instructions are
     critically important to us.
          The Engle instructions show us, and you
     had them read, you're going to take them back
     with you, these are binding on you.  These are
     binding on you.
          Reynolds concealed or omitted -- Reynolds was negligent.  Reynolds placed cigarettes on
     the market that were defective and unreasonably
     dangerous.
          Reynolds concealed or omitted material
     information not otherwise known or available,
     knowing the material was false or misleading,
     or failed to disclose a material fact
     concerning the health effects and the addictive
     nature of smoking cigarettes, as Reynolds
     entered into an agreement of conspiracy with
     others to do the same.
          And of that, there can be no question,
     because we've seen that they met in 1963; we
     saw all the documents in 1953; we saw all the
     documents that have been produced since, all of
     which was about the cigarette controversy when
     none existed; all about doubt of the scientific
     and medical consensus, long after it was there.
     Much like Dr. Ticknor, Reynolds was in those
     days out of touch with the scientific community
     and consensus.
          Now, the fourth question, because now you
     have the benefit of the -- of the instructions,
     the fourth question on strict liability and
     negligence really isn't about strict liability and negligence, because strict liability and
     negligence will be found if they have class
     membership.
          But to do that, we have to answer one
     further question:  Was smoking cigarettes for
     which RJ Reynolds has legal liability --
          MR. MONDE:  Excuse me, may we approach?
          THE COURT:  Yes.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          MR. SMITH:  Now, where I was.  I want to
     show you question No. 4, because this is under
     strict liability and negligence, and if you are
     taking notes, I will tell you the instruction
     on this is instruction No. 10 that the Court
     has already read to you, if you want to look
     back on it.
          Strict liability and negligence, question
     4 is:  Was smoking cigarettes for which RJ
     Reynolds tobacco has legal liability a legal
     cause of Mr. O'Hara's cancer?
          That is equally an easy question to
     answer.
          Number 1, the only -- there have only been
     five brands of cigarettes identified by
     Mrs. O'Hara.  She bought cigarettes between
     1967 and 1981 for her husband.  She was in
     charge of the budget, and she bought them by
     the carton.
          I'm not saying he never bought any
     cigarettes on his own.  You heard what she
     said.  She didn't care for that to happen because she bought and budgeted the cigarettes.
          The brands of cigarettes were Lucky
     Strike, Pall Mall, Camel, Winston.  And
     Marlboro later, is what her testimony is.
          "I think you gave us five brands.  Five,
     Lucky, Camel, Pall Mall --
          "Correct.
          "During the entire time that you and your
     husband were married and he was smoking, were
     those the brands that you would purchase for
     him when you were buying the cigarettes?
          "ANSWER:  Yes."
          So from the time of -- now, there's no
     reason to suggest that somehow his brands
     before that were different, but we don't know
     that.  We can't know that.  He's not with us.
     He died from lung cancer.
          But from 1967 to 1981, there were five
     brands smoked; Marlboro at the end.  All of the
     other brands, and your instructions tell you
     this, were brands for which RJ Reynolds is
     responsible.
          That's all you have to do to answer
     question No. 4.
          Were those cigarettes from those four brands substantially contributory to his legal
     liability?
          Yes.  They were the overwhelming amount of
     cigarettes that he smoked, and he died from
     being addicted to the cigarettes that he
     smoked, including those cigarettes, and
     predominantly those cigarettes.
          Number 5 is:  Was Mr. O'Hara himself
     negligent, and was his negligence a legal cause
     of cancer?
          My partner will talk to you a few minutes
     about it, but that really is comparative.  We
     talked about that all the way back at voir
     dire.
          What this means is if you should decide
     that Mr. O'Hara has some degree of negligence,
     it is your job to determine that and say yes.
          All I would say is remember what he didn't
     know and why he didn't know it.  Remember what
     he couldn't have known and who could have told
     him in determining whether he was negligent.
          Now, at this point, what I would like to
     talk to you about is the next couple of
     questions.  They are called the path to
     punitive damages. The next couple of questions deal with two
     issues:  One is concealment and the other is
     conspiracy to conceal.
          Concealment, it would be that Reynolds
     concealed or omitted material information not
     otherwise known or available, knowing that the
     material was false or misleading, or failed to
     disclose a material fact concerning the health
     effects and/or addictive nature of smoking
     cigarettes, or both.
          In other words, did they know something
     that nobody else knew, or did they and their
     co-conspirators know something that nobody else
     knew, and would -- and did not tell them
     that -- and failed to disclose a material fact
     in a way that mattered?
          You have material fact that was defined
     for you in about two sentences.  What it
     basically means, it was something that
     mattered.
          Let's talk about what the concealment was.
          Well, No. 1, this is an Engle finding.  We
     know that.  We start off with an Engle
     findings.  That's the Engle findings as a class
     member.  That binds you.  They did do that. Now the question is:  Did they do that in
     a way that was material or a legal cause for
     the cancer in this case?
          That is, did they do something that did
     not disclose something, did they conceal
     something, did they hide something that
     mattered?
          And then conspiracy to conceal.
     Conspiracy is simple.  It means that they
     decided, as my partner said in opening
     statement, to lock arms, walk hand in hand as
     an industry, with all of these participants,
     that they would all agree that they would
     conceal or omit disclosing information, and
     that they would hide certain information, and
     when they did it, and this is from Engle, they
     did it with the intention that smokers and
     members of the public would rely upon it to
     their detriment.
          That's a finding.  That's binding if he's
     a member of the class.
          The question now is:  Did it matter?
     Would it have mattered to Mr. O'Hara?
          Now, we know some things about the ability
     that this company had to conceal.  This is a document in 1969:  We do not foresee any
     difficulty in the event a decision is reached
     to remove certain reports from research files.
     Once it becomes clear that such action is
     necessary for the successful defense of our
     present and future suits, we will promptly
     remove all such reports from our file.
          This is a company that knew about
     concealment.  That is correspondence between
     research and legal in RJ Reynolds, saying we
     will remove something, we will invalidate
     something if it will help our legal position.
          That's concealment.  Reynolds is legally
     responsible for every act committed, not just
     by the companies it's responsible for, but
     every act committed by a co-conspirator in the
     course of about a 50-year conspiracy.
          So all of them were in it together.
     That's what we have to prove, and that's what
     the evidence completely establishes.
          If any one company had decided to come
     forward and tell the truth, the whole thing
     would fall.
          If one of them decided, let's tell them
     what we know about how addictive nicotine is. If one of them had said, do you think after
     1958 we ought to tell them what we told the
     British American Tobacco, that we know that at
     least we're sure that it's a cause of lung
     cancer?
          No.  Nobody could break away.
          The conspiracy was a conspiracy of silence
     and to hide the truth from the American people.
          They form their conspiracy in '53.  They
     hired the test scientists, the best doctors.
     They hired the best witnesses.  They hired the
     PR firms.  They hired the ad men and gave them
     enormous budgets.
          There was nobody who could overcome the
     impact.
          This is what -- this was a memorandum in
     evidence that you might remember with -- it was
     one of the lawyers talking about the interview
     of Dr. DiMarco.
          He also said, and I can't recall his exact
     words, that our medical scientific witnesses
     will say whatever we want them to say, clearly
     implying, if not stating, that they lacked
     credibility and integrity.
          That's what one of their research people were saying about the scientific witnesses that
     they were producing back then.
          What the industry concealed.  Well, they
     concealed that they studied nicotine and that
     they knew it was a highly, highly addictive
     drug.
          They concealed that they studied teenage
     smokers and that they knew that 90 percent of
     the people they were targeting were between the
     ages of 14 and 20.  That's when you had to get
     them, when the brain is most vulnerable, when
     their judgment is least mature.
          They got 90 percent, and guess what, they
     kept them, because once they got them drink --
     once they got them smoking, they got addicted
     to nicotine.
          They knew that 50 percent of all smokers
     would die from a smoking-related disease, and
     they knew that hundreds of thousands, as many
     as 500,000 Americans would die every year.
          It doesn't matter.  What mattered was the
     profit.  What mattered was the stock dividends.
     What mattered was at the end of the year, the
     executive bonus; at the end of the year,
     keeping the paycheck and keeping the job going, and if a few hundred thousand people had to die
     to support it, it didn't matter to Reynolds.
          They never told anybody.
          And I want to ask you this:  Every time
     you hear this, say, would it have mattered?
     Would it have mattered?
          They never told people that their
     co-conspirators were manipulating the levels of
     nicotine to keep smokers buying their
     cigarettes.
          They were trying to get into a contest
     about who could find the exact level that was
     the most effective to give the nicotine a,
     quote, kick; their word from their documents.
     They were trying to impact the kick.  Because
     why?  Because they thought it would equal a
     greater market share.  It was always about the
     bottom line with them.
          They knew that there were 70
     cancer-causing agents.  You remember in 1961,
     they listed the carcinogens.  They told people
     publicly.  They told people that they would
     take away, filter out, get rid of, if they ever
     found anything harmful, they would get rid of
     it. They said that in the '50s, they said that
     in the '60s, they said that in the '70s, they
     said that in the '80s.
          They had one little problem, the biggest
     secret that they kept:  They couldn't do it.
          They didn't make a safer cigarette.  They
     made the illusion of safer cigarettes, but they
     didn't make a safer cigarette.  It always had
     carcinogens in it.  It always had the chemicals
     in it.  And it was always a deadly product.
          They purposefully mislead the public about
     the safety of filters.
          And by the way, remember, two of the --
     Ms. Colette said it didn't matter to him, but
     in the end, he smoked his favorite, was
     Winston, and the latest brand, Winston,
     Marlboro, both of which were No. 1 and No. 2
     filtered cigarettes in the country.
          Why?  Because they were the most promoted.
     How did they promote them?  We saw the
     documents from Dr. Cummings.  They promoted
     them directly in -- she said, she said:  We buy
     by promotion.  We brought -- what was the best
     buy?  Who gave you the best buy?  The companies
     did. They promoted directly on the BX, and they
     gave prices nobody could beat.  They targeted
     the military.  It was an easy audience.  That's
     why there were some many smokers in the
     military, including Garry O'Hara.
          They met in 1953.  That's when the
     conspiracy began.  They lied to the government.
     They gave this limitation of their authority.
     We are going to use strict research.
          They used it for public relations; they
     used it to front; they used it as a shield.
     Those are in the documents.  You saw those.
          It was never the real deal.  It was always
     an illusion of compliance with the law.
          So what did they say the very first time?
     It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a
     habit they can't break.  Wouldn't it be
     wonderful if our company was the first to
     produce a cancer-free cigarette?
          Think about what that means.  Why would a
     cancer-free cigarette be such value unless you
     already knew you already had a cigarette that
     had cancer in it?  And they did.
          They did the Frank Statement.  You've
     heard that.  They promised -- what they promised was that they would cooperate in the
     future.  They never did.  We'll make -- the
     products we make are not injurious.  And they
     said:  We put people's health as our paramount
     responsibility.
          It never was their paramount
     responsibility.
          Next.  1958, BATCO.  The individuals we
     met, those were the individuals at TIRC, those
     were the individuals at RJ Reynolds, those were
     the individuals at the CTR and TIRC.  The
     individuals we met believe that smoking causes
     lung cancer.
          Would it have mattered in 1958 if the
     tobacco industry had said about their
     cigarettes:  We know that they do contribute to
     causing lung cancer?  We know that.  Would it
     have mattered?
          Carcinogens are found in practically every
     class of compounds in smoke.
          Would it have mattered if they told the
     public:  We have identified carcinogens,
     cancer-causing agents in our cigarettes.
          Would it have mattered in 1962 if they had
     admitted:  The amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is
     overwhelming?
          And then in 1963, before the Surgeon
     General's Report:  Cigarettes have certain
     unattractive side effects.  They cause lung
     cancer.
          Would that have mattered if they had stood
     up in 1964, when the Surgeon General came out
     with his report, and said:  Our -- we support
     the Surgeon General, but our research shows the
     same thing.  Would that have mattered?  Of
     course it would have.
          That's all you have to show for a material
     fact. QUESTION:  Do you agree that it would be
     wrong to use confusion to the advantage of the
     tobacco industry to the detriment of the
     smoking public?
          ANSWER:  I would.
          QUESTION:  And if the tobacco industry is
     talking about using confusion to their
     advantage, you agree that would be highly
     improper? ANSWER:  I don't think it would be proper,
     no. That's what they did.  That's
     what Dr. Figlar said now.  Of course it wasn't
     proper.  And it mattered.
          Let me kind of wrap that part up quickly.
     Here is how simple it is:  If somebody goes
     down to rent a car, and that rental car agency
     knew that there was something wrong with the
     car, the brakes weren't working, and maybe
     there's been a recall out on the brakes, but
     they rent the car, and they know the brakes
     aren't working, and they don't tell you, when
     you drive down the street, put on the brakes,
     and go into a crash, is anybody have any second
     that they would say:  They had an obligation to
     tell you.  They knew the brakes were no good.
     They had an obligation to tell you what the
     safety hazard was.  They had an obligation to
     do that.
          They chose not to.  They chose to let you
     rent the car, drive down the street, and then
     say, oh, by the way, there was a recall, you
     should have known about it. The recall, I didn't know about the
     recall.  I just know you rented me the car.
          Do you remember the guy who testified, the
     elderly African-American gentleman who said, I
     wouldn't think they would sell a product, I
     don't think they would sell a product that
     wasn't safe.  They wouldn't do that.
          But they did it.  And it worked.
          Doubt was their business.  Confusion and
     deceit.  This is what they said:  Obviously,
     the key word is confusion.
          Doubt.  The most important story is one
     that which casts doubt, and doubt is our
     product.  It is the means of establishing the
     controversy.
          Some factor or factors other than smoking
     may be involved.  They were always looking for
     doubt, confusion, unknown.  That's what they
     have always been about.
          And they were throughout his entire life.
     They -- they were, even at the time he was
     laying on his deathbed, they were lying about
     the addictiveness -- they just finished lying
     about the addictiveness of their product.
          Go ahead. This is what they told people, though, on
     national TV. >>:  We want to be the detective just as
     much as the Surgeon General and the AMA.  We
     will cooperate in every way.
          Well, obviously, a filter takes out
     certain tar and nicotine.  I don't think the
     industry admits there are any bad elements.  If
     there are bad elements, through our
     laboratories, through the Surgeon General,
     through the AMA, through acts of God, luck, we
     hope we may find them, and if they are found,
     they will be removed.
          >>:  We do talk to the question of whether
     or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not
     believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We
     don't accept that.  Because when, as and if any
     ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as
     being injurious to human health, we are
     confident we can eliminate that ingredient.
          >>  Do you believe that cigarettes are
     safe?  Have they been proved to be safe,
     Mr. Cullman? >>:  I believe they have not been proved
     to be unsafe. That is it.  Both of those
     men, national TV, national audiences.  Those
     were absolute falsehoods.
          They were covering up the fact that they
     already knew from their own reports, reports
     that you saw from their own scientists,
     documents that you saw that they couldn't take
     something out, and they did know that injurious
     things were in there.  They knew it before '64,
     and they certainly knew in the '70s.  They just
     chose thought to tell anybody.
          Why?  Because they know it mattered.  They
     know it would have mattered to a Garry O'Hara.
     They know it would have mattered to a Garry
     O'Hara, a man who was already trying to quit.
          They talk about motivation.  Think about
     the motivation that might have been there for
     smokers if -- including Garry O'Hara, what
     about the motivation if they said:  We agree
     with the Surgeon General, our cigarettes cause
     cancer?  What if they had done that?
          Well, what if they had, in '58, said the truth?
          What if they hadn't come up with the
     gimmicks in 1953?
          What if they hadn't called their
     scientists -- blamed their scientists for
     finding the truth?
          Do you know what would have happened?
     Take a look at this.
          This didn't happen.  Right here is when
     Garry O'Hara quit.  Sadly, though, we know
     because of the lag time, right here is what got
     Garry O'Hara.
          But we know this:  There were times when
     the market looked like it was going to go down
     in '53 and '64 and other times, when they
     first -- every time, every single time they
     came back with another story.  Every time they
     kept the truth.  Every time they put a quarter
     of a trillion dollars into advertising.  They
     kept the yellow line going up and the red line
     going up, and it was the red line that got
     Garry O'Hara.
          If they had told the truth sooner, it
     would have mattered.  It would have mattered to
     him and everybody else that's on that red line after the '50s and the '60s and the '70s, when
     they chose profit over people.
          Go ahead.
          Doubt and confusion.  After 20 years, the
     industry has employed a single strategy, to
     defend itself in three major fronts:
     Litigation, politics and public opinion.
          It was brilliantly conceived and executed.
     It was a holding strategy, creating doubt about
     the health charge without actually denying it.
          Why?  Because every time they came up with
     one more figure; we're not sure; more people,
     we are looking for that rationale, that
     self-rationale, psychological crutch; there is
     doubt; it's not clear; we're not sure.
          They could smoke another cigarette, buy
     another pack, buy another carton.  And that is
     all Reynolds cared about.
          Go to the next one, please.  Next one.
          You want to know about concealment?  Do we
     really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug?
     It is, of course, but there are dangerous FDA
     implications.
          Inside they are saying:  We know it's a
     drug, but we can't say it because if we do, the government will regulate.  We won't tell
     anybody we know it's a drug.
          In the cigarette controversy, there are --
     the public, especially those who are present
     and potential supporters, heavy smokers, which
     in 1972 would have been Garry, must perceive
     and understand, believe in evidence to sustain
     their opinions that smoking may not be a causal
     factor.
          That's all they wanted.  All they have to
     do is:  If we can plant doubt, addicted smokers
     will have a rationale.  They can keep smoking.
     Well, it's not clear.  It's not sure.  It's not
     over yet. >>:  I certainly wouldn't be in the
     business if I thought cigarettes were harmful
     to people.  I think it's important there be a
     lot of us around who are trying to keep the
     research honest and open.
          >>:  Take the controversy about
     cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress, a house
     committee heard from leading experts on smoking
     and health. The record shows that many of the
     country's most respected doctors openly
     challenge anticigarette claims.
          >>:  And I have to disagree with you in
     that we don't know what causes the ailments
     that have been attributed to the cigarette
     smoking.
          >>:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
     cancer, yes or no?
          >>:  It is not known whether cigarettes
     cause cancer.  It has not been causally
     established.
          >>:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
     relationship between cigarette smoking and
     emphysema?
          >>:  Despite all of the research to date,
     there has been no causal link established.
          >>:  Okay.  The jury has not come in.
          >>:  It may not be harmful, you're not
     convinced.
          >>:  It may be or it may not be.  We don't
     know.
          >>:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
          >>:  I don't know if they do or not.
          >>:  I'm not able to give you a "does" or "does not" answer.
          >>:  Okay.  They agree that smoking causes
     lung cancer.  Do you agree?
          >>:  It may.
          >>:  Do you know whether it does?
          >>:   I do not.  We don't know what causes
     cancer in general right now, so I think that we
     may find out what causes cancer, we may find
     out some relationship which is yet to be
     proven. That was in 1994.
          Now, they're going to get up and say that
     Garry should have known all of this.
          How would he know?  Apparently, the
     executives of the company didn't know.
          Of course they knew it.  They had the lab
     reports.  They knew what was going on.  They've
     known it since 1958.  They certainly knew it
     since the early 1960s.
          But they were, 35 years later, saying:  We
     don't know.  Maybe.  May cause all of these
     deaths.
          (Thereupon, a video clip played as
     follows:) QUESTION:  And you want people to be able
     to believe that and rely upon them, did they
     not?
          ANSWER:  I believe in general, yes.
          QUESTION:  And as late as '88 or '89 or
     '90, the Tobacco Institute was saying they
     still didn't know whether smoking causes
     cancer, correct?  That's what they were telling
     the public, correct?
          ANSWER:  They did not know.  They could
     not make that determination, is what they said
     in the video.
          QUESTION:  And they wanted the people to
     believe them, correct?
          ANSWER:  I would say they would, yes. Our basic -- this is their own
     words:  Our basic position in the cigarette
     controversy is subject to the charge, and may
     be subject to finding, that we are making false
     or misleading statements to promote the sale of
     cigarettes.
          I want you to think about something,
     folks.  In the last 10 days that you've been
     here, it seems longer, in the last 10 days that you've been here, you have learned more about
     what RJ Reynolds knew than Garry O'Hara's
     entire generation could have known, that Garry
     O'Hara would have ever known.
          You've learned more in the last 10 days in
     this courtroom than generations of Americans
     would know, because RJ Reynolds and the rest of
     the companies decided not to let them know.
          They always say they wanted free choice.
     They couldn't have wanted free choice, because
     if they would, they would have just put the
     information out there and let people make a
     choice.
          That would have been an informed choice.
     They wanted smokers to make their decision not
     on the facts but on the facts that they
     pretended were true.  Not the facts that they
     knew were true.  Those were the facts they
     never told anybody.
          And there their answer is:  Well, yeah,
     but they could have gotten Reader's Digest.
          Reader's Digest didn't know they were
     manipulating nicotine.
          Well, they might have found it in Consumer
     Reports. Consumer Reports had no earthly idea what
     they were doing in their lab, such as making
     sure that an antagonist, something that would
     have blocked the effects of nicotine, didn't
     get researched and didn't get implemented.
     Because why?  Because the company said, we're
     digging our own grave if we do that.
          They didn't care about how many graves got
     dug, just as long as it didn't dig their
     financial one.
          This is what they did on the manipulation.
     You know it.  They were in a contest.  Brown &
     Williamson, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds, they
     were in a contest.  They were after nicotine.
     It is the reason they existed.  It is the sine
     qua non.
          If we move toward the reduction or
     elimination of nicotine, they said, we would
     have to liquidate our business.
          Our nicotine levels were not obtained by
     accident.  We can regulate fairly precisely the
     nicotine.
          This is where they were trying to come
     up -- you remember freebasing, the testimony of
     Dr. Hurt about freebasing. Nicotine occurs in free form, which is
     volatile, rapidly absorbed by the smoker and
     believed to be instantly perceived as nicotine
     kick.
          Methods which may be used to increase
     smoke pH and/or nicotine kick include
     ammoniation.
          We know, you saw the documents.  They were
     in an ammonia derby.
          It was Brown & Williamson said the soul of
     Marlboro is ammoniation.
          And it was Camel and Winston, that in the
     1970s jumped on board and they ammoniated -- in
     fact, you saw some documents about how much
     urea was used in just the state of North
     Carolina by certain companies.
          They knew what they were doing.  They were
     manipulating the nicotine.  We put a document
     in front of you, manipulating nicotine.
          Do you think they would have ever told
     someone?  They want to say, it's natural, it
     appears in tobacco.
          Not the nicotine that Garry O'Hara smoked.
     That isn't the one that naturally appeared in
     tobacco.  That's the one they finally engineered for the result they wanted.
          Remember when Murray Senkus said:  How low
     can we go?  He wasn't worried enough about how
     low can we go to help people.  They wanted to
     make sure they could make it look like they
     were making a safer cigarette; at the same time
     they were sustaining the habituation, they were
     sustaining the addiction.
          And this is the one -- you remember this
     document.  This is the one in which they talk
     about the antagonist, something that would have
     blocked the effect of nicotine:  You have to
     stop that project right now.
          This is what they said after all of this.
     This is what they told Congress. >>:  Let me begin my questioning on the
     matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
          Let me ask you first, and I would like to
     just go down the row, whether each of you
     believes that nicotine is not addictive.  I
     heard virtually all of you touch on it.
          Just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is
     not addictive? >>:  I believe nicotine is not addictive,
     yes.
          >>:  Mr. Johnson.
          >>:  Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine
     clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
     addiction.  There is no intoxication.
          >>:  We'll take that as a no.  Again, time
     is short.  If you can just -- I think each of
     you believe nicotine is not addictive, but we
     would like to have this for the record.
          >>:  I don't believe that nicotine for our
     products are addictive. You remember all of them:  I,
     too, don't believe it's addictive.  Every one
     of them.
          Now, it was a different time, you know
     that, when he started, when he grew up.  They
     dominated the airwaves.
          He doesn't have to prove that he relied on
     a particular statement.  What we know is that
     he smoked the most advertised brands at the
     time.  He smoked the brands that were most
     promoted on military bases.  Dr. Cummings put
     those documents in front of you. We know that RJ Reynolds dominated the
     military for a number of years.  We know that
     they spent a quarter of a trillion dollars in
     the industry advertising their product, and we
     knew that he smoked the products that were the
     most popular for the various times.
          In the early days, it was more Lucky,
     Camel.  As it got later -- he smoked them all,
     but later it was Marlboro and Winston
     primarily, and those are the -- at the very
     end.
          Why?  Well, those were the No. 1 and No. 2
     cigarettes that were sold in the market,
     promoted in military bases.
          That's what it was.  It's that simple.
     That's all you have to show.  You can infer
     reliance.
          By infer reliance I mean you can figure
     reliance on how he conducted himself in light
     of the information that was available and what
     they were putting out.
          Now, we know it's not free choice.  And we
     know -- we know that what we have is two
     questions that get us to punitive damages.
          Number 1 is:  Was the concealment or the omission of material information -- material
     information being would it matter -- regarding
     the addictiveness of the health effects of
     cigarettes -- or the health effects of
     cigarettes, or both, by RJ Reynolds a legal
     cause of Mr. O'Hara's death?
          The answer is yes.
          It doesn't have to be the only cause, but
     the fact that they hid this information, did
     that affect?  Did that matter?  Would that
     matter?  The answer is yes.
          Conspiracy?  Did they agree to this?  Of
     course they all agreed to do that, is what the
     whole thing is about.  That's why you saw them
     in 1953 in the hotel, and in 1994 swearing that
     they didn't know about the addictiveness of
     their cigarettes, when, at the same time, they
     were researching whether levulinic acid could
     bind their nicotine more appropriately to a
     smoker.
          And then the question is:  By clear and
     convincing evidence, have we shown that we
     should receive punitive damages in this case?
          The answer is yes.
          500,000 people died.  You can consider that.  More people died from cigarette smoking
     than in all the wars.  More people died from
     cigarette smoking than automobile accidents,
     AIDS, suicide, homicide combined.  500,000
     people a year.  One of them was Garry O'Hara.
          In considering to award these, you may
     consider whether or not -- and they are to be
     awarded to punish and deter.  Punish and deter.
     To keep people from doing this ever again.  To
     punish them from what they did, but also to
     deter this ever happening again in the future,
     by this company or any company doing this kind
     of work.
          Finally, No. 3:  When you're considering
     an award, you may consider any harm arising
     from Mr. O'Hara's cancer.  You may also
     consider harm suffered by other persons not
     parties to the lawsuit.
          That is a fact.  In punitive damages, it
     is more than just about Mr. O'Hara.  He's part
     of it.  But you could go to the
     reprehensibility of what they did.
          They lied in the '50s, they lied in the
     '60s, they lied in the '70s, they lied in the
     '80s, they lied in the '90s, and 20 million Americans died.  They talk about 60 million
     quit?  Garry quit.  Garry was a success story
     on quitting.  He did it.  But he died.  How
     many more of that 60 million?  Well, we know
     that 20 million died.
          You don't try to addict high school
     students.  You don't try to recruit people in
     the 10th grade.  You don't call them a crop.
     You don't refer to our next crop as 14 to 20
     year olds.  That is reprehensible conduct by
     these companies.
          They were going into the high schools.
     They were targeting because they needed
     replacement smokers.  Why did they need
     replacement smokers?  Why did they need a new
     crop?  They knew how many they were losing by
     either quitting or dying.
          Realistically, if our company is to
     survive and prosper over the long-term, we must
     get our share of the market.
          And that was the 14- to 20-year-olds, the
     ones most vulnerable.
          My ladies and gentlemen, my partner is now
     going to talk to you about numbers, and I will
     come back to talk to you again after the defense presents their case, but I want to tell
     you something:  This case begs punitive
     damages.  This case shows the damages done by
     just not telling the truth.  They showed that
     it mattered.
          There is every reason to believe that he
     would have never -- if he had known in the '50s
     about cancer, if he had known about the
     manipulation of nicotine, if he had known what
     they were doing, if he knew that they could not
     do what they said they could do and make a
     safer cigarette and remove the carcinogens,
     would it have mattered?  It would have mattered
     to anybody.  It would have saved this life, and
     his family would still have him.
          That's what this case is about.


          MR. AVERA:  Just one second here to reset.
          It's been a few days since we last
     chatted, ladies and gentlemen, and I've been
     given a very short amount of time to talk to
     you about a couple of issues in this case.
          One of them is the issue of -- I'm sorry -- the damages suffered by the O'Hara
     family.
          And to do that, what I need to do is take
     you back to a time 50 years ago when a young
     airman, Garry O'Hara, met and fell in love with
     a young girl from the French countryside, and
     he married her.
          He brought her to the United States,
     someplace that he had never visited before, to
     raise a family.
          And they had three babies, and they
     created a family and raised them.  And Colette
     O'Hara followed her husband through all of his
     assignments in the United States and across
     Europe.
          They devoted themselves to the -- to each
     other and to their family.  And as many
     newlyweds do, they envisioned a life together,
     raising babies and working towards a retirement
     one day.
          And if you wanted to know how special
     their relationship was, Colette and Garry's,
     you just have to listen to the testimony of
     Mr. Donnie Wood, who told you that their
     relationship was so special they were a yin and yang; that she provided those things that he
     couldn't do very well, she was good at and
     provided for him.  And those things that she
     wasn't very good at, he provided those things
     for her.
          But because of what Reynolds did to him,
     what they had concealed from him and all
     Americans of that generation, in 1995, that
     family, happy family picture that you see
     there, sometime in the mid 1970s, when
     Mr. O'Hara was still smoking, those memories
     changed, and Garry O'Hara was diagnosed with
     lung cancer, was lying in his bed with his wife
     and children by his side, and cancer ravaged
     his body, with Garry soon to become one of that
     statistic of 20 million.
          There cannot be any greater grief than
     watching someone you love suffer, watching a
     husband, watching a father go through the
     ravages of lung cancer as it metastasized to
     his bones and to his brain, and again waiting
     and watching that transformation of the
     gentleman that we see in this photograph with
     his family, and change and morph into someone
     they really didn't recognize as a result of cancer.
          Those memories that you see there, those
     memories now are intruded upon.  Those happy
     memories are now intruded upon with the
     memories of watching Garry go through cancer
     and dying, watching him go to the doctor,
     watching a husband and father cry about dying.
     Not because he was afraid of dying.  Certainly
     not.  Not someone who would serve so honorably
     for so long.  He wasn't afraid of dying.  He
     told Michael that.
          What he was afraid of and what he was sad
     about was not being there for Colette, not
     being there for his children.  He had devoted a
     lifetime to her and to his family, and now,
     because that fuse had been lit and he was dying
     from lung cancer from all of those exposures to
     the carcinogens, over almost two decades of
     smoking, he was going to not be able to win
     that battle and was going to die.  That memory
     that they have, you can consider that.
          Next paragraph, please.
          There is the transformation, with the hand
     of his best friend on his shoulder.  That is a
     period of time when the realization is coming to Garry, as Colette and his children watch,
     that he will not survive this.
          The elements of damages that you are to
     consider are the damages that are allowed for
     by law.  His Honor Judge Jones has instructed
     on them.
          I'm going to go over with you the verdict
     form.  One of the questions that you may have
     as you listen to Mr. Smith talk about the
     evidence in the case and listen to me talk
     about the damages in this case:  Well, what is
     it that you want us to do?  What do you want us
     to do here as jurors in this case?
          And the best way I can do that is to walk
     through the verdict form with you, as Mr. Smith
     has somewhat already.  I'm going to do it a
     little bit differently, though.  I'm going to
     put some information here in front of you, and
     one of the things that Mr. Smith has asked me
     to address is this question 5 on the verdict
     form:  Was Mr. O'Hara himself negligent, and if
     so, was his negligence a legal cause of his
     cancer?
          And Judge Jones has already instructed you
     that negligence is the failure to use reasonable care.  And you might find that Garry
     O'Hara, who grew up in a cigarette culture, who
     started smoking when it was normal for
     everybody, when it was glamorous, sexy, cool,
     hip, you might find that he could have tried to
     quit harder, he could have tried to quit more
     often, and you might find that he was
     negligent.
          And if you do, if you check yes to
     question 5, that takes you to question 6, where
     there is an allocation of negligence with a
     percentage.
          That percentage must total 100 percent.
     That is an allocation of fault between the
     corporation, Reynolds Tobacco Company, and the
     citizen, Garry O'Hara.
          When you come to that question, if you do,
     there is one thing you have to keep in mind.
     You remember when I talked to you in opening, I
     tried to make the point emphatically that they
     would make an issue of Garry O'Hara's choices.
          It's all about Garry O'Hara's choices, and
     I told you, I think, that they were going to
     put a spotlight on Mr. O'Hara, and I told you
     that we were going to turn that spotlight around, and we were going to turn it into a
     floodlight and shine it on them, and we were
     going to talk about their choices and what they
     did.
          And that's what we put on in terms of the
     evidence over the last two weeks, and that's
     what Mr. Smith has talked about this morning.
          And when you come to this question, I want
     you to think about the nature of the choices,
     because Garry O'Hara, growing up in the
     cigarette culture, his choices were innocent
     choices.  They weren't informed choices.  Never
     did they have the information they did, they
     always had.  Far more information than Garry
     O'Hara did.
          They never once asked him to quit.  They
     never once told him to quit.  They concealed
     that from him, and never once told him that
     what we've been telling you is wrong, that it
     is addictive, and it does cause cancer.
          Those are evil choices.  That's a
     different character of choice than the choices
     that Garry O'Hara made once he became addicted
     to nicotine.
          And so if you reach question 6 and there is an allocation of fault, I'm going to suggest
     that you allocate no more than 10 percent to
     Mr. O'Hara, and the reminder to Reynolds.
          You consider the evidence, and as jurors,
     you consider what is fair.  That is the amount.
          Next are the economic losses suffered by
     Mr. O'Hara's estate by Mrs. O'Hara, and these
     are the numbers that Dr. Raffa gave you, the
     loss of earnings in the past, and he gave you
     two summaries, if you recall.
          The two summaries that he gave you were
     one for age 55, if he retired at age 55, and
     then you recall the other summary, age 66.
          And what I'm giving you here are the
     numbers from age 66; but I think our common
     sense leads us to the conclusion that folks
     have an age that they hope to retire, but the
     reality, as Dr. Raffa said, is that most folks
     continue working more further in the future
     than they had planned.
          So the loss of earnings from the time he
     became ill and no longer worked until the time
     of his death, the lot of net accumulations that
     is already discounted -- because you remember
     Dr. Raffa telling you he has to discount the future amounts?  If you took notes on that
     numbers, that 168,822 represents the discounted
     amount.
          And then finally, No. 10 includes the
     damages sustained by Mrs. O'Hara for her
     husband's loss for support and services.  That
     includes military pension, that includes the
     offset, that includes reducing the number with
     a future amount, it includes the loss of
     services, and it includes the money lost from
     the private sector job.
          It's all of those numbers into one,
     reduced for present value, and then reduced
     again for any benefits that Mrs. O'Hara has
     already received, because, you remember, she
     has received benefits; she just receives less
     benefits because he's passed.  If he were with
     us, they would have received more benefits.
          The next three questions, 11A, B and C,
     have to do with pain and suffering damages.
          I say pain and suffering damages.  That's
     a category of damages that are non-economic.
     They are the human loss, what Mrs. O'Hara has
     been through for the last 20 years, and what
     she will go through for the next 14 years, her life expectancy.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I would love to
     speak to you for an hour about the quality of
     these people, the quality of Garry O'Hara and
     his wife, but I do not have time to do it.  But
     you do get to judge the family, Mrs. O'Hara and
     the children; and the measure of the man that
     we have not met, and will not meet, is measured
     by the quality of the people that you heard
     from on that stand.
          I'm going to suggest to you a sum of
     $10 million for Mrs. Colette O'Hara, you should
     not award more, you should not award more, for
     the past 20 years, a lady who says that no one
     will measure up to her husband.  She's never
     remarried, and she never will, because no one
     will measure up to her man.
          For Valerie and Michael, Garry's daughter,
     his little girl, his youngest son, who were
     young enough at the time, at the time in their
     early 20s to watch their father die from
     cancer, you should not award more.
          Let me finish today by echoing the
     comments of my partner regarding the punitive
     damages aspect of this case, and that question, which will be the last question, and I'm going
     to tell you in closing that you have a power
     that no one else has, and you have a power to
     make them financially feel for what they did.
          Their victims were Americans, good people
     like Garry O'Hara.  He lived and he served with
     honor and integrity.  And there is not one
     thing in this record that you can point to that
     Reynolds did that you could characterize as
     honorable.
          And there is not one thing in this record
     you can point to that Reynolds did that anyone
     could characterize as having integrity.
          What they did was evil.  It was a scheme.
     It was a trick.  It was a lie, deny, conceal
     campaign.  They believed in hooking them early
     and hooking them for life, and it succeeded.
          Justice, shall you pursue.  Our job is
     about to be over, and your job will be to
     consider this evidence and reach answers to
     these conclusions.  But justice today cries out
     louder than the wails of Colette O'Hara, as her
     young children looked on when Garry O'Hara
     breathed his last breath.
          Justice requires that you do your job and the answer to this question.  And we all know
     the old saying:  You shall know the truth, and
     the truth shall set you free.
          And they knew the truth.  They wouldn't
     honor the truth.  They embraced a different
     saying, and that saying for them was:  You
     shall know the money, and the money will make
     you conspire against your fellow citizen.  You
     shall know the money, and you shall lie to your
     fellow man.
          Garry O'Hara deserved better.
          In 1861, Abraham Lincoln said in his first
     inaugural address:  "Why should there not be a
     confidence in the ultimate justice of the
     people?  Is there any better or equal hope in
     the world?"
          You, ladies and gentlemen of the jury,
     American jury, you are the ultimate justice in
     our society, in our civilization.
          He was speaking to every American at that
     time.  He was speaking to every American to
     come.  He was speaking to all of us in this
     courtroom about justice.
          And he was speaking to you.  Thank you.


          MR. SMITH:  The good news is this is the
     last lawyer you're going to hear from in this
     case.
          The better news is I have just 28 minutes.
     The bad news, I still talk this fast.
          I want to show you a couple of things in
     direct response.
          You were just told:  It's an American,
     it's free choice.  RJ Reynolds' position today
     is it's free choice.  It's just a free choice.
          I want to remind you of what the Surgeon
     General of the United States said about that.
     This was already in your evidence.
          Play that, please. >>:  Surgeon General C. Everett Koop issued two major reports on smoking; one on the
     dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on
     nicotine addiction.
          The tobacco industry disputes both reports
     as more political than scientific.
          >>:  We've been told so frequently that
     smoking is a matter of free choice, you start
     when you want and you quit when you want, but
     anybody who's ever smoked knows that's not
     true.
          >>:  What does the record, the long-time
     record say is the most dangerous age to get
     hooked on tobacco?
          >>:  Indications are very clear that the
     people who are most heavily addicted to
     nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting
     are those who began smoking when they were 14
     to 16.
          I think the studies all over the world, in
     every country, in every culture, the younger
     you start, the greater the addiction and the
     more difficult it is to quit.
          >>:  Now, you said that you consider
     tobacco as addictive as cocaine and heroin.
     Isn't that an overstatement? >>:  No.  I think the evidence is very
     clear if you understand what we're talking
     about.
          Addiction is a specific physiologic
     problem, and the manner in which you become
     addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner
     in which you become addicted to cocaine or to
     heroin, and that even after you have quit and
     you think you're clean, there's a tremendous
     tendency to relapse.
          >>:  There's no such thing as a safe
     cigarette.  There's no such thing as a quality
     death. That's exactly what the
     Surgeon General of the United States said in
     1988, but, of course, you know that RJ Reynolds
     disagreed with that decision.
          They talk about free choice.  Before I
     leave it -- and he talks about not a quality
     death.  That's not a quality death.
          Just a few months before, just a few -- a
     year before, this was a man whose future was
     right ahead.  He had just -- he had been
     honorably discouraged.  He was decorated by the service.  He had gotten a job.  And cigarettes
     caught up with him.
          That's what this case is about.
          Don't forget for a moment that they talk
     about free choice.  Think about this:  It goes
     to the materiality.  If they really believed in
     free choice, wouldn't they have just given
     people the information?
          If they didn't think that concealing
     information made a difference, why wouldn't you
     just tell the truth?
          No.  They knew the truth.
          The truth was that if they told people
     what they knew about nicotine addiction, if
     they told people what they were doing to
     manipulate the nicotine, if they told people
     that they had found 60 carcinogens, if they had
     told people that they had been lying to them
     because they really couldn't remove it, they
     knew it wouldn't make a difference, if it was
     really about free choice, you just tell them
     all of the information.  That would have been a
     free choice.  It would have been an informed
     choice.
          It's not a free choice when you get in that car and they don't tell you the brakes are
     defective.  They know it, and they don't tell
     you, and they're responsible for the outcome.
          That's how simple it is about concealment.
          They said, you know, there might be
     another case where this all applies.  There
     might be some case somewhere else where these
     facts did apply or Engle did apply, but not
     this case.
          Don't forget this which was in evidence.
     This was 1987.  This is what Brown & Williamson
     said:  Lest some lawyer be looking over our
     shoulder, I do not concede that even one person
     dies of a chronic disease that is caused by
     smoking cigarettes.  Sauce for the goose is
     sauce for gander.  That's all I'm saying.
          They don't really believe there is some
     other case, because they'll never admit.
          Now, in this case they start out --
          MR. MONDE:  Your Honor, may we approach?
          THE COURT:  You may approach.
          (Thereupon, the following proceedings were
     had at sidebar:)
          MR. MONDE:  The statement that we never
     admit goes beyond what is permitted in argument.  We are not -- we are not required to
     the admit responsibility in this case or in any
     case, and it is improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I'm going to overrule
     the objection.  You have one additional minute.
          MR. SMITH:  Yes, sir.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry, Mr. Smith.
          MR. MONDE:  Mr. Smith.
          I need to move for mistrial on that
     ground.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I deny the motion.
     Thank you.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and
     the following proceedings were held in open
     court:)
          MR. SMITH:  Let's go back and go over some
     things.  The clock scares me.
          First of all, they talk to you about
     cancer, the lung cancer.
          Put up Rene Ledbetter, please, on page 96,
     if you would.
          This is what Dr. Ledbetter said:
          "Is this the type of lung cancer that you
     have seen frequently in your career as a cancer
     doctor? "Yes."
          Remember what everyone said.  There's
     several parts of the puzzle.  There's
     pathology, there's examination, there's
     experience, there's radiology.  There may be
     others.
          The clinician makes the call.  This
     clinician made the call in the military before
     anybody ever heard of litigation, and when he
     made the call, remember what happened.  There
     really was radiology right back then.
          Number 2, they talk about -- they talk
     about causation.
          Go to Gary Strauss, please, on page 96.
     Yes.
          Remember, he said, "Well, it's been
     14 years."
          "Well, when he was diagnosed with
     adenocarcinoma of the lung in 1995, well, was
     he still at significant risk for acquiring lung
     cancer?
          "Well, I mean, how do you answer that
     question when the answer is he developed lung
     cancer.
          "The day before he was diagnosed? "Sure, yes.
          "What was his risk after his diagnoses?
          "100 percent."
          He had the smoking exposure.  He had it
     over years.  You've seen the graph we used
     before.  You heard us talk about lag time.
     That's what happens.  You don't get cancer
     immediately.  It takes a number of years.
          He quit -- remember in the very beginning,
     in the 1953 document, Dr. Teague for RJ
     Reynolds, he was talking about the Wynder and
     Graham study in 1953.  They said from cessation
     until smoking [sic] will probably be 10 or
     greater years.  That's exactly what happened
     here.
          They talk about -- they take various
     tidbits and they want to say this proves or
     this proves.
          We put on every doctor that they took a
     snippet out of the testimony.  Every doctor we
     put on ended up with the same conclusion:  To a
     reasonable degree of medical certainty, it was
     primary lung cancer.
          Not one, not two.  Two, before there was
     any litigation.  A radiologist who says:  I normally do not -- I read the film.  I knew
     they were going to try that.  That's what he
     said:  The film usually tells the story.  He
     didn't have it.
          Why did you agree to do it in this one
     case?
          Because it was so clear.
          He read the reports, and he knew how clear
     it was.
          That is a false trail.  Ladies and
     gentlemen, this was primary lung cancer.  And
     they would have you believe that every doctor
     that year who treated him, right up to the end,
     got it wrong.
          And, in fact, as they -- they told you, he
     didn't put it on the death certificate.  The
     same doctor said he had terminal lung cancer
     less than two months before.  The same doctor
     said repeatedly he had lung cancer.
          They want to pick and choose a few things.
     They want to pick and choose, try to confuse.
          I like that.  That is exactly what they've
     been trying to do throughout this whole
     explanation of the evidence.
          They talk about addiction.  Let's talk about Dr. Ticknor for a minute.  They said, oh,
     he wasn't up in the ivory tower.
          I'll say.  He's got a practice in which
     50 percent of his income is from testifying.
          He's got a practice in which the majority
     of his work has nothing do with nicotine
     addiction.  He's never written and published.
          They know that.  He's the one they bring
     in here to use the DSM, and the first thing he
     says is he couldn't give the first criteria on
     the DSM because he was unable to talk with the
     patient.
          What did Dr. Hurt say why they typically
     don't use the DSM?  Because really -- and who
     teaches the DSM, by the way, in medical
     school -- he says it's really not good for that
     kind of diagnosis because there's too many
     things in there you need to talk to the patient
     about to understand.
          Remember, he said:  Well, I really
     couldn't say.  I didn't give him credit for
     this because when he smoked, I couldn't tell if
     he intended to quit or not because I never knew
     what his intent was.
          Well, you would have talk to the patient. The Heaviness of Smoking Index, their
     argument is it doesn't really say that they're
     addicted.  It just says they're heavily
     addicted.
          Folks, if you're heavily addicted, you're
     addicted.  He was the heaviest of the addiction
     scores by both doctors.
          They say, well, we didn't talk as much
     about him during their testimony.
          The reason why is because in his case, a
     person who smokes two packs a day for 20 -- for
     18 years or more, who tries to quit repeatedly,
     his children told you they can remember from
     childhood dad was always trying to quit, he
     tried successfully for a little while in '77 --
     he did just what the Surgeon General said, he
     relapsed.  He smoked and smoked and smoked.  He
     went outside to smoke.  He understood he had to
     go outside.  He stood in the rain and snow, and
     that's what he did all the time.
          I rest my case on that issue.  He stood in
     the rain and the snow to smoke cigarettes
     because cigarettes were dominating his life.
          They say, well, there's no proof he ever
     really tried to quit What did he tell this wife?  Remember the
     testimony.  When she got on him and he was
     trying, he said:  I can't live without them.
          He finally was successful.
          Their own doctors and everybody that has
     taken the stand has said the fact that you're
     addicted does mean that you can't quit.
          And he was a success story on quitting.
          By the way, on what day did they ever
     encourage anybody to quit smoking cigarettes?
          On what day was that part of their
     business model, to encourage them to quit?
          They had -- you remember the Great
     American Smoke-Out?  One day.  Ed Asner
     testified one day a year.
          And what did tobacco do?  What did they
     do?  They came up with the Great American
     Smoke-In and gave out kits to support smokers.
     They didn't want people to quit for one day.
          They talked about it wouldn't have made a
     difference what was going on in '72.
          Well, we know he started trying to quit in
     1972.  I thought I would put out a document of
     what they were saying in back in 1972.
          Can you put up the Implications Arising From Smoke pH?  I think it's Dr. Teague.
     Thirty-two --
          MR. MONDE:  Your Honor, I'm sorry, may we
     approach?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          Please take that down.
          (Thereupon, the following proceedings were
     had at sidebar:)
          MR. MONDE:  It's not related to this
     Judge.  It's just a misstatement of the
     evidence to say that he tried to quit in 1972.
     Mrs. O'Hara admitted right on
     cross-examination, this is the '71/'72 time
     period, after she had taken her son to go see
     the doctor, she admitted that he did not try to
     quit at that time.  That's the only evidence.
          THE COURT:  Didn't they say there was a
     two and a half month period of time?
          MR. MONDE:  '77.
          MR. SMITH:  Before he quit, for a decade,
     she said, he tried for a decade to quit.  From
     '81, I'm not that good at deciphering, Judge,
     but that would go to '71.  Several quit
     attempts.  The children said he tried to quit
     through the '70s.  They said during the period of time he was trying to quit.
          What were we doing?  We weren't trying to
     manipulate nicotine?  I'm going to show you a
     document that shows that's not true.
          THE COURT:  There was testimony that they
     remember him always -- that they remember him
     always trying to quit.
          I concede that the two and a half months,
     the most successful time, was in '77, but there
     is evidence from which the jury could infer
     that.  But they are to rely upon their
     recollection of the evidence, and I will be
     happy to give that limiting instruction, if you
     want me to.
          MR. MONDE:  Well, what would the limiting
     instruction be?
          THE COURT:  Jury, you shall rely upon your
     own recollection of the evidence regarding
     that.
          MR. MONDE:  All right.
          THE COURT:  Okay?
          MR. SMITH:  It's always true.
          THE COURT:  I understand.  That's why I
     give it.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open
     court:)
          THE COURT:  Before Mr. Smith proceeds, I
     just want to remind you, jury, that you're
     obligated to and you're reminded that you are
     to rely upon your own recollection of the
     evidence that is presented during the course of
     the trial.  Thank you.
          You may proceed.
          MR. SMITH:  Thank you.
          1972 document.  RJ Reynolds.
          They said:  Well, when he was starting to
     consider quitting, remember she said that the
     family said it was about a decade he tried to
     quit, around '71/'72 he tried to quit?
          Let's go back and see what they were
     doing.  This is what RJ Reynolds was doing when
     he was trying to quit cigarettes:
          "In essence, a cigarette is a system for
     the delivery of nicotine to the smoker in an
     attractive, useful form.
          "At 'normal' smoke pH or at or below 6.0,
     essentially all the smoked nicotine is
     chemically absorbed as acidic acid.  As the
     smoke pH increases above 6.0, an increasing proportion of the total smoked nicotine occurs
     in 'free' form, which was described to you as
     freebase, which is volatile, rapidly absorbed
     by the smoker and believed to be instantly
     perceived as nicotine 'kick.'  Chart VIII shows
     how proportion of 'free' nicotine increases as
     pH goes higher."
          What were they doing when he was trying to
     quit?  They were trying to find a way to get a
     bigger market share by increasing the smoke pH,
     which they thought translated to getting more
     people to smoke because they wanted -- that
     would give them a bigger nicotine kick.
          They talked about the documents of RJ
     Reynolds.  Many of them, they said -- or most
     of them, they said, about the nicotine was well
     known and well known in the public and they
     used the sine qua non.
          Go to the one, it's called the Research
     Planning memo on the Nature of Tobacco
     Business, PT 04791.
          This is an RJ Reynolds document.  I
     believe it bears date '71 or '72.
          '72.
          Now, they said:  Sine qua none, now, that was -- they knew about that back in Reader's
     Digest, back in 1952 or '57 or some date back
     there, Reader's Digest had all of this
     information.
          Blow up the top.
          "In a sense, the tobacco industry may be
     thought as being a specialized, highly
     ritualized, stylized segment of the
     pharmaceutical industry.  Tobacco products
     uniquely contain and deliver a nicotine, a
     potent drug with a variety of physiological
     effects."
          That's what they said in '72.  You heard
     what they said under oath in '94.
          "Our industry is then based upon design,
     manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms
     of nicotine."
          That's RJ Reynolds in '72.  That's where
     they were focused on.  That's what they were
     focused on.
          "Happily for the tobacco industry,
     nicotine is both habituating and unique, and
     it's variety of physiological actions.  Hence,
     no other active material or combination of
     materials provides equivalent satisfaction." They knew what they were doing.  They knew
     they were addicting people.  They knew they
     were living on addiction.
          They knew, when they tried to get people
     younger -- it was because the younger smoker,
     the learner, the presmoker, it's in the
     documents, they knew that as soon as they got
     them and they became smokers, the No. 1 reason,
     remember the graph we showed, the No. 1 reason
     they retained a smoker, kept a smoker, wasn't
     flavor, wasn't love, anything about the
     cigarette; it was nicotine.  That was the most
     important thing, and that's what RJ Reynolds
     knew and counted upon.
          You were shown some documents on their
     argument about addiction not causing death.
     The Surgeon General of the United States, we
     put up the graph, and then later again, the
     Surgeon General and all of the medical people
     who testified on that subject in this courtroom
     on that subject, agreed as follows.  It's
     really simple:  You get addicted to nicotine,
     you continue smoking.  You stay addicted to
     nicotine, you continue to smoke.  The longer
     you smoke, the more you have exposure, the dose response.  The more exposer you have, the
     higher the risk is.
          Consequently, he did quit.  He was a
     success story.  He did not what they wanted him
     to do, not what they asked him to do.  He
     finally conquered it.  But that got him.  It
     started with nicotine addiction, and it ended
     with lung cancer.
          That's exactly the way the question is
     phrased to you on the verdict form:  Did the
     addiction substantially contribute to his
     death?  And the answer to that is yes.
          The answer to "did he have primary lung
     cancer" is yes.
          The answer to "was he addicted," was he
     addicted?  Yesterday, they put the chart
     themselves from the DSM, and you had a chance
     to see them as you sit there.
          My suspicion is that every person in this
     courtroom was going through the same process in
     their mind:  I think he does meet that, I think
     he does meet that, as their expert said no, no,
     no, and you're sitting thinking, but he did all
     of these things.
          They said you can't trust Dr. Cummings or Dr. Hurt's testimony as much because they don't
     like the tobacco industry.
          They have spent their lives at the Roswell
     Center for Cancer Research and at the Mayo
     Clinic.  They have seen the results of
     cigarette addiction, nicotine addiction and
     dependence.
          They have watched families, just like the
     family that is here today, family after family
     after family get the news.  They have watched
     what it does.
          How do you think they would feel as health
     care professionals?  How do you think they
     would feel about the industry?  But their
     records, their credentials are unassailable.
          We didn't have to go find somebody
     somewhere in a private practice that has never
     written a word that included the word "smoking"
     in it and had never done a bit of research on
     the impact of the brain.
          That's what RJ Reynolds brought you.
          They say he was able to control his
     smoking.  There is nothing -- you know, they
     brought an expert in here yesterday.  I'm not
     sure, but you guys rely on your own memory, if you can remember it, but I think the conclusion
     was that he would believe there were people
     addicted, but they had to be mentally ill.
     They would have to lose control -- I think he
     said schizophrenics, bipolars and people with
     organic brain damage.  Everybody else he
     thinks, really, as long as you have some
     control, you're not addicted.
          Not anybody else agrees with this.
          And finally, in cross-examination, he
     admitted he's out of step with the scientific
     community, which is where Reynolds has always
     been.
          I want to finish with this.  I want to
     finish with just a couple of more things.
          They don't want to spend any time talking
     about the fact that -- they want to say that,
     well, a lot of this stuff that happened,
     happened after he quit.  That's because they
     know what the punitive damages instruction is.
     It's damage to him, and you may consider what
     they did afterwards.
          In 1981.  In 1981, he quit.
          In 1953, we had a downturn.  They got
     together and the conspiracy began.  They told the stories.  They attacked the science.  They
     came up with all the literature and press
     releases that you've seen and heard about.  And
     the number went up.
          In 1964, it went down again.  They came
     back and said the same thing.  They had more
     advertising than anybody, including General
     Motors.  They were the most advertised product
     in the country.  They had the best public
     relations firm, and they continuously contested
     the Surgeon General.
          Remember, we have to give them
     self-rationale.  The self-rational is not
     conclusive.
          And guess what happened?  It kept coming
     up.
          And someone from the jury asked
     Dr. Cummings at one point:  What happened in
     1981?
          He said:  Well, some of it was the numbers
     generationally in terms of the baby boom
     impact, and the other was that information
     began to become more and more available into
     the '80s.
          We know that in this case, that they had to release their documents in the late 1990s.
     Right here.
          I want you to look at what has happened
     since people had more information.  The
     mountain they climb was when they were climbing
     one when the information was being withheld and
     concealed.
          When the information began to come up,
     they started down.  And when the information
     actually got out, they have plummeted.
          What does that tell you?  That when they
     got a free choice, meaning when people actually
     got to learn the truth and actually got to find
     out what was going on, they made a choice to
     get out of smoking.  But that was too late for
     Garry O'Hara.
          They say:  Well, we can't tell you that
     anything influenced his brand usage.
          No.  Back up to her testimony.  Go to the
     testimony.
          She said:  We bought for price.
          How did you do that?
          Well, her daughter actually said the same
     thing:  You know, we always bought for price.
          What did she say? We looked for what was the best promotion.
          Now, who does the promotions at the BX?
          It's not the Air Force.  It's the
     companies.
          These were the biggest companies selling
     the most popular brands.  You saw the documents
     through Dr. Cummings that they targeted
     military.  They targeted military for promotion
     because they knew it was a good market, because
     more than 50 percent of the people still smoked
     into the 1980s in the military.
          So when they say, well, we just went by
     promotion, the promotion is because the only
     cigarettes they ever bought, with the exception
     of Marlboro Light, the only cigarettes they
     bought were the ones that were promoted by RJ
     Reynolds.
          I want to talk to you a minute about they
     keep saying about statements.
          Can you put concealment up for a minute?
          This case is about concealment.  They keep
     wanting us to pick out something they said.
          The other thing you're going to -- this is
     about what they didn't say.  This is what --
     that's why you can infer reliance.  Was is the concealment or omission of material
     information?
          It's not what they said alone.  The
     material in concealment is what they chose not
     to say.  The evidence they chose not to reveal.
     The secrets they choose to keep.
          Was the concealment or omission of
     material information regarding the
     addictiveness or the health effects of
     cigarettes, or both, by RJ Reynolds company a
     legal cause?
          It doesn't have to be the only cause.  It
     has to be a legal cause, substantial
     contributing cause to Mr. O'Hara's developing
     cancer.
          Well, we know that he quit smoking in '81,
     and we know he struggled with it, but until he
     died, he had never relapsed after '81, that we
     know of.  We know he had several relapses, and
     one after a substantial stop in '77.  He was
     trying.  Even their doctor admitted he was
     trying to quit.
          How much help would it have been, how much
     would it have made a difference to come out in
     the '60s, when he was just starting to smoke, or maybe the '50s, when they knew in '58?  How
     about in the '60s?  How about in the '70s?
          How about if they come out and told what
     they were doing?  How about if they just hadn't
     done it?  How about if they weren't
     manipulating nicotine?
          How about if they weren't trying to get
     the share of the market, increase their share
     of the market by doing one thing, one thing
     only, manipulating nicotine to get more kick?
          What if they had actually said, our own
     internal research shows that cigarette smoking
     causes cancer?
          It's one thing, we're all natural, we're
     Americans, and we sometimes get suspicious of
     government.  So somebody says, well, the
     government says this, but the company says it's
     not true.  The government says -- but the
     company says it's not true.
          What would have been the impact if they
     had simply stepped forward and said:  We agree
     with the findings of the Surgeon General?
          What would have been the impact on the
     health of the American people if they had said:
     We have confirmed that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and it is the major cause of lung
     cancer?
          What if they had done it in the '60s and
     '70s when they knew it?  What if they hadn't
     hidden -- hidden and continued to hide through
     the '90s the fact that their cigarettes were
     not just addictive, highly addictive, as
     addictive as heroin and cocaine?  Even when the
     Surgeon General finally said that in 1988, what
     was their response?  That's ridiculous.  Scare
     tactics.  They are trying to -- they are trying
     to scare people away from cigarettes.
          They never cared about anything except the
     bottom line.  They never cared about any family
     except the ones that kept smoking.
          When you go back today, the first three
     questions should be easy.
          And the Engle, the Engle results will help
     you a lot with decisions after that.  Engle
     is -- has said what it said.  It is no less
     than what it says.
          Cigarettes that were made were defective;
     that they did conceal; that they did conspire;
     and that they were negligent.
          And then you simply have to say:  And did that matter?  Did that matter to Mr. O'Hara?
     Would that have made a difference?
          And if the answer is it would have
     mattered, then the answer to every question is
     yes.
          When I started this case, when we started
     this case, you heard them get up and say this
     is about Mr. O'Hara.
          Well, I want to kind of end up about this
     with Mr. O'Hara:  You know, sometimes we speak
     a shorthand when we try to summarize a person's
     life after the fact.  It's like an obituary.
          Born in 1945.  Quit school to join the
     United States Air Force, 1963.  Retired,
     honorable discharged, and decorated for heroism
     and devotion to duty, 1993.  Died a few weeks
     after his 50th birthday, 1996, leaving behind a
     loving wife of nearly 28 years, and three
     children, a close family who loved him well.
          That's what this is about.  He was a
     strong-enough man to do everything.  He got his
     education; he was a great soldier, a great
     father, great family man.  But there is nobody
     too strong that they can't be brought down by
     one thing:  He had a weakness for and was addicted to cigarettes.  And even then he
     overcame, but he overcame too late.
          I want to show the last -- this is the
     graph I wish we were looking at.  This is the
     graph that could have happened.  This is --
     this map, this chart in the way that it could
     have been.
          That's the way it is.  This is the way it
     should have been and it could have been if they
     had just had the courage.  That's when he was a
     boy.  If they had done it when they knew that
     it caused cancer.  If they had done it, and
     they knew it was addicted --
          MR. MONDE:  Your Honor, your Honor.
          MR. SMITH:  -- that could have been the
     curve.
          THE COURT:  Please approach.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and
     the following proceedings were held in open
     court:)
          MR. MONDE:  There is no evidence of that.
     It's rank speculation to manipulate that graph
     that way.  It is rank speculation.  There is
     absolutely no evidence.
          THE COURT:  Thank you. MR. SMITH:  It is legitimate based on the
     evidence that we have, based on what happened
     when they did get more information in the
     1990s.  That simply is showing what could have
     happened, that decline could have happened if
     they would have told the truth.
          MR. MONDE:  Let's show what actually
     happened instead of rank speculation.
          THE COURT:  All right.  The portion of the
     chart which was manipulated to draw an
     artificial line down, that is the part that I
     think goes to the point of speculation.
          What you did show and what you argued is
     perfectly legitimate, that once the information
     came out, it went down.  That's fine, arguing
     within the bounds of the evidence that was
     presented.
          The other, we assume maybe, but that's not
     going to be good enough.  At this point in
     time, I will simply ask the jury to disregard
     the last graph.  Thank you.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and
     the following proceedings were held in open
     court:)
          THE COURT:  Members of the jury, the last graph that was placed up for your view, I'm
     simply going to ask you to disregard that.  And
     that shall take no place and not be considered
     by you in your deliberations.  Thank you.
          Mr. Smith, you may continue.  You have two
     minutes remaining.
          MR. SMITH:  I know.
          This is the graph I will show you now, and
     this is the line, if I had a yellow marker, I
     would be making.  That's what could have
     happened.
          What is important about the yellow line?
     Because when the yellow line turns, the red
     line will follow it.  And any time it could
     have turned down, any time they could have told
     the truth, any time they could have revealed
     what they knew and what they were hiding, this
     line could have turned down.
          That line represents human beings.  That
     line is a line right out here with Garry O'Hara
     and a whole lot of people like him.  That's
     what this case is about.
          You know, there is an old saying:  In
     everything, there is a day of reckoning.  It
     may take a long time, it may take 20 years, it may take longer than 20 years, but reckoning
     comes around for what you've done.
          Today is the day of reckoning for RJ
     Reynolds for what they did to Garry O'Hara, his
     generation and his family.
          We commend this to your justice.
     Mrs. O'Hara, thank you.
