          MR. MONDE:  If it please the Court,
     Mrs. O'Hara, Counsel.  Ladies and gentlemen.
          First, I want to say thank you.  Thank you
     for your time.  Thank for your attention.
     Thank you for your patience.  And we had to
     deal with legal matters in front of the Court.
     Your service here today is very important.
     Thank you.
          As I told you in opening, this case,
     although you will hear and you did hear a lot
     of evidence, it really boils down to something
     simple.  It is about one smoker, and one smoker
     only: Garry O'Hara.  And that is what we are
     going to focus on.
          Mr. O'Hara, as you know, quit smoking in
     1981, cold turkey.  No withdrawal.  And he
     never picked up another cigarette.
          Now, Mr. O'Hara was a responsible,
     hard-working man.  He served our country for 30
     years in the Air Force.  He started as an
     airman basic, and rose all the way through the ranks to that highest enlisted man post.
          While doing that, somehow he found time to
     get a college degree, earning a bachelor of
     science.  He accomplished his missions, and he
     achieved his goals at work, at home, and when
     the time was right for him, when it came time
     to quit smoking.
          Now, look, by all accounts, Garry O'Hara
     was a good, man, a good father, a good soldier,
     and a good husband.
          It would be human nature for you to feel
     sympathy towards Mrs. O'Hara and her family for
     their loss, but Judge Jones will tell you that
     under the law, you cannot base your decision
     here in the Court on sympathy.
          Can we see that, please?
          This will be final instruction 27:  In
     reaching your verdict, do not let bias,
     sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or other
     sentiment for or against any party influence
     your decision.
          Now, remember back in voir dire, jury
     selection, you all were sitting out there in
     the audience, and one question I asked, I asked
     if anyone had a doubt or concern about their ability to set aside feelings of sympathy and
     decide the case just on the evidence and the
     law, please raise your hand.
          I told you that because Mr. O'Hara died of
     cancer.  His loved ones would come in and talk
     about his final days, and I asked, please raise
     your hand if you have any question or doubt
     about being able to set aside sympathy and just
     decide the case on the facts.
          And you all did not raise your hand.
     Maybe others did, but you didn't.
          And that -- that commitment is part of
     your solemn bond and your solemn oath that you
     took when you swore to be jurors, not to let
     sympathy influence your decision.
          And this is a Court of law.  And as you
     have heard, the Plaintiff is seeking millions
     of dollars.  And under our law, the Plaintiff
     has the burden of proof on many issues.  And I
     will explain to you why the evidence in this
     case does not show that she's met her burden.
          And your job, your job will soon be to
     decide the case based on the facts and law, and
     based on the evidence about Mr. O'Hara and his
     life and the choices that he did make. Now, the Engle class action that you have
     heard about, heard about it in closing, heard
     about it in opening, heard about it in the jury
     selection, that is over.  This case is not
     about other smokers or about tobacco companies
     in general.
          You will get the verdict form in a few
     minutes.  Notice, when you look at it, look for
     this when you get it, all of the questions are
     about Garry O'Hara, not a class of smokers or
     tobaccos in general.
          I expected that -- I said this in opening,
     I expected that the Plaintiffs would present a
     lot of evidence about things that just didn't
     have anything to do with Garry O'Hara.
          And you heard hours and hours of testimony
     and saw a lot of documents, a lot of ideas from
     Reynolds and other tobacco companies; and many
     of them, many of those documents that you saw,
     they were from a time before Mr. O'Hara was
     born, and many were from a time after he quit
     smoking.
          And I asked you to please ask, when you
     saw those documents, and I ask you again when
     you look at the evidence back in the jury room, ask yourself:  What does his have to do with
     Garry O'Hara?
          You heard about organizations that
     Mr. O'Hara never heard of.  You saw documents
     from companies, Philip Morris and others that
     aren't in this courtroom, and you heard about
     things that people wrote and said.
          MR. SMITH:  May I approach?
          THE COURT:  Approach, please.
          (Thereupon, the following proceedings were
     had at sidebar:)
          MR. SMITH:  Your Honor, objection.  Your
     Honor, that is a misstatement of law for two
     reasons.  Number 1, RJ Reynolds, Brown &
     Williams and American Tobacco, you also
     instructed they are here, and you also gave an
     instruction that they were responsible, every
     co-conspirator, talking about Philip Morris.
     The co-conspirators, they are here.  You can't
     say that.
          MR. MONDE:  I said that they saw documents
     from companies that are not in the courtroom,
     including Philip Morris, Liggett & Myers and
     other examples.  It's not a member of the
     conspiracy. THE COURT:  Okay.  I understand -- I
     understand that this is the beginning of this
     statement, okay?  And not his conclusion.  And
     so his preparatory statement that they did hear
     from things, if it appears that he's going to
     be denying the agreement theory, that they
     can't find that -- then I -- you can revisit
     it.  I don't find that to the case.
          MR. MONDE:  I assure the Court that I'm
     not going there.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and
     the following proceedings were held in open
     court:)
          MR. MONDE:  Ready?
          As I was saying, you saw documents from
     companies that aren't in the courtroom.  You
     heard about things that people wrote and said
     that never reached Mr. O'Hara, things that did
     not influence his smoking decisions.
          Make no mistake, the testimony, the
     documents that were presented to you, much of
     it was done for the purpose of getting you
     angry, getting you upset, distracting you from
     the issue in this case about Garry O'Hara. In spite of all of those documents that
     they showed you, our country has decided that
     cigarettes are legal.  They are legal to make.
     They are legal to sell.  And they are legal to
     advertise.
          This case is not about whether people
     should smoke cigarettes.  It is not about
     whether smoking can cause disease.  It can.  It
     is not about whether smoking can be addictive.
     It can.
          There may be other smokers out there who
     did not know about the risks of smoking.  There
     may be other smokers out there that tried and
     tried desperately to stop smoking, but never
     were able to succeed.
          There may be other smokers out there who
     were tortured about their smoking, that hated
     their smoking, or continued to smoke because
     they relied on statements that they heard by
     tobacco companies.
          This is not that case.
          Now, before I get to the verdict form, let
     me talk about those Engle findings briefly.
          There is no debate that none of those
     findings tell you how to answer the questions that you will need to answer about Garry
     O'Hara.  And the Judge instructed you on that.
          Those findings do not establish that
     Mr. O'Hara was a member of the class.  Those
     findings cannot be used to help establish that
     he was a member of the class.
          That is jury instruction 9.  Right there.
          They -- those findings, those findings --
     you can take that down.  Thank you, Will.
          Those findings did not establish that
     Mr. O'Hara had primary lung cancer.  They don't
     establish that Mr. O'Hara was addicted.  They
     don't establish that any addiction to
     cigarettes was a legal cause of Mr. O'Hara's
     cancer.  And they don't establish that
     Mr. O'Hara relied on any statement by a tobacco
     company.
          So let me turn to the verdict form.  The
     first question:  Did Garry O'Hara have primary
     lung cancer?
          And we have talked about what that means.
     Did his cancer start in his lung?  Or some
     place else?
          The Plaintiff has the burden of proving to
     you that his cancer started in the lung.  It is not Reynolds' burden to prove where it started.
     It is Plaintiff's burden to prove it started in
     the lung.
          Now, they spent a lot of time during the
     trial on this issue.  They brought you four
     witnesses.  And we brought Dr. Sowers.  But
     remember, it is not the number of witnesses
     called that matters.
          We presented our evidence through the
     cross-examination of the Plaintiff's witnesses,
     just as I told you that we would do in opening.
          The facts that came out in
     cross-examination, those are our witnesses.
          And remember Dr. Sider.  I had those big
     large boards because I wanted to walk him
     through all of the -- those reports.  Not just
     some, all of them.  And we did that.
          And we respected your time by not calling
     additional witnesses that just would have said
     the same thing.
          Here is why Plaintiff has not carried her
     burden on this first question.
          Reason one:  There is no sign of cancer --
     there was no sign of cancer in Mr. O'Hara's
     lung. Let's start with the radiology: the
     x-rays, the CTs.
          Now, Dr. Sider admitted, for a
     radiologist, the answer is on the film.  Now,
     he tried to say, well, I was just talking about
     a different case.
          That's not what he said.  He said, I'm a
     radiologist.  My expertise, the skill that I
     bring to the table, is looking at these films,
     the images, and seeing things that people not
     trained to do what I do cannot see.
          The answer is in the film.  But there are
     no films here.
          Dr. Sider told you that his opinion was
     based on what he called radiographic
     appearance, and then he had to admit, well, I
     didn't have any films to look at to tell you
     about radiographic appearance.
          So what we do have are the reports of the
     radiologist, the one radiologist who did look
     at the films when they were still available,
     Colonel James Watson.
          And those were the boards that I went
     through with you.
          Dr. Sider had to admit that there was no discernable visual nodule in the lung.  In
     plain English, it wasn't there.
          Dr. Watson looked at the chest x-ray -- do
     you remember that was June 13th, and then the
     CT report, June 14th?
          He looked at those films, and he noted
     some things along the trachea.  He had an
     enlarged right hilar node.  All of that was in
     the area outside of the lung, between the
     lungs.  Dr. Watson's report says something
     about a nodule, lesion, tumor in the lung.
          And Dr. Ledbetter, Dr. Strauss and
     Dr. Marsh, they each admitted they are not
     radiologists.  They rely on the radiologists to
     interpret the films, and they did not disagree
     with Dr. Watson's report.
          Here is what Dr. Ledbetter said:
     Paratracheal mass, not in the lung.  Hilar
     node, not in the lung.
          Neither of those findings by Dr. Watson
     showed primary cancer in the lung.
          Dr. Marsh:  Hilar node, not in the lung.
     Hilar node, not the primary site, not where the
     cancer started.
          And he said:  None of the radiology reports identify a lung tumor.
          Dr. Ledbetter, when he was looking at the
     films back in 1995, June 19th, 1995, what did
     he write?  What did he write?  Lungs are clear.
     Lungs are clear.
          And then there was another x-ray.
     Remember, after they -- they did a biopsy
     procedure, and this is July 25, and
     Dr. Loughlin read that.
          What does he say?  The lungs are clear.
          And I remember what I asked Dr. Sider.  I
     said:  Dr. Sider, given your background and
     training, if this radiologist, Loughlin, had
     seen something in the lung, a nodule, tumor,
     something suspicious for cancer, would you have
     expected him to put that in his report?
          You remember his answer.  He said:  Yes.
          It's not there.
          The answer is in the film.  And the
     radiologist who reviewed the films never
     identified anything in the lungs.
          And they agreed with the radiology
     reports, except for Dr. Sider.  Remember, he
     wanted to rewrite Colonel Watson's CT report.
     He wanted to say -- the witness who says that the answer is in the film wanted to rewrite it
     to say that that description of the
     paratracheal mass meant there was a mass in the
     lung.
          He wanted to say, after saying the answer
     is in the film, that he was right and the guy
     who actually did see the film was wrong.
          Please consider that, the credibility of
     that testimony, when you're dealing with this
     first question.
          And then the pathology.  Remember, the
     pathologist is the doctor who looks at material
     under the microscope.
          And several of Plaintiff's witnesses told
     you that pathology samples are often able to
     identify the primary site of the cancer.
          Not here.
          Just like there were no films to show you,
     there was no pathology samples to show you.
     Just like the radiology, we have to rely on the
     reports written by the pathologist at the time.
          We have two of them.  Dr. Elliott at
     Eglin, he reviewed the pathology under the
     microscope, and he could not determine in this
     case where the primary location was.  Origin is uncertain, but would consider GI tract, lung
     and urogenital tract.
          The next page.  That's okay.
          And I'm not going to play games with you
     that he listed GI tract first and lung second.
     For one thing, the AFIP report that we are
     going to get to in a moment, they reversed
     those.
          But the important thing in this situation,
     the pathology could not identify the primary
     site of the cancer.
          And, again, it's Plaintiff's burden to
     prove it was the lung.  Dr. Elliott's report
     does not help Plaintiff carry the burden.
          You didn't hear anybody disagree with
     Dr. Elliott's report.  In fact, what did
     Dr. Ledbetter do, the oncologist, when he got
     this?  He sent it up to the AFIP, the Armed
     Forces Institute of Pathology.  He wanted to
     know if they could use their expertise to see
     if they could tell where the cancer started.
          And what happened?  Well, it was reviewed
     by the AFIP.  And remember Dr. Sider?  Remember
     what they told you about the Armed Forces
     Institute?  Several of the other doctors had described it as a world-renowned institution.
     But Dr. Sider, he went one step further, and
     remember, he had worked there, he said that
     AFIP is the arbiter of all things pathology.
          And the arbiter of all things pathology
     brought all of their know-how, all of their
     expertise, to the question:  Can we tell where
     Mr. O'Hara's cancer started from this pathology
     sample?  Their answer was no.
          The same possibilities: lung or GI tract.
          And, again, no witness disagreed with that
     pathology report.
          Now, everyone is in agreement that the
     cell type was adenocarcinoma.  That is
     important, because adenocarcinoma, as several
     of the doctors explained, not just Dr. Sowers,
     on cross-examination several of the doctors
     explained that there are several places along
     the GI tract where adenocarcinoma can start.
          Now, this is important.  The Plaintiff's
     witnesses, their medical witnesses, they
     explained that there were additional tests that
     could have been done to determine the primary
     site of the cancer.  And they explained that
     those tests were not done. And they were not done because it would
     not have mattered to the care and treatment of
     Mr. O'Hara at that point.  And we don't argue
     with that.
          There was no reason to put Mr. O'Hara
     through additional tests that weren't going to
     make a difference in his care and treatment.
     We don't criticize that.  In fact, we are the
     ones that brought that out on
     cross-examination.
          But now we are in a Court of law, and
     Plaintiff has the burden, and the fact that
     those tests were not done is additional reason
     that Plaintiff has not met the burden in this
     courtroom.
          What about Dr. Ledbetter?  He saw
     Mr. O'Hara for one time, one hour.  And in his
     report, he wrote probably lung cancer, and if
     lung cancer, and he admitted that those words
     lack certainty.
          And his actions speak louder or echoed his
     words, because what did he do?  He's the one
     that sent that pathology up to the Armed Forces
     Institute.  He wasn't sure.
          But 20 years later, Plaintiff's counsel contacted him, and he spent more time meeting
     with the lawyers than he did ever seeing
     Mr. O'Hara.
          And he told you he didn't recall
     Mr. O'Hara.  He admitted that all of this
     testimony was based solely on the medical
     records, those same medical records that led
     him to use these words reflecting uncertainty
     20 years ago, but 20 years later, now he's
     100 percent absolutely certain.
          That is the same man who conceded that
     there is no evidence of any actual cancer in
     Mr. O'Hara's lung.
          Dr. Marsh.  He had just one record.  And
     it says primary lung cancer, sure enough.
          But what is the rest of the story?
     Dr. Marsh saw Mr. O'Hara one time, one hour.
     He never treated Mr. O'Hara.  He generated one
     record, a disability letter.  He admitted that
     this was not a medical record.  It didn't go to
     any doctors.  It is a letter that Mr. O'Hara
     asked him to write to say he was disabled from
     cancer so he could apply for disability.
          And Dr. Marsh admitted that the primary
     location of the cancer of Mr. O'Hara did not matter for the purpose of the letter.  He was
     totally disabled at that point and not curable
     regardless of where the cancer started.
          And Dr. O'Hara -- Dr. O'Hara -- Dr. Marsh
     in his letter said that the lung cancer was
     documented on CT scanning on June 14th, 1995.
     That is the same radiology report that you all
     have seen several times, the same radiology
     report that all of the doctors, including
     Dr. Marsh, say does not show anything in the
     lung.
          Tumor boards.  Heard a lot about those.
     Here are the facts:  There are no records of
     them.  And both Dr. Marsh and Dr. Ledbetter
     conceded that if, in fact, the tumor boards
     discuss Mr. O'Hara's case, it was after the
     documents that they wrote.
          Dr. Kit Kuss.  Now, he's the doctor that
     filled out the death certificate.  And each
     side showed you records from Dr. Kuss.  Some
     say lung cancer, some say widely metastatic
     adenocarcinoma, without identifying a primary
     site.
          But the last record that Mr. O'Hara -- I'm
     sorry, that Dr. Kuss wrote about Mr. O'Hara ways the death certificate.  And it said widely
     metastatic adenocarcinoma.  He did not identify
     this as a lung cancer.  He didn't say where the
     cancer started.
          And if the radiology reports showed cancer
     in the lungs, maybe that omission is not
     important.
          If the pathology report showed that the
     cancer started in the lungs, maybe that
     omission is not important.
          But they didn't, and the omission here
     speaks volumes.
          Not identifying the primary site in that
     death certificate is completely consistent with
     the radiology reports; it is completely
     consistent with the pathology reports; it is
     completely consistent with cancer of unknown
     origin.
          Metastatic pattern or the spread of
     cancer.  We brought you Dr. Sowers.  Now, look,
     he doesn't sit in an ivory tower writing
     articles.  He works every day interpreting
     films of patients with cancer.
          And he told you just how rare it is to
     have a primary lung cancer that has spread to the degree that Mr. O'Hara's spread, but not to
     see anything in the lung.  Three percent, he
     said.
          Dr. Strauss conceded that most cancers of
     unknown primary are poorly differentiated
     adenocarcinoma, which is the cell type
     Mr. O'Hara had.
          And so the question for you is whether
     Plaintiff has carried her burden in proving it
     started in the lung.  And for the reasons I
     have described, the answer should be no.
          And you don't have to decide where the
     cancer started.  You don't have to all agree
     that it started at any of the various places
     that we've shown you through the evidence it
     could have started.
          The question is simply:  Has Plaintiff
     carried her burden that it started in the lung?
          And look at Plaintiff's experts.  They
     can't even agree where the cancer started.
     They can't agree.
          One last point on this question.
     Mr. O'Hara was diagnosed with cancer when he
     was 35 years old, 14 years after he -- 14 years
     after his last cigarette.  And Dr. Strauss agreed that if a smoker quits by age 35 -- I
     may have misspoke.  Let me say that again more
     slowly.
          Mr. O'Hara was diagnosed with his cancer
     14 years after he quit at age 35.
          Now, Dr. Strauss agreed that if a smoker
     quits by age 35, it is unlikely that they ever
     will develop a smoking-related cancer.  He did
     quit at 35.  That's completely consistent with
     Mr. O'Hara never having a tumor visible in the
     lung.
          Now, there are a lot of places that the
     witness has told you this cancer could have
     started, and they didn't look there.  And
     again, we -- we have talked about why.  There
     was no good medical reason to do those tests.
          But where is the one place that those
     doctors did look and look and look?  It was the
     lung.  It was the lung.  And there was nothing
     there.
          So based on the evidence, the answer
     should be no to this first question.
          Now, let's talk about addiction, question
     2:  Was Garry O'Hara addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine?  The answer is no.  And I'm going to talk about why.
          There is no dispute that smoking can be
     addictive and hard to quit for some people.
     The fact that smoking cigarettes can be
     addictive, that has been known for over
     100 years.  You remember the Florida Department
     of Health saying that back in 1906.
          Dr. Cummings admitted that it has been
     known for hundreds of years that nicotine is
     present in tobacco; that it occurs naturally;
     that if you take a tobacco plant from the
     field, chop it up and smoke it, there will be
     nicotine in it.
          Now, there is no dispute, as I said, that
     some smokers are addicted, but this question is
     not about some smokers; it is about Garry
     O'Hara.
          And yet, those first two witnesses,
     Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt, they spent hours and
     hours talking in general terms, generic topics,
     things that don't have to do with Garry O'Hara.
          In fact, I asked somebody to go back and
     check.  Those two witnesses were on the stand
     for five days.  The direct exam of Dr. Cummings
     lasted about nine hours. Do you know how many times Dr. Cummings
     mentioned Mr. O'Hara in that nine hours?
     Seven.  About seven.
          The redirect lasted over an hour.
     Mentioned Mr. O'Hara twice.
          The direct and the redirect exam of
     Dr. Hurt lasted almost five hours, and he
     mentioned Mr. O'Hara five times.
          That's why I said during opening, please
     keep your eye on the ball.  Ask yourself:  How
     does what I'm hearing have to do with
     Mr. O'Hara?
          Now, there are experts.  Some experts that
     come into Court and give you the benefit of
     their expertise in an unbiased way.  No agenda.
     No rooting for one side or the other.  Just my
     opinion, and here are the reasons why.
          Then there is Dr. Cummings.  He's
     testified for 20 years in lawsuits just like
     this.  The last two and a half years, he's
     testified over 144 days.  That's nearly five
     months of time.  Made well over a million
     dollars just since 2009.  He's a self-appointed
     general in the war against tobacco.  He
     admitted that he's rooting for the Plaintiff to win.
          Dr. Cummings taught in the conference we
     told you about.  It's the same conference that
     Dr. Hurt went to.  Remember, Dr. Hurt, he
     showed you or we asked him about that
     PowerPoint presentation that he made, where he
     said the witness' job was not to give up any
     points, and to avoid yes or no answers.
          And I respectfully say he certainly
     practiced what he preached there.
          And you will hear -- you have heard
     already the Court's instruction on the
     believability of witnesses.
          The long story short is that you are
     entitled, in evaluating the believability, the
     credibility, to look at the interest that the
     witness has in the outcome, and there are other
     expressions of bias.
          Well, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt, they
     showed you document after document, and they
     tried to suggest that the only reason people
     smoked is for nicotine, that nicotine controls
     them, prevents them from making choices.
          But remember I told you in opening that we
     would present our evidence through the cross-examination, at least a lot of it.  Let's
     focus briefly at some of the things that they
     said on cross-examination.
          Dr. Hurt agreed that not all smokers are
     addicted.
          Dr. Cummings agreed that there are
     60 million former smokers in this country, more
     than the number of current smokers.
          Dr. Cummings agreed that many of those
     former smokers were addicted and quit anyway.
          Dr. Cummings agreed that anyone can quit
     smoking.  That's what they told every smoker at
     his clinic through his Smart Move pamphlet.
          So let's look at Mr. O'Hara and what we
     know about his smoking, to answer that
     question:  Was he addicted?
          Now, you've seen this.  It's the medical
     record.  It shows that he smoked for 18 years,
     two packs a day.  Started in 1963, the year he
     joined the Air Force.
          There is no evidence -- you heard no
     evidence that Mr. O'Hara wanted to quit or
     tried to quit in the 1960s.  And from the
     1970s, there was ample evidence that Mr. O'Hara
     was able to control his smoking at any time that he chose to, and to quit when he chose to.
          1971.  Remember, we heard the testimony
     about their son Frank.  Mrs. O'Hara goes to the
     doctor.  The doctor says that smoking is bad
     for Frank's lungs and Mr. O'Hara can't smoke
     around Frank inside.
          Mr. O'Hara said, I won't smoke around
     Frank inside.  I won't smoke inside at all
     anymore.
          He didn't disagree with the doctor.  He
     didn't say, I have some doubt or confusion
     about whether smoking can be bad for folks'
     lungs.
          He didn't say, well, I've heard there's
     some doubt or controversy by tobacco companies,
     so no, I'm going to keep smoking inside.
          He didn't say any of that.  He just went
     outside and smoked.  He controlled his smoking.
     He never smoked in the house again.
          And you heard testimony that he would go
     outside in the rain and in the snow to smoke.
          Guess what?  He did that his whole career.
     That was part of his duty at work, was long
     nights on guard.  He smoked outside, smoked to
     stay awake, smoked to relieve the boredom, smoked because it helped him concentrate.
          And remember that I asked Mrs. O'Hara,
     when she explained this to her husband in 1971
     when she came home from the doctors, did he try
     to quit?  The answer was no.
          Now, she testified that later in the
     1970s, he would talk about cutting back and
     quitting.  But actions are what matter.
          And Mr. O'Hara wanted to continue smoking
     at that point in the '70s.  Remember, she told
     you that she never actually saw him try to quit
     smoking that whole 10 years, that whole
     10 years from the doctor's appointment with
     Frank and '81 when he did quit for good:  Even
     during the 10 years, I don't recall anything.
          The person who spent the most time with
     Mr. O'Hara during that decade, the person who
     knew him best, the person who was most
     concerned about his smoking, she told you he
     never tried to quit in the decade of the 1970s.
     She never saw him try to quit in the decade of
     the 1970s.
          And you heard other evidence that, in
     fact, in 1977, Mr. O'Hara quit for at least two
     and a half months when the family was over in Belgium.
          And what happened during that time?  Did
     he go through withdrawal?  Was he irritable?
     Was he unable to concentrate?  Unable to do
     this job at home or at work?  No.  No evidence
     of withdrawal symptoms.
          Now, at some point, after at least two and
     a half months, Mr. O'Hara went back to smoking.
     Mrs. O'Hara told you that she does not know
     when or why.
          And Dr. Hurt told you after two and a half
     months, that nicotine, it's out of the body.
     No nicotine receptors.  Remember that fancy
     animation he showed you?  They're back to
     normal.
          Addiction didn't make him go back to
     smoking after two and a half months.  It was
     his choice.
          And in 1981, at the age of 35, he made the
     choice to quit for good.  And you remember that
     story.  His daughter, Valerie O'Hara, went to
     grab his hand.  He burned her.  He felt
     terrible.  And he said:  You know what?  This
     is it.  I'm done.  I quit.  I promise you, I
     quit. And he kept his promise.  That is Garry
     O'Hara.  He kept that promise.  That is not
     addiction.  It is control.  It is choice.
          And cold turkey.  No cessation aids.  No
     trips to the doctor.  And no withdrawal.
          Again, each of the family members, they
     agreed that when he quit smoking, there was no
     changes in his personality.
          And when he quit smoking in '81, he didn't
     gain weight; he lost it.  Got into running, got
     into shape.
          And Dr. Hurt, he agreed -- remember, I
     asked him those series of questions.  You know,
     did you see evidence of job performance?
     Evidence of depressed mood?  Evidence of sleep
     disturbance?  Difficulty concentrating?
          Those are withdrawal symptoms of an
     addicted smoker.  Not here.  Not here.
          Dreams.  You heard that he dreamt about
     smoking.  But those dreams, they didn't cause
     him to go back to smoking.  Valerie O'Hara
     testified that 10 years later, he was still
     talking about dreaming.  But he didn't smoke.
     He never picked up another cigarette.
          That's control.  That's not addiction. Now, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt told you he
     was addicted, so let's talk a little bit about
     that.
          You will not be given a definition of
     addiction in the instructions that Judge Jones
     gives you.
          You heard from Dr. Cummings and
     Dr. Ticknor that there is no consensus on the
     definition of addiction and that the definition
     has changed.
          You will need to decide based upon the
     evidence what it means to be addicted.  And you
     will need to decide whether the Plaintiff
     carried her burden on that.
          But consider this:  Dr. Hurt acknowledged
     that the DSM is a valid tool.  They use it at
     the Mayo Clinic.  He said:  Well, I didn't use
     it here because I only like to use with people
     that I speak to.
          But Dr. Ticknor explained to you that the
     DSM can be and is used in forensic settings.
     That's like where we are here, provided you
     have other information available.  That's where
     all of those depositions came from.
          And he explained to you how, based on the family's testimony, he provided the information
     that he needed to do that assessment under the
     DSM.
          But ask yourselves this when you think
     about Dr. Hurt:  Why didn't he tell you on
     direct examination that the Mayo Clinic had a
     definition of tobacco addiction?
          Remember he talked at some length and with
     some pride about the Mayo Clinic, No. 1, No. 2,
     in US reports, been around for decades,
     patient-centered approach.
          But he didn't tell you anything about
     their definition of tobacco addiction until we
     asked on cross-examination.
          And Dr. Hurt admitted that the Mayo Clinic
     does have a definition.  They prefer the term
     "dependence" rather "addiction," but he told
     you those things meant the same thing, so we
     asked:  What is the definition?
          Nicotine dependence, also called tobacco
     dependence, is an addiction to tobacco products
     caused by nicotine.
          Nicotine dependence means you cannot stop
     using the substance, even though it's causing
     you harm. Mr. O'Hara could stop.  Mr. O'Hara did
     stop.  Mr. O'Hara never smoked when he had a
     medical condition related to his smoking.  He
     doesn't meet the definition of the Mayo Clinic.
          So what did Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings do?
     Well, they used a two-question test, heaviness
     of Smoking Index.
          Five days of testimony, but when it comes
     to addiction, a two-question test.
          And you know what?  That Heaviness of
     Smoking Index test is not designed to say
     whether a person is addicted or is not
     addicted.  It is designed to tell you how
     heavily they might be addicted.  It assumes
     addiction.  The test assumes addiction.
          You can literally score zero on that test
     and you are deemed addicted.
          How is that going to help you answer the
     question of whether he was addicted or not?
          THE COURT:  Mr. Monde, one hour.
          MR. MONDE:  Now, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt
     talked about smoking and nicotine addiction
     being this hugely complex behavior, and yet
     they boil it down to a two-question test, a
     two-question test that is rigged to give you the answer.  You can't be not addicted under
     that test.
          And what did he score on that, by the way?
     Five or 6, he said.  That meant if you get a 5
     or 6, the person couldn't quit smoking.  It
     would be highly unlikely that they could quit.
          And what do we know here?  He did it.  He
     did it without withdrawal.  He did it cold
     turkey.  He did it without assistance.
          So we brought Dr. Ticknor in yesterday.
     An ivory tower type?  No.  Does he have 50
     articles published?  No.  Is he a member of
     four different organizations?  No.
          He practices medicine.  He deals with
     people and addiction every day, including
     nicotine addiction.
          And when you consider those various
     witnesses, you are just going to have to decide
     what is more important, the number of diplomas
     on that witness' wall or the experience under
     their belt?
          That is Dr. Ticknor.  And he applied that
     DSM, and he walked you through it, those 11
     criteria.
          He told you where he thought Mr. O'Hara's smoking behavior did meet the criteria, and he
     told you where it didn't.  And he showed you
     that rainbow graph, and he showed you why he
     found Mr. O'Hara not addicted.
          And he was cross-examined, but he didn't
     say in that cross-examination that he found
     criteria that he didn't tell you about in
     direct exam.
          And as I said before, there was -- there
     is no evidence that Mr. O'Hara used or needed
     to use any aid to help quitting.
          Now, addicted smokers, heavily addicted
     smokers, those folks can quit, but they need
     aids.
          Now, look, today, we have Chantix, we have
     nicotine patches and gum.  Those weren't
     available.  But there were things like
     hypnosis, group therapy, you could go to the
     doctor.  And folks did back in the '60s and
     '70s, but not Mr. O'Hara.  He was in charge.
     He was not addicted.  He was in control.
          And all of those medical records that you
     patiently watched and looked at, how many said
     Mr. O'Hara is addicted?  Or was addicted?  Not
     a single one. The evidence in this case is that the
     first time someone diagnosed Mr. O'Hara with
     addiction was 34 years, after he gets in this
     litigation.
          Now, what about the fact that Mr. O'Hara
     smoked two packs a day for 18 years?  Isn't
     addiction -- isn't addiction the only thing
     that would explain that?  Absolutely not.
          The evidence is clear.  Not all regular
     smokers, not all daily smokers are addicted.
     Not all two-pack-a-day smokers are addicted.
     The DSM says that about half of regular smokers
     are addicted and half are not.
          And remember what Dr. Hurt told you:
     Nicotine is not the only reason that people
     smoke.  He told you in cross-examination:  Some
     people for the pleasure.
          That was Garry O'Hara.  The evidence is
     clear, Mr. O'Hara was not addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine.
          The next question, if you get there, and I
     don't believe that you should, but if you do,
     it is my only opportunity to talk to you, and
     that is question 3:  Was addiction the legal
     cause of his cancer? The question doesn't ask whether smoking
     caused his cancer; it asks whether addiction
     did.
          Now, a way to think of that question is
     this:  Was Mr. O'Hara so powerfully addicted to
     cigarettes that he was compelled to smoke,
     powerfully addicted to nicotine?  And was he
     unable to quit and prevent his cancer?
          To answer that question, you have to think
     about whether addiction prevents all smokers
     from quitting.  We already know the answer to
     that.  It is no.
          Now, addiction can only be the legal
     cause -- that's the instruction you are going
     to get -- it can only be the legal cause if it
     directly, and in natural and continuous
     sequence, produced or contributed
     substantially -- and I want to focus you on
     that word "substantially" contributed to
     causing his cancer such that but for addiction,
     the cancer would not have occurred.
          Now, Mr. Smith showed you the
     concurring-cause language farther down, but
     that doesn't change the fact that addiction
     must substantially cause the cancer. Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt, as you saw,
     they both agreed that there are 60 million
     former smokers in this country, and the vast
     majority would have been addicted as they
     defined it.
          Addiction didn't prevent those people from
     quitting.  Millions and millions of Americans
     quit in the '60s, '70s and '80s, and when
     Mr. O'Hara decided that's it, I'm putting these
     things down, he did the same.
          And think about that during this time that
     Dr. Hurt was telling you and showing you these
     documents that cigarettes were more addictive,
     and that people couldn't quit them, and that
     Reynolds was making its cigarettes more
     addictive and not telling people that.  All of
     these people quit.  But what is important here
     is that Mr. O'Hara quit.  That didn't keep him
     from quitting.
          It didn't keep him for quitting for over
     two and a half months in 1977.  It didn't keep
     him from quitting forever when he said, I'm
     done.
          Dr. Hurt said:  Well, I mean, only
     3 percent of smokers quit a year. Mr. O'Hara is there.
          So on this question, was Mr. O'Hara so
     powerfully addicted that he was compelled to
     smoke and not able to quit?  Or did he have the
     ability to quit any time?
          Based on what you already know about
     Mr. O'Hara, the answer is clear, he was able to
     quit when he wanted to, and he was completely
     in control of his smoking.
          No one forced Mr. O'Hara to light up a
     cigarette and smoke.  And no one forced
     Mr. O'Hara to light that last cigarette and put
     them away.  He made that choice.  Those were
     his choices, not addiction.
          Those choices were the substantial -- the
     only substantial cause of his smoking-related
     injury, any injury that he had.
          Now, there is no evidence that the
     cigarettes that Mr. O'Hara were smoking were
     any different from any other cigarette on the
     market.  No evidence that his brain was
     affected differently from any other smoker who
     quit.  No evidence that he was exposed to
     different advertising or different company
     statements when all of those folks quit. In fact, there is no evidence that he saw
     or heard anything from RJ Reynolds.  Every
     smoker is responsible for their behavior.  Even
     Dr. Cummings admitted that a smoker has to
     choose to try to quit.
          And Mrs. O'Hara, she testified that it was
     Mr. O'Hara who needed to decide for himself
     when he was ready to quit.  Mr. O'Hara was
     fully in charge of that decision.
          Now, Mr. O'Hara, as I said, the evidence
     shows he didn't want -- that he wanted to smoke
     until he quit in 1981 when he had that event
     with his daughter.
          And just like that, he joined all of those
     other millions of Americans who quit.  No
     withdrawal.  He made the choice.  He followed
     through on it.
          Addiction did not control Mr. O'Hara.
     Mr. O'Hara was in control of his smoking.  Your
     answer, if you get to No. 3, should be no.
          Let me turn to question 4, please:  Was
     smoking cigarettes for which Reynolds has legal
     liability a legal cause of his cancer?
          Now, you heard testimony that Mr. O'Hara
     smoked five brands, including Marlboro. Reynolds does not make Marlboro.  Reynolds is
     not responsible for Marlboro.
          Plaintiff can't carry her burden by
     showing that Marlboro was the cause of
     Mr. O'Hara's injuries.
          And there was testimony about those five
     brands, but she never was able to tell you how
     much or when she bought those brands.
          We went through that chart.  Remember I
     had that chart of the different places where
     they lived?  And she wasn't able to say how
     much or when.
          And that's not surprising, because she
     wasn't buying brands based on the brand; she
     was buying based on price.  Mr. O'Hara never
     asked her to buy any of those brands.
          Reliance?  Reliance?  By Mr. O'Hara?  He
     didn't do most of his buying of cigarettes; she
     did.  And the few that he bought, she doesn't
     know why or what.  Cigarettes were cigarettes
     to him.
          Now, they -- Plaintiff's counsel talked
     about filtered, the illusion of filtration.
     Some people, he says, were induced to smoke
     filters, thinking that they were safer. Well, while all of that was going on,
     according to Plaintiff's counsel, what was
     Mr. O'Hara doing?  He was smoking filtered and
     unfiltered, interchangeably.  There is no
     reliance.
          Your answer on No. 4 should be no.
          Now, the next two questions on the verdict
     form, 5 and 6, ask about fault and percentage
     of responsibility.  This is important.
          On this question, No. 6 and 5, you are not
     comparing conduct in general.  The question is
     not about a comparison of conduct in general.
     It is a comparison of conduct that was a legal
     cause of Mr. O'Hara's cancer.
          Reynolds cannot be assigned fault for
     actions that were not a legal cause of his
     cancer.
          And so we talk about those documents.  The
     evidence is that Mr. O'Hara was a willing
     smoker.  He made the choice to start smoking in
     '63.  Reynolds didn't force him to start
     smoking.  We don't know what brands he smoked
     then.  Mr. O'Hara made that decision.
          And remember what Dr. Cummings said:  Even
     before Mr. O'Hara started, smoking was a normal lifestyle choice.
          And then in 1966, two, three years after
     he started, every pack of cigarettes that he
     smoked carried the warning required by
     Congress.
          And he smoked from 1960 -- from that
     warning in 1966, and every pack he smoked until
     he quit in '81 carried the warning.
          We know from what we talked about the
     visit, from Frank's doctor, he knew that
     smoking could damage his lung.
          We know in 1977 he made that decision to
     quit, and then in 1981, he made another choice
     to quit for good.
          And we respect Mr. O'Hara's choice to
     smoke, and we don't criticize him for that.  We
     are not criticizing him for that choice.  Those
     are his decisions.  He had right the make them.
     With the right to choose comes responsibility.
          Now, those company documents they showed
     you, and they try to suggest that that beared
     on the percentages of fault.
          There was no evidence in this case --
     think about it, think about it, there was no
     evidence or testimony in this case that Mr. O'Hara ever saw anything from a tobacco
     company, much less made decisions based on it.
     Again, he didn't even buy most of this
     cigarettes.
          He never asked -- think about this:  The
     testimony is that he never once asked his wife
     to buy a particular brand.
          Mrs. O'Hara couldn't make smoking
     decisions for him.  Reynolds couldn't make
     those smoking decisions.  He alone.
          And she has admitted, and we saw counsel
     here today admit some responsibility.  He was
     responsible in his career.  He was responsible
     at home.  He made those choices.  Not in
     reliance on things that companies said.
          And on No. 6, I submit the answer should
     be 100 percent responsibility for Mr. O'Hara.
     That is what he assumed in his responsibilities
     at work.
          Let's go to question 7 and 8:  Concealment
     and conspiracy to conceal.  I'm going to deal
     with those at the same time because they're
     based on the same core facts.
          The burden that Plaintiff has assumed in
     this case is to prove to you that Mr. O'Hara developed a smoking-related cancer because
     Reynolds either concealed information from him
     or agreed to conceal information not otherwise
     known or available.
          Here is what these questions are really
     asking you:  Did Garry O'Hara develop cancer
     because he did not know that smoking was
     dangerous?  Because Reynolds hid it from him?
          That's what these questions ask about.
          The answer has to be no.
          He knew that smoking was dangerous, and he
     chose to smoke anyway.
          Now, material.  Mr. Smith said that means,
     in simple English, did it matter?
          He showed you documents that Mr. O'Hara
     did not see.  But did it matter?  No.  Because
     Mr. O'Hara knew enough that smoking was
     dangerous, and he chose to smoke anyway.
          And Dr. Cummings, he testified to you that
     smoking and health, it is one of the most
     widely covered issues in the media.
          And why is -- why does all of this
     evidence about what was in the public domain
     matter?  It is this, it is this, folks:  You
     cannot conceal what is known. Yes, Reader's Digest was the No. 1
     magazine in the country for decades.  Yes,
     Reader's Digest was a magazine that the O'Haras
     got.  Yes, Reader's Digest was a magazine that
     Mr. O'Hara read.  And they covered decade by
     decade, long before Mr. O'Hara started smoking,
     the dangers of smoking, the fact that you could
     get cancer from smoking.
          All of this widespread publicity, let's --
     let's look at the 1957 clip, please, from
     Surgeon General Burney.
          What did the Surgeon General say was the
     effect of this smoking coverage by newspapers
     and magazines?
          "Our position is that we have informed the
     public through the excellent coverage of the
     press, radio and TV."
          Dr. Heller, from the National Cancer
     Institute, said the same thing.
          But it didn't stop there.  1964, within
     months, maybe weeks of when Mr. O'Hara started
     smoking, front page news.  Biggest public
     health story, Dr. Cummings said, including
     coverage here in Pensacola.
          And the Air Force.  The Air Force was educating its airman even before the Surgeon
     General came out in '64.
          Remember the three articles I read to you,
     the articles talking about what the Air Force
     was doing, the Air Force talking about the
     posters that were being put up at the base
     exchanges?  All of that information was out
     there.
          Now, as I said, does that mean that
     Mr. O'Hara knew all that Reynolds knew?  No.
          But look at the question.  It has to be
     material.  It has to matter.  He knew, and he
     knew when he quit for good.
          Advertising.  Plaintiff spent a lot of
     time talking about advertising.  There is no
     evidence in this case that Mr. O'Hara bought
     any cigarettes because of advertising, nor
     Mrs. O'Hara for that matter.  She explained to
     you that she wanted to buy the cheapest
     cigarette available because she didn't want to
     spend any more money on it.
          And in order to be a legal cause of
     cancer, Plaintiff must show that Mr. O'Hara
     reasonably relied to his detriment on
     statements by Reynolds. Now, Mr. Smith showed you part of the
     instruction about Plaintiff not needing to
     provide direct evidence, that you could infer
     reliance.  You can infer reliance.
          Keep reading.  The instruction goes on to
     say:  You can infer only if the evidence as a
     whole supports such an inference.
          The evidence does not support that
     inference.  The evidence is that Mr. O'Hara
     knew the risks, saw the warnings on the packs,
     made the decision to smoke.
          Mr. O'Hara -- we heard a lot about The
     Tobacco Institute, the TIRC, the Council for
     Tobacco Research.  No evidence that Mr. O'Hara
     saw or relied on anything they said.  There was
     no evidence that he mentioned any statements by
     Reynolds.  Not once.
          I mean, there is no evidence that he was
     smoking particular brands because of things
     that they were saying.  He didn't ask for
     brands by name, and he didn't care what she
     brought home.
          Now, Plaintiffs showed you documents and
     interview clips from people like Anne Browder
     in 1983; Ed Horrigan, 1984; Surgeon General Koop in '88; the CEOs in Congress.
          Folks, those were all long after
     Mr. O'Hara quit smoking.  The Flintstones.  The
     ads with celebrities.  Not one piece of
     evidence that Mr. O'Hara saw those, relied on
     those, mentioned those.
          Now, Plaintiff spent a lot of time talking
     about manipulation of nicotine.  What was
     happening with Mr. O'Hara during the same time
     period?  He was quitting smoking for good.
          They showed a document, a so-called secret
     document that actually established that levels
     in -- nicotine levels in cigarettes were going
     down.  From 1960 to 1963, to 1972, nicotine
     levels were going down.
          And Dr. Hurt showed you a few documents
     from Dr. Teague suggesting an increase in
     nicotine level.  But on cross-examination,
     Dr. Hurt was forced to admit that at the same
     time Reynolds was looking at that, members of
     the public health community were -- who had no
     connection to Reynolds, were advocating that
     Reynolds look at a cigarette with a medium
     nicotine content and lower tar as a way to try
     to make a safer cigarette. Dr. Teague's 1972 memo:  Nicotine was the
     sine qua non of smoking.  Dr. Hurt told you
     that that meant nicotine was essential,
     nicotine was essential to smoking.
          Look what Reader's Digest said 22 years
     earlier:  Nicotine is the essential ingredient
     in tobacco.
          They showed you documents about marketing
     to youth.  What does that have to do with
     Mr. O'Hara?
          There is no evidence that he started
     smoking when he went into the Air Force because
     of advertisements.  You heard his best friend
     say that folks in Vietnam, he said there was
     one person that he knew that didn't smoke.
     What does that have to do with Mr. O'Hara?
          They showed you documents from the 1920s
     before Mr. O'Hara was born.  Those didn't
     affect smoking decisions.
          And we showed with Dr. Cummings, that when
     it came to the credibility of sources of
     information -- I won't go through all of these
     that we showed with Dr. Cummings, but people
     were taking their information about smoking
     from groups like the American Cancer Society and the government, not the tobacco companies.
          So back to the verdict form, please.
          Seven and 8.  There is no evidence that
     Mr. O'Hara reasonably relied on statements by
     Reynolds, or any tobacco company for that
     matter, or that Reynolds concealed or conspired
     to conceal information that but for the
     concealment, Mr. O'Hara would not have known
     and would not have developed cancer.
          So I'm close to wrapping up, but before I
     do, I need to address some of the last
     questions on the verdict form, and I want to
     spend a moment on damages.
          For the reasons I've told you, I
     respectfully believe that the Plaintiff has not
     carried her burden of proof that the law
     imposes here.  And while I need to talk about
     damages because it's my job, I -- I say, again,
     I don't think that she's proven her case, and I
     think the evidence -- it doesn't matter what I
     think, the evidence doesn't prove that.
          But one of the strengths of our jury
     system is we put folks like yourselves in the
     jury box, and we ask you all to use your common
     sense to evaluate the evidence. Now, you heard from Dr. Raffa last week,
     and he gave estimates of Mr. O'Hara's financial
     loss, and he told you that before Mr. O'Hara
     stopped smoking -- he told that before
     Mr. O'Hara stopped working, he was making about
     $37,000 a year.
          And here, they are asking for $10 million.
     It is an extraordinary amount of money, and I
     have thought about a way to try to put that in
     context.
          At $37,000 a year, it would take 270 years
     working to earn that money.
          Now, Mr. -- Dr. Raffa told you that he
     spoke to Mrs. O'Hara, who told him they had
     planned to retire early, at age 55.  He gave an
     estimate of lost wages and support of about
     $500,000.
          Now, soon the Judge will send you out
     after he's instructed you that any award of
     damages must be fair and just in light of the
     evidence.  And there may be cases, as I've
     said, where the evidence makes it clear that
     damages are warranted.  That's not here.
          Cases where the evidence shows the smoker
     was heavily addicted, cases that show that the smoker could not quit, cases that show that no
     matter how hard he tried or she tried, he could
     not quit, cases that show that the smoker was
     unaware of the risks of smoking, cases that
     show that the smoker kept smoking even with a
     health-related condition.  That's not this
     case.
          You have heard the evidence.  That is not
     this case.  But if you do determine that
     damages are appropriate, I respectfully submit
     to you that the damages should be in the
     hundreds of thousands of dollars, not 10 and 12
     and 14 million.
          Use your common sense.  Use your common
     sense.
          Now, there is a question about entitlement
     to punitive damages.  It is the last question
     on the verdict form.  And they are asking you
     to answer yes to the question of whether
     punitive damages are warranted.
          Now, if you answer no to the other
     questions preceding, you don't get to that.
     And for all of the reasons that I have talked
     about, I don't think the evidence allows you to
     get here.  I don't think that the burden of proof has been carried by the Plaintiff.
          But if you do get this far, the damages
     that you award, if you choose to award them,
     have fully compensated Mr. O'Hara.
          Punitive damages are not about
     compensation or making someone whole.  Punitive
     damages are about more money, more money that
     would go not to the cancer society, not to stop
     smoking prevention, to Mrs. O'Hara.
          And Judge Jones instructed you, remember
     he told you the burden of proof on entitlement
     here is different:  It is clear and convincing
     evidence.  That means the evidence must be
     clear.  It means the evidence must convince you
     without hesitation.
          The Engle findings themselves do not
     establish entitlement to punitive damages.  The
     decision is you, based on the evidence in this
     case, if you do say yes, as the Court
     instructed, we will come back for another part
     of the trial, where the Plaintiff will you ask
     you for more money.
          But for all the reasons that we have
     talked about, the answer should be no.  There
     is just no connection between those documents that the Plaintiff showed you and Mr. O'Hara.
     There has to be a tie between that evidence and
     Mr. O'Hara for you to check yes on that
     question, and it's just not there.
          And consider this, you heard about the
     Council for Tobacco Research, the CTR.  The CTR
     no longer exists.  It was not perfect.  It
     doesn't exist any more.  They funded millions
     of dollars in research.  That was undisputed by
     Dr. Cummings.  Over 6,000 publications.  Some
     were on basic research.  Dr. Cummings admitted
     that research still related to the issue of
     smoking and health.
          And that research you heard was done by
     highly respected scientists.  The CTR didn't --
     didn't pay for folks that got their diploma
     under a shade tree.  These were
     Nobel-prize-winning people that they funded,
     highly respected scientists at highly respected
     institutions.
          The Tobacco Institute, that is gone.  It
     was disbanded in 1998.  All of the people that
     wrote the documents that they showed you -
     Dr. Teague, Dr. Rodgman, Dr. Senkus,
     Mr. Johnston, Mr. Horrigan -- they have either all passed away or they have not been at
     Reynolds for more than two decades.
          Today, Reynolds publicly admits that
     smoking causes disease and that nicotine is
     addictive.  And all of those documents, all of
     those documents that they showed you during
     that five days of Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings, it
     is all known to the government.  And the
     government has decided that cigarettes are
     legal.
          We talked about Premier.  Remember
     Premier, we talked about it with Dr. Cummings,
     an attempt to make a cigarette by Reynolds that
     delivered less tar and that smokers would
     smoke.
          Unfortunately, the public didn't like it,
     and the public health community wanted to stop
     it before it could get started.  But Reynolds
     was trying.  Reynolds is now regulated by the
     Federal Food and Drug Administration, the FDA.
     Been that way since 2009 under the Tobacco
     Control Act.
          Reynolds is a different company today,
     operating under different regulations and
     guidelines than the company that they were, even back from the documents that they showed
     you.
          And so if you get to this last question,
     the answer should be no.
          I appreciate your patience.  I have
     explained to you the best that I can why the
     evidence in this case -- why the evidence in
     this case justifies a verdict in favor of
     Reynolds.  And so I want to leave you with one
     final thought.
          Plaintiff has the burden of proof on her
     claims.  In order to meet that burden of proof,
     you have to do more than put on a slide show
     with Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt showing
     documents that had nothing to do with Garry
     O'Hara and his smoking decisions.
          As I said at the start of opening, this
     case is about Garry O'Hara and the choices he
     made.  As I told you, he was an accomplished
     man.  He met his goals, and when he was
     motivated to quit smoking, he quit.
          Now, Mr. Smith will get another chance to
     talk to you after I go sit down.  I don't get
     another chance to talk to you.  It doesn't mean
     I wouldn't want to respond.  But those are the rules.
          And so I simply ask this:  If you hear
     things that I haven't had a chance to respond
     to, please ask:  Well, what would Mr. Monde
     have said in response to that?  Ask that now.
     Ask that when you go back to the deliberation
     room.
          Last thought before I sit down.  Despite
     everything that the Plaintiff has shown you,
     even Dr. Cummings agreed that cigarettes are
     legal and that in the United States of America,
     smokers like Garry O'Hara are given the
     freedom, the freedom to choose to smoke or not.
          Even after all of the documents that you
     have seen in this case, that is a right to
     choose that our country still honors.
          All of that information about the risks of
     smoking, all of that information about the
     addictive nature of smoking, some folks still
     smoke, and that is their right.  And it was
     Mr. O'Hara's right.  We don't criticize him for
     that right.  But those were choices that he did
     make.
          And as Mrs. O'Hara testified:  I ask now,
     in your mind, all you could do was advise your husband to quit, correct?
          She said:  Yes.
          He needed to decide for himself to quit
     when he was ready to do so?
          And she said:  Right.
          That is what this case comes down to.
          Thank you so much for your patience.
     Again, thank you so much for your time.  And on
     behalf of Reynolds, thank you.
