          MR. MONDE:  Ladies and gentlemen, you
     spoke loud and clear through your verdict
     yesterday.  Reynolds heard it.  And I heard it.
          Our country is based on the jury system,
     and you did your duty.  Am I personally
     disappointed?  Sure.  But thank you for your
     service.  And I do not think for a second that
     your message was not heard.  It was.
          It is one of the reasons that Dr. Figlar
     came down here from North Carolina to speak
     with you.
          Now we are at a different phase of the
     trial, and so I want to spend a little bit of
     time talking about that.
          Yesterday, through your verdict, you found
     that the conduct of Reynolds harmed Mrs. O'Hara
     and her family. And through your verdict, you made clear
     that you disapproved of the conduct of Reynolds
     and the other companies, Tobacco Institute, the
     CTR, that you heard about through the decades
     of evidence that you heard.
          Mr. Smith says I want you to forget about
     that.
          No, no, not at all.  I told you I heard
     you.  Reynolds heard you.  No one is asking you
     to forget any of that.
          No more documents to show you.  No more
     slides to show you.  But, you know, the purpose
     of punitive damages is to punish or deter.
          By your verdict yesterday, you decided on
     an amount that, under the law, you felt fully
     compensated Mrs. O'Hara and her children for
     the conduct of Reynolds.
          Now it is a different question:
     Punishment and deterrence.  That's why I want
     to talk about -- and that's why we brought in
     Dr. Figlar to talk about who would you be
     punishing.
          You're not punishing Dr. Teague.  You're
     not punishing Dr. Rodgman.  You're not
     punishing the people that wrote those documents, those documents that you said, these
     are not acceptable.
          You're punishing folks that live and work
     at Reynolds today; Reynolds, the company of
     today.  And that's why it's important to talk
     about what the company is doing today.
          Now, as part of your verdict, you
     allocated 15 percent responsibility to
     Mr. O'Hara.  And as the Court instructed you,
     based upon your findings that there was
     concealment and an agreement to conceal, none
     of that comes off the award to Mr. O'Hara and
     her family.  The full 14.7 million will go to
     them.  No reduction at all.
          And so the question now is:  Having made
     an award that you felt fully compensated her,
     should you give more?
          And as Judge Jones said, as part of the
     punitive damages phase, you can decline to
     award an amount of punitive damages or you can
     award an amount that you feel is fair and just
     under the circumstances.  But for what
     purposes?  To punish and deter.
          And he also told you that you may not seek
     to punish Reynolds directly for any harm suffered by any persons other than Mr. O'Hara
     and his survivors.
          And so, again, while I hope you feel that
     we treated Mrs. O'Hara with respect in this
     trial, the question now is:  There has got to
     be evidence that is connected to Mr. O'Hara in
     considering whether to award more.
          And so as I said, one of the things you
     have to ask yourself is:  If we award punitive
     damages, who is it that we are punishing?
          Well, the RJR, Reynolds leadership that
     you heard about, they are gone.  The people
     that made the decisions that you found
     liability for in the first phase of this trial,
     they are gone.  Those people who stood up
     before Congress and raised their hand, they are
     gone.  Those people are not at Reynolds to be
     punished.  It is a new company with new
     management, new scientists.
          Now, it is still a controversial business,
     making a controversial product.  But it is a
     legal business.  I mean, our country has said
     it is legal.
          And yes, companies are in business to make
     a profit.  That is what companies do.  That is what companies do.
          An award of punitive damages today would
     be to punish current employees like Dr. Figlar.
          MR. SMITH:  Objection, your Honor.  May we
     approach?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          (Thereupon, the following proceedings were
     had at sidebar:)
          MR. SMITH:  Your Honor, I object to that
     argument, that it is punishing individuals in
     the company today like Dr. Figlar or anyone
     else.
          The only person on there is RJ Reynolds.
     That is an inappropriate argument, to
     personalize it down to the employees, that this
     is coming out of somebody's pay.
          This is about RJ Reynolds, and it is
     misleading to this jury to suggest that you are
     punishing those employees and those people who
     work there today.  It is about punishing RJ
     Reynolds today.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.
          MR. MONDE:  The company operates and
     exists through its employees.  It is not some
     amorphous entity.  It is the people of the company.  It is the conduct of the people today
     of that company.  That is what he's seeking to
     punish.
          THE COURT:  I think it is fair for you to
     make the comment that the company consists of
     people and employees.  That is the company,
     just as it was, those employees who were making
     those decisions then.
          I think personalizing it to an individual
     employee who is going to lose his or her job or
     something like this --
          MR. MONDE:  I understand.
          THE COURT:  -- I think that is out of
     bounds.  I think it is inappropriate, because
     we have tried to maintain the whole concept of
     treat this corporation like you treat any other
     person.
          MR. MONDE:  Right.
          THE COURT:  So it is the corporation as a
     whole.  And it is what its doing.  And as you
     said, corporations are made up of individuals.
     Thank you.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and
     the following proceedings were held in open
     court:) MR. MONDE:  Ladies and gentlemen -- I'm
     sorry.
          THE REPORTER:  It's okay.
          MR. MONDE:  Are you ready, Kelli?
          I don't want to suggest that any punitive
     damages or award would come directly out of
     Dr. Figlar's pocket.
          My point simply is that a company is made
     up of the men and women who work for it; and
     the men and women who work for it today are not
     the people that wrote the documents that you
     saw in this trial and that you found, and we
     respect your finding of, was unlawful.
          You know, the fact is that those company
     documents that were stamped secret, the company
     documents that you found were concealed, every
     one of them today is up on that website.  I
     mean, that's just the fact.
          The Counsel for Tobacco Research, that is
     gone.  The Tobacco Institute, that is gone.
          And we heard a lot in the trial, and you
     found that the company concealed the dangers of
     smoking.  You found that they concealed the
     addictive nature of nicotine.  That is
     disclosed today. Today, Reynolds acknowledges that smoking
     is a cause of lung cancer.  It acknowledges
     that smoking is addictive.
          You saw they acknowledged that if people
     want to quit, they are concerned about their
     health, the best thing for them to do is quit.
     If they choose not to quit smoking but want
     other products that are less harmful than
     cigarettes, Reynolds offers those.
          And the Surgeon General, I mean, clearly,
     you told this company that you did not think
     that they cooperated with the Surgeon General.
     I mean, that -- that -- that is what your
     verdict says.
          And today, you heard that the -- when you
     go to that website, they send people straight
     to the Surgeon General.
          You heard that they cooperate with the
     Surgeon General and with other government
     agencies.
          And, you know, you saw those Surgeon
     General reports.  They are thick.  That doesn't
     mean that if you disagree as a scientist with
     some of the things that are written there -- I
     mean, that's fair, and that's what scientists do.  Dr. Figlar, he's a scientist.
          You can't draw some conclusions that, oh,
     nothing is changed because scientists have fair
     debate about some of the scientific issues.
          Ingredients.  You saw documents about not
     telling folks what were in the cigarettes, the
     additives.  You found -- you said that was
     wrongful.  The company heard you.
          Today, it is up on the website.  You smoke
     a Camel, find the ingredients.  Any brand that
     you smoke, it's right there.
          The Vuse, the electronic cigarette.  I
     mean, Dr. Figlar told you that they put a
     warning on there to let folks know that there
     is nicotine in it.
          The deterrence aspects of things.  Well,
     the bottom line, in terms of the FDA and its
     regulation of the tobacco companies, including
     Reynolds, is this:  Dr. Figlar said it, they're
     on lockdown.  They can't change a product, they
     can't change the additives in cigarettes, they
     can't come up with a new product without
     getting the FDA's approval.
          And the FDA, they don't have to knock.
     They can come in whenever they want. So there is oversight like there never was
     before.
          Why does that matter?  Why is he telling
     me this?
          The answer is because you have got to
     remember the charge of law from the Judge says
     you have got to ask:  Is deterrence needed
     here?
          There is oversight.  There is oversight.
     Reynolds pays for that oversight.
          There is transparency, and there is
     disclosure that there was not before.
          And, again, yes, Reynolds is still selling
     cigarettes as part of the variety of products
     that it offers.
          They are offering these other products,
     including nicotine -- you know, the ZONNIC gum,
     help people stop smoking.
          Do they make money from that?  Yes, they
     do.  And is it wrong to buy a company that
     makes cigarettes?  No.  That is what companies
     do.
          I mean, some of those sales helps fund the
     research.  You heard about how much money it
     takes to research and develop these other products.
          So no one is saying that Reynolds is
     getting out of the cigarette business.  And it
     is not a requirement.  I mean, it is still a
     legal product in this country, folks.
          The fact that they do that is not related
     to the issues that you have in front of you
     today on the punishment and deterrence
     question.
          Now, the verdict form that you are going
     to get, when I sit down and go have lunch and
     look at that verdict form, it is going to ask
     you just one question:  What is the total
     amount of punitive damages, if any, which you
     find by the greater weight of the evidence
     should be assessed against Reynolds Tobacco?
          Now, you awarded Mrs. O'Hara and her
     family $14.7 million yesterday.
          And Mr. Smith suggested another 25 million
     more.  This decision is yours.  But I want to
     suggest that if you are inclined to award
     punitive damages, I would like to offer some
     suggestions.  And that is all they are; they
     are suggestions.
          Hear me straight.  It is your decision. Now, one thing you did is you found an
     award for the lost services and support of
     Mr. O'Hara, and the lost future earnings of
     $525,000.
          I would like to suggest a range to you and
     I would like to suggest a range of another
     $525,000 up to one and a half million dollars.
          Where he's getting the other number from?
          Well, you awarded $10 million to
     Mrs. O'Hara, and you said, well, but 15 percent
     of that is allocated to Mr. O'Hara because of,
     under the law, his negligence.  I mean, that's
     what your verdict form said.
          Give it back.  That $1.5 million, give it
     back.  Award that, if you find that punitive
     damages are awarded and warranted under the
     law, not 25 million.  Not 25 million under the
     circumstances of this case.
          Remember, sympathy, you all took that
     pledge, and I know you honored it.  I know you
     did.  And emotion and anger.
          Are you angry?  I know you are.  But just
     look at it objectively, because that is the
     oath that you took, and please consider that
     range. Now, when I sit down, I expect Mr. Smith
     will get up and say, no, that is not enough.
     That is his right.  And, again, it is your
     decision.  But I ask you to base your decision
     based on objective facts, and not anger and
     emotion.
          Again, I appreciate all the time and
     attention that you gave me and my team and my
     client.  I really do.  Thank you.
