          MR. SMITH:  May it please the Court,
     Counsel.
          First of all, thank you for the service
     you gave yesterday and for the last two weeks,
     and thank you for coming back again.
          Most of what I would say you already know.
     You made the decision yesterday unanimously
     that this was a case appropriate for punitive
     damages.
          You know today that we didn't put on any
     additional evidence, because, frankly, we
     didn't think any additional evidence was needed
     to support a decision that you have already
     made.
          The only decision, really, before you
     today, and the only thing that will be on the
     verdict form that you get, will be a statement
     as to what is the amount that should be awarded
     in this case.  That is the only question.
          In making the decision, there are a couple
     of things that you have been instructed about, and you will take the instructions back to you,
     but I want you to recall that in making this
     determination, you should consider the
     following:  The nature, the extent, and the
     degree of misconduct and related circumstances.
          Today was really what I would call
     mitigation, that is, in 2015, we are a
     different company.
          Now, we still don't agree with the Surgeon
     General when the Surgeon General says that we
     were a company that, for the last 100 years,
     was engaged in conduct -- certainly in a
     50-year period of that 100 years, engaged in
     aggressive conduct that led to 20 million
     Americans dying.
          But you already know that, and you already
     know -- I'm assuming you weren't surprised by
     the fact that that the company wouldn't agree
     with that.
          You already know that the company comes in
     and says, we're changed; we're not the same
     today; we're doing all these other things
     today.  But you already probably anticipated,
     when asked a simple question of, did you
     manipulate -- your company manipulate the nicotine contained in cigarettes during the
     period of time germane to the life of Garry
     O'Hara, right, if you will, in the 1970s, when
     Garry O'Hara was trying to quit smoking?  The
     answer is:  No, I don't acknowledge that.
          They're not going to acknowledge that.
     They don't have to.  But that's what they
     brought in as their mitigation.
          We are doing some other things.
          Your time frame for making this decision
     is really essentially, because the Court will
     instruct you and has instructed you, excuse me,
     that in assessing the reprehensibility or
     wrongfulness of Reynolds' acts as proven in
     this case, you may -- it says you may -- excuse
     me -- let me back up -- you may also consider
     harm suffered by other persons, not just him,
     but his generation, if you will, or people like
     himself who had the same end because of the
     same conduct, who were victimized by the same
     failure to tell the truth and hide the truth
     and consistently keep the truth on the most
     critical issues of the time for smokers: the
     hazards of cigarettes and the addictiveness of
     them. In assessing -- you may also consider harm
     suffered by other persons not parties to this
     lawsuit, caused by the conduct that harmed
     Mr. O'Hara, in assessing the reprehensibility
     of the wrongfulness of Reynolds' acts, as
     proved in this case, although you may not seek
     to punishing Reynolds directly for any harm
     suffered by any person other than Mr. O'Hara,
     which is right.
          Mr. O'Hara -- they told you in the
     beginning that Mr. O'Hara was the focus of the
     case, you recall that.  Today, they bring in
     someone who wants to talk about their company
     in 2015.
          In 1994, when Mr. O'Hara was incurring a
     backache that turned out to be lung cancer,
     that turned out to take his life just after his
     50th birthday, they were still standing up
     before Congress and swearing the product wasn't
     addictive, despite 40 years of documents to the
     contrary, despite that 1959 documents were
     saying that people smoked and they knew it for
     the reason of nicotine and addiction.
          We know that from 1958 forward -- we know
     all of this.  It's already been there, that they knew of the hazards of smoking, they knew
     of the carcinogens that were in their
     cigarettes, and they hid it.
          Now they say, we put it up on a website, a
     website that was created in response to once
     the documents had to be released.  And none of
     the documents were voluntarily released.  You
     heard today FDA regulation wasn't voluntarily
     consented to.
          MR. MONDE:  Judge, not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  I will overrule the objection.
          MR. SMITH:  In mitigation, what they
     really want to say to you, it is not unusual on
     judgment day in any setting:  I'm not like I
     was back then; I want you to forget what I did
     back then.
          But you can't forget what they did back
     then because this case is about Garry O'Hara
     and those people of his time and what they knew
     and what they had access to and what they --
     what it did to them.  That's it.
          Garry O'Hara didn't have the benefit of a
     website.  Garry O'Hara didn't have the
     information available to him when he was making
     a decision to begin smoking.  No. In those days, they were still marketing
     to young people, underaged people, 14- to
     20-years-old.  They are still putting and
     promoting on military bases cigarettes.
          They want you to, today, forget what you
     learned over the last two weeks.  We have
     confidence you won't.
          They want you today to forget that they
     were in a conspiracy that was designed to
     conceal the truth, blame those who found the
     truth, attack those who revealed the truth,
     destroy the documents that contained the truth,
     and when nothing else would work, twist the
     truth in a way that would fit their selfish
     need, which was to keep their company making a
     lot of money, making them one of the -- they
     spent -- perhaps in making your decision, all
     you really need to know is this:  20 million
     people died during a time period when they
     spent a quarter of a trillion dollars
     advertising their product.
          But no, we want you to hear how we are
     today.
          This is about Garry O'Hara's lifetime.
     This is about what he could have known.  This is what they did to him and millions like him,
     soldiers like him, husbands like him, fathers
     like him, wives like him, mothers like him.
          Now, we're going to ask you today -- oops.
     They never do that on television law things.
          We're going to ask you today -- take that
     off, please.  I don't want to touch the
     evidence.
          THE CLERK:  I have a bag.
          MR. SMITH:  To give an amount that we
     think -- help me get that on.
          We are asking for $25 million.
          I don't want any more than that.  I don't
     ask for any more than that.  You can give
     whatever you want, but we don't want to be back
     here again.  We think this is a number that's a
     reasonable number in light of the evidence.  It
     is less than two times what you gave in
     compensatory damages, a measure that we think
     is fair, $25 million.
          Now, I want to be real clear with the
     jury.  When you come back, and I'm hopeful that
     you will come back with this number, please
     make sure that number includes a sufficient
     number of zeros.  My heart can't take it twice. I could spend a lot more time talking to
     you about this, but you already know what is
     fair, you already know what is just, and you've
     seen what they have done and how it turned out.
          You know what it has done to Mrs. O'Hara
     and Valerie and Michael.  The difference now is
     you consider what it did to all the others just
     like them.
          $25 million will send a message.  It will
     tell them that in Pensacola, Florida, today,
     you had to face justice.  And we don't want you
     to forget it.
          And we want you to change your habits
     because of it.  We want you to be a different
     company, and we don't want any other company to
     ever do what you did, or any companies get
     together and do this.
          It's a message, and is one that we think
     makes a difference.  We don't want it greater,
     because we want it sustained.  We don't want
     less, because we think it would be less than
     justice.
          Thank you so much for what you've done.


          MR. SMITH:  Okay.  For the first time in
     this trial, we agree, it is not enough.  That
     is what I'm going to say.
          This is a company that just engaged in
     purchasing the second largest menthol brand in
     the world -- excuse me, the largest-selling
     menthol brand in the world, and they just did
     it this year.
          If you're going to send a message -- and
     that's what really this is about, sending a
     message.  You're not going to send a message up
     there for $500,000 or a million and a half dollars to Reynolds.  They wouldn't notice it.
          The fact of the matter is that they want
     you to think that this is about somehow you are
     punishing them today and that would be unfair
     because all of these people that did all of
     this conduct, they are no longer there.
          Wait a second.  That would be a fair
     argument if RJ Reynolds was about to disgorge
     themselves from all of the money made in all
     those years while they lied all those times to
     all those people.  When they built the tobacco
     empire that they are, they did it on those lies
     and that concealment to people, including Garry
     O'Hara and everyone like him.
          They want to say now:  Well, don't punish
     us now, don't punish us now.
          Who do you think made the money that put
     that company where they are today?  People just
     like Garry O'Hara.
          MR. MONDE:  Your Honor, improper argument.
          THE COURT:  I will overrule the objection.
     Thank you.
          MR. SMITH:  They said:  We are now a new
     company.  We are now a new business.  None of
     those people are here anymore.  None of those people run our company anymore.
          My client died at age 50, and they weren't
     a new company, and they weren't a new business.
     In fact, they were still the same old company,
     doing business the same old way, manufacturing
     the cigarettes the same old way, under the same
     old stories, and same old lies.
          They talk about FDA regulation.
          Let me put up PT 02009, please.
          Let's go back to a document that's in
     evidence.  Let's go back to 1969, a time when
     my client was a young soldier and a young
     married man, living on a military base.
          Confidential:  "Who ain't for more money?
     I would be more cautious if using the
     pharmic-medical model.  Do we really need to
     tout cigarette smoke as a drug?  It is, of
     course, but there are dangerous FDA
     implications to having such conceptualization
     go beyond these walls."
          That's the company that was around back
     then.  They knew it was a pharmic-medical
     model, they knew it was a drug.  But let's not
     tell anybody beyond these walls, because if we
     did, we would be suggest to regulation by the FDA.
          But now they want to say subject to
     regulation by the FDA ought to somehow serve
     them in mitigating what they owe for what they
     committed in this case for, what they did in
     this case, what they did -- and he keeps saying
     this is all about O'Hara.  It is, but in
     considering the reprehensibility, you can look
     beyond that.  You could look to something like
     this.
          You can look to, during this period of
     time, when we talked about yesterday hundreds
     of thousands of people died every year, a
     company every year had to turn their head on
     those facts.
          Hundreds of thousands of people.  More
     people than car wrecks, more people than AIDS,
     more people than homicide, more people than
     suicide, more people than drug abuse died every
     year, and they turned their head, and they kept
     to the same old story, and they went lock step
     every year of his life.
          From when he was first smoking until the
     last cigarette he took, until the day he was
     diagnosed, until he died, their story never changed.
          And they somehow, I think, want to say
     that this is some kind of -- this would be some
     sort of unjust enrichment.
          Wait a second.  Let's cut to the chase
     here.  They are here for one reason today.
     They are here to try to talk you into not
     taking more money from them, the kind of money
     they need to do what they've done before.
          MR. MONDE:  Your Honor, objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Thank you.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to ask
     Mr. Smith to wait.  The last comment Mr. Smith
     made, I want to ask you to strike it, and he's
     going to continue with his argument.  Thank
     you.
          MR. SMITH:  Let me rephrase it.
          They want you to ignore where the money
     would come from and focus only where the money
     would go.
          The money would go because it is set up
     under the law, and you have made the decision
     that punishment and deterrence is appropriate.
          Punishment and deterrence.  It's not just
     punishment for today; it's punishment for what they did.
          Everybody who gets in trouble, finds
     themselves in any -- and I'm not talking about
     just in the court system, but in life.  When
     you have done something wrong and you come
     back, I promise you, the first thing:  I'm not
     like that anymore.
          I promise you that was true from childhood
     throughout your life, that's all you ever heard
     from people, when they finally had to face
     judgment:  Well, that's not what I'm like now.
          Yeah, but the punishment is for what you
     did then.  The punishment is what you did to
     him and his generation.
          Everybody, when faced with what they've
     done in the past, says:  I'm not like that
     anymore.
          That's not enough to escape punishment for
     what you actually did and how long you actually
     did it to how many people you actually did it
     to.  And he was one of the people that actually
     suffered from it.
          Deterrence.  Deterrence is not just about
     deterring them; it is deterring people, them or
     others, from ever engaging in this kind of 50-year conspiracy to hide the true and lie
     about things.  That's what it's about.
          You are sending a message in Pensacola
     today that says, this is -- this jury finds and
     this is what we want you to pay attention to
     and we don't want you to forget.  That is what
     punitive damages are for.
          Punish and deter.  Punish or deter.  We
     believe that this number is fair.  We believe
     this number is justified on this record.
          If lying to an entire generation about the
     most critical things in the -- that you know
     and that nobody else knows does not justify
     this, I can't think of what would have.
          Lying for a few years would justify this.
     Lying for a decade would justify this.  Lying
     for two decades, three decades, four decades
     five decades, two generations of Americans.
          That's why today, now, 500,000 people are
     anticipated to die this year from
     tobacco-related illnesses, even though tobacco
     smoking is going down now.  But guess what?
     They didn't get the truth soon enough.
          Once the truth came in, you saw the graph
     yesterday, once the truth began to filter -- MR. MONDE:  Objection, your Honor.
          MR. SMITH:  -- cigarette use declined.
          THE COURT:  Please approach.
          (Thereupon, the following proceedings were
     had at sidebar:)
          MR. MONDE:  The chart yesterday, I
     believe, refers to the chart that the Court
     asked Mr. Philipson to take down.  It was
     withdrawn.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. MONDE:  I just pointed to one.
          THE COURT:  There were two charts.
     Obviously, there was the one that they created,
     and then there was one that was used during the
     course of the trial.
          MR. MONDE:  I have no objection to the
     chart.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to ask him to
     clarify.  Thank you.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and
     the following proceedings were held in open
     court:)
          MR. SMITH:  This chart yesterday, that's
     what would have happened if the truth had come
     out sooner.  That's what has happened since the truth came out.  That's what happened since the
     documents were disclosed.
          That's what happened now and in the
     future, but this curve, the red line, if you
     will, went way out beyond that.  Why?  Because
     of what they did during that time.
          So now, what they would like you to say is
     forget about what we did then.  Just focus on
     who we are now.
          But while we're focusing on who we are
     now, in some ways Glamour magazine, Rolling
     Stone, in the end, no matter what they talk
     about, their growth product is still
     cigarettes.  That's where they make their
     money.  It's a legal product.  But that didn't
     justify -- and it was a legal product for all
     of those years.  But it didn't justify for a
     moment what they did.
          To punish and deter this company, to get
     their attention, to make a difference, we think
     the number we have suggested is fair.  It is
     your decision, but we believe $25 million to
     this company, and you may -- some of you may
     say, that's not as large as it takes to get
     their attention. But we believe it's adequate.  We don't
     want to do this over again.  We are asking you
     to do this because I think it will send a
     message that will resonate all the way to the
     executive suites, all the way to the
     shareholders and the board of directors of this
     company.
          You can't have built an empire on this
     kind of conduct and not pay the price for it.
          What you've done, what happened to you,
     you've taken a young man, his life, you've
     changed his family.  And he's just one more
     example that you did it to hundreds of
     thousands of times a year.  That didn't get
     your attention?  If that didn't get your
     attention, then maybe the only thing that will
     get your attention is to hit them in the
     pocketbook, because that appears to be the only
     thing that Reynolds ever cared about.  Thank
     you.
