MR. COFER: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court.
Counsel.
Mrs. Perrotto.
Members of the jury, good afternoon.
I told you in opening statement that we believe this case comes down to three pretty simple, straightforward questions.
When did Mr. Perrotto know that smoking was dangerous?
Who was in control of Mr. Perrotto's decision to smoke or quit smoking?
And did smoking cause Mr. Perrotto's colon and twist and cause his death?
And I told you clear back in opening statement that the evidence would be that Mr. Perrotto knew for decades that smoking was dangerous and caused emphysema and COPD and cancer; that Mr. Perrotto always had the ability to quit smoking whenever he made up his mind that he truly wanted to quit and was willing to put in the effort or efforts to quit; and finally that the evidence would be that smoking had absolutely nothing to do with causing
Mr. Perrotto's colon to twist or causing his death.
So let's talk about what we've learned these last three weeks.
Mr. Hammer told you, one of the last things he said before we broke for lunch was if the defendants would have just told Nick Perrotto smoking was dangerous before he started, everything would be different.
Well, you've been here in this courtroom the last couple of weeks and you know, you can see it on the timeline, before Nick Perrotto smoked his first cigarette studies were already being published linking cigarette smoking with lung cancer.
Mr. Perrotto's older brother Santo testified that Mr. Perrotto, Nick, started smoking sometime between the years 1952 and 1954 when he was 13 to 15 years old.
Remember Santo testified he also began smoking as a teenager in the '50s, and he told you that from his very first cigarette his dad was telling him, Don't smoke. These things aren't good for you.
Dr. Proctor, one of their major witnesses,
told you about the studies that were being published beginning in 1950 -- see them -- and the massive publicity they received.
He told you about the retrospective epidemiological studies published in 1950, the Doll and Hill study, and the Wynder and Graham study, and he told you those studies, those epidemiological studies, showed that smokers were much more likely to get lung cancer than nonsmokers. And he told you those studies weren't just published in medical journals. He said they were published in lay publications too and they got tons of publicity.
And he singled this one out, remember? In 1952 he said this was a particularly important tobacco study. It was published in Reader's Digest, the most popular magazine at the time, and it was called "Cancer by the Carton." But he said, you know what that tells the reader, 1952, that every time you buy a carton of cigarettes you're buying a carton of cancer.
The very next year, in 1953, Wynder Graham published their famous mouse skin-painting experiment. It was published in the medical journal called Cancer Research. Here's how it
was reported in Life Magazine.
Remember what Dr. Proctor told you about this study? He said it got wide publicity, it got a ton of press and that it caused people to quit smoking and caused cigarette sales to decline. 1953.
And we know for a fact that people were talking about these studies because in June of 1954 the Gallup company conducted a poll, a nationwide survey, where they asked: Have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung?
And in 1954 what was the response? 90 percent said yes.
We know that the Perrotto family regularly watched the news together, read Reader's Digest and read the newspapers.
But in addition to articles describing the mouse skin-painting studies and the epidemiological studies, they reported on television too. Dr. Proctor told you about a program called See It Now that was hosted by Edward R. Murrow. And Dr. Proctor told you that Edward R. Murrow was one of the most respected
journalist of his time, and he described the See It Now program as kind of like the '50s version of 60 Minutes.
So here are Dr. Ernst Wynder, who did the mouse skin-painting study and the early epidemiological studies and E. Cuyler Hammond, who is with the American Cancer Society being interviewed on that program back in 1955.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Good evening. This is See It Now, produced by the partnership of Friendly and Murrow. Tonight, the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer.
VOICE: In 1952 Drs. Hammond and Horn of the American Cancer Society began an extended study of the smoking habits of American men. Here is Dr. Hammond reporting on the results of the first two years.
VOICE: It is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer.
VOICE: In my opinion people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being
warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.
VOICE: We believe that the -MR. COFER: Ernst Wynder.
VOICE: -- evidence strongly indicates that tobacco smoking, and particularly cigarette smoking, is a major cause of lung cancer. This does not mean that we believe it is the only cause. Certainly there are a few that may develop lung cancer without ever having smoked. And there are, of course, many who do smoke and who never develop this disease.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. COFER: So we know, members of the jury, that from the time that Mr. Perrotto was a young teenager, before he was already a regular smoker, that he was on notice that smoking was not just bad for your health but that it was linked with lung cancer. So that's the '50s.
Ten years later in 1964 the Surgeon General of the United States published this landmark study announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was a proven cause of lung cancer in men. Plaintiff's own experts, both Hurt and Proctor, told you that this was a huge deal.
And it got massive publicity. It was the lead story on the nightly newscast. It was on the front page above the fold of newspapers. It was on the cover of major national magazines.
People were talking about it and they were talking about it big time. And here's how the report was covered on CBS with Harry Reasoner, 1964.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's Committee.
VOICE: Almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn 10 years ago and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's Committee. This, in summary, is what the committee says:
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way.
Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis.
Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases.
Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease; although it's not proven that smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed.
In short, the committee says, if you smoke cigarettes you increase your chances of dying early. The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
The Surgeon General's Committee presented its report at a news conference in Washington.
VOICE: Out of its long and exhaustive deliberations the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the United States to warrant remedial action. This overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease
categories.
More specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and I quote, "In view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate."
VOICE: Cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. The familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives.
It's like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. In a case like that you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then you give him a chance to reform.
In this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Good night.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. COFER: Members of the jury, that was 1964. Nick Perrotto was 24 years old at the time. So as a result of the Surgeon General's Report and all the publicity it received,
Congress held hearings and they passed something called the Federal Cigarette Labeling Act, and they required the companies, beginning in 1966, to put a warning on every pack of cigarettes manufactured in this country. Congress wrote this warning and told the companies exactly what it would say, what the font would be, and where it would be placed on the pack. From that time on every cigarette sold in this country came in a pack with a warning on it.
Four years later the Congress changed the act, changed the warning and required a stronger warning. For the next 15 years every pack of cigarettes that Mr. Perrotto bought had this warning. "Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
Mrs. Perrotto said that she remember this warning label. She testified that even before they were married she would talk with Nick about
the warnings and that they talked about them all the time.
We also know from Mrs. Perrotto's testimony herself that in 1975 when they met Mrs. Perrotto already knew that smoking causes emphysema, COPD and cancer. And how did she know that? She said she learned it from reading about it and talking with other people.
In 1985 the warning changed again. This time the warning specifically said, among other things, "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy."
"Quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to health."
So we know for a fact that the public was getting the message that cigarette smoking was dangerous, could cause lung cancer, heart disease and emphysema and that quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to health.
See what else we know. We know that in 1986 Nick Perrotto got a much more personal warning and a much more impactful warning. In 1986, the very next year after this warning came out,
Santo Perrotto had a heart attack that put him
in the ICU. And you remember what cigarettes he was smoking? Merit. And he told his little brother, Hey, Nicky, I quit smoking. The doctor told me to quit smoking. You need to quit smoking too so it doesn't happen to you.
So what did Mr. Perrotto do? Mrs. Perrotto was forced to admit, after I showed her her sworn testimony in her deposition, that between 1982 and 1992 he took no concrete action to quit smoking.
So, members of the jury, the evidence was clear that before Mr. Perrotto ever picked up that first cigarette he was on notice that smoking was harmful and could be linked with lung cancer.
As he got older, his knowledge grew and grew.
So what plaintiff wants you to do is they want you to think that Nick Perrotto made one decision in his life. They want you to think back when he was 12 or 13 or 14 he picked up a cigarette, they want you to think that's the decision we're focusing on. Well, Mr. Perrotto made many, many decisions over the course of his life to continue to smoke and not to quit.
So don't just think Nick Perrotto as a teenager starting smoking sometime in the '50s, but think about what Mr. Perrotto did or didn't do when the warning came out, when the warning got stronger, when the warning specifically said smoking causes lung cancer and heart disease and emphysema and quitting now greatly reduces serious risks to health, when his brother said,
Nicky, look at me. Quit. Throw your Merits away.
So it's a series of decisions that you have to consider that Mr. Perrotto made over his life.
Mrs. Perrotto testified that she remembers the public service announcements that the American Cancer Society, the American Lung Association and the others sponsored.
Those PSAs told the public in a very poignant way what the consequences were or could be of choosing to smoke. Mrs. Perrotto told you that she saw the one with Bill Talman, that actor who was on Perry Mason, but that was before she met Mr. Perrotto. That was back in the '60s.
But she said she saw this one with Yul
Brynner and she told her husband to watch it. And this was in 1986, the very same year that Santo was in the ICU.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Ladies and gentlemen, the late Yul Brynner.
VOICE: I really wanted to make a commercial when I discovered that I was that sick and my time was so limited. I wanted to make a commercial that says simply, now that I'm gone I tell you, don't smoke. Whatever you do, just don't smoke.
If I could take back that smoking we wouldn't be talking about any cancer, I'm convinced of that.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. COFER: 1986, Nick Perrotto wasn't a kid when he saw that. He was an adult with a wife and kids and responsibilities.
And you remember what Mrs. Perrotto said he said about that PSA? He said he was surprised because Yul Brynner was such a strong, athletic, virile man. And you know what he said? It's not going to happen to me.
Dr. Hurt, the doctor from Mayo Clinic, he described it as denial and rationalization.
Remember that? I talked with him about that right off the bat when I cross-examined him.
And Dr. Hurt told you that he himself used to be a highly addicted smoker who engaged in denial and rationalization. Remember that? He told you that anecdote where he said, you know, when I was in med school, my cadaver had COPD and I said, that's not going to happen to me. That was on direct examination.
On cross-examination I said, Hey, Dr. Hurt, it didn't happen to you, did it?
He said, No, it didn't.
I said, And you know why, right? Because you made the commitment to quit. And you said you were highly addicted and you said it was really hard but you made the commitment to quit. Your wife asked you to quit and you did it. And you didn't smoke another cigarette for 39 years.
Do you remember what else he told you? That was in 1975. Do you remember what else he told you? That if Nick Perrotto would have quit smoking in 1975 when Debbie was encouraging him to quit, he would have had a normal life
expectancy. He never would have gotten lung cancer. That's what their own expert told you.
Members of the jury, you will never find a more clear example of a fork in the road. You had two men, Dr. Hurt says, highly addicted. Plaintiff says that Mr. Perrotto was highly addicted. The women they love said, honey, quit smoking. Hurt said, wasn't easy, but I did it.
I never smoked another cigarette for 39 years.
In contrast, Mr. Perrotto ignored his wife's advice and he never made a serious attempt to quit smoking until 1992 when he was diagnosed with lung cancer. There's no doubt, there is no doubt that Mr. Perrotto understood that smoking was dangerous.
So the next question is: Who was in control of his decision to smoke or quit smoking?
Mr. Bass told you that Dr. Hurt was basically the best addiction expert you could ever find. You heard about Dr. Hurt at the Mayo Clinic, and he's extraordinarily well-credentialed, absolutely. So let's talk about what he told you.
Dr. Hurt told you unequivocally, "People who are addicted can quit; people who are not
addicted can quit. It is undisputed that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking."
Don't take my word for that, take Dr. Hurt's, the expert they brought that they ask you to rely on. He told you that even heavily addicted smokers can and do quit smoking every day. He told you today there are more than 60 million living former smokers. And he believes that most of them were addicted. He told you that each and every day 3,000 Americans quit smoking and each and every year between 1 and 2 million Americans put their cigarettes down.
Do you remember what else he told you? He said, if you don't try to quit, you're not going to quit.
Dr. Hurt talked with you, members of the jury, about the importance of motivation. And he said, "Motivation leads to trying to stop smoking, and trying to stop smoking does ultimately lead to most people quitting."
So, members of the jury, I suggest that raises two questions, two very important questions. Before he got sick, did Nick Perrotto really want to quit smoking? And did
he make a serious effort or efforts to quit smoking?
Well, according to Mrs. Perrotto,
Mr. Perrotto made absolutely no effort to quit smoking before the early 1980s. Now, she didn't meet him until '75, but clearly she can speak based on her personal knowledge between '75 and the rest of his life.
You heard his first wife, Barbara Heppinstill, who married in the '60s, they get divorced in the '70s, said she doesn't recall him ever trying to quit smoking.
Santo said, I know Nicky tried, I know Nicky tried. But he never told you any specifics. He never told you when. He never told you how.
The two women -- two of the women he was married to who lived with him told you it didn't happen. Mrs. Perrotto admitted that the only time her husband made any concrete effort to quit smoking was sometime in the early '80s when she wanted to get pregnant and when Michael was born in 1982.
Now, it is true that two days ago on the witness stand Mrs. Perrotto said for the very first time that her husband briefly quit smoking
Merit Ultra Lights around his 50th birthday in an effort to get healthy. And then when he started smoking them again -MR. HAMMER: Objection. That mischaracterizes the evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. COFER: Then when he started smoking them again, she said, Honey, what are you doing?
Hey, these are Merit Ultra Lights. They're healthy. These won't hurt me.
Think about that. I'm going to quit smoking these so I can get healthy. Oh, they're not unhealthy. There's simply no way, members of the jury, to square that testimony.
Mrs. Perrotto also testified that her husband took no concrete action to quit smoking before 1980 or after 1982 when their son was born.
Well, here's the deal. Only Mr. Perrotto could decide whether to smoke or at least try to quit smoking. No one could do that for him. He clearly knew that smoking was bad. He had friends and family members urging him to quit.
He had family members who did quit.
Mr. Perrotto didn't quit, not because he
couldn't quit, because he didn't make a serious effort to quit.
Where is the evidence, any evidence in this case that Mr. Perrotto was any different than the 60 million Americans who have successfully quit smoking? Did you hear any evidence, any?
Where is the evidence that he was different than his brother Santo who quit or his brother-in-law Richard DeRosa who quit or the highly addicted Dr. Hurt who quit?
The difference was not his ability to quit smoking. The difference was that he made a different decision. He made a decision to continue to smoke.
So that takes us to question three: Did smoking cause Mr. Perrotto's colon twist and cause his death?
So plaintiff is claiming that Mr. Perrotto's lung cancer in 1992 ultimately caused him to die of an infection or sepsis in 1996. Everyone agrees that Mr. Perrotto had lung cancer in 1992 and that he died from septic shock in 1996. Everyone also agrees that neither smoking nor lung cancer causes sepsis.
So what does plaintiff try to do? They try
to piece together a chain of events that links his lung cancer in '92 with his 1996 sepsis.
The problem is plaintiff's own treating physicians and hired experts don't agree on how that possibly could have happened.
So let's talk about their competing theories. Plaintiff's first theory is that four years after her husband's lung cancer was removed from the chest that the cancer recurred in his brain and then he died from that surgery.
So they argue, if he had not had lung cancer in '92 he would not have brain cancer in '96 and he wouldn't have died from complications of that surgery.
And Mr. Bass said -- he had a slide that said for you to decide, was the tumor in his brain metastatic from the lung? And what caused the sigmoid volvulus? And those are the two medical questions.
So let's just talk about that. Plaintiff's theory assumes, it assumes that the cancer that was found in his brain came from the lung.
That's premise number one of their theory.
So what was the evidence? You heard it.
The 1992 lung cancer was confined to the chest
and had neuroendocrine cells and adenocarcinoma. The 1996 cancer was confined to the brain and was an adenocarcinoma with papillary features.
None of the records prepared in 1992 or 1993 by any of the pathologists who looked at that lung cancer described it as having papillary features. But it is true, there's a 1996 record prepared by Dr. Cove that suggests the lung cancer did have papillary features. But there's nothing in that record that documents how Dr. Cove made that observation.
So plaintiff's argument is simple. And it makes a lot of sense, really. He said, well of course it had to come from the lung, because there's no evidence he had any other cancer in his body. That's their argument. And you know what, she may be right. She may be right. But plaintiff has the burden of proof, and their entire assumption, her entire medical theory rests on that assumption; that the cancer in the brain came from the cancer in the lung.
But here's the deal, because I don't want anyone getting sidetracked about that or worried about that too much. Having said all of that, here's the most important point. It really
doesn't matter where the cancer in the brain started, because the tumor in the brain is not what killed Mr. Perrotto. And there is no evidence, members of the jury, that Mr. Perrotto died of complication from surgery. We know what caused his death, his colon twisted, he got a perforation, part of the contents of his bowel spilled into his abdomen, which caused an overwhelming infection that killed him.
I'm sure you've learned more about sigmoid volvulus than anyone ever wanted to know, and my guess is this is the last time that you're ever going to have to hear about it, but bear with me just for a few minutes as I go through it again.
So you've heard a sigmoid volvulus is when the colon twists like a garden hose and things can't pass. And what happens then is you get constipated. And that happened to Mr. Perrotto so Dr. Neimark went in and did a colonoscopy and basically freed up the colon. And then a couple of days later he ended up having pain and turns out that his colon became perforated and some of those bowel contents got into his abdomen and he had an infection. So we all agree on that. But the evidence was that the infection had
absolutely nothing to do with the surgery.
So how can I say that? They brought you three docs that tried to piece it together.
Let's talk about what they said and let's talk about what the evidence was.
Volvulus is not a complication of surgery.
There is no medical literature that says it is.
None of Mr. Perrotto's treating physicians has ever seen it happen before. And no one can explain how brain surgery can cause a colon to twist. Because it just doesn't happen.
Hundreds of thousands of people have surgery each and every year and don't get a volvulus.
And there is no evidence, none whatsoever, that people who have surgery are at a higher risk of getting a volvulus than anyone else. No one knows what causes sigmoid volvulus because it is such a rare condition for people under the age of 60, like Mr. Perrotto was. Remember how often it happens? Once or twice in every
100,000	people.
So what's plaintiff's argument? Well, their entire argument comes down to this: But he got the volvulus after the surgery so it had to have something to do with it, right? Of course it
did. It happened after the surgery. That's their entire argument. Well, there's actually a Latin phrase that describes that, and it's called post hoc, ergo propter hoc. Maybe some of you remember this from high school or from college. What it means is after this, because of this. That argument has been recognized as a fallacy or mistake of logic for hundreds of years. You can go check Wikipedia. And here's the example you'll see. The classic example that's argued: Because the rooster crows before sunrise, the rooster caused the sun to rise.
Well, of course that had nothing to do with the sun rising.
You know, maybe a more typical example that some of us may experience: It's like the landlord who tells the college kid when they move in the apartment, hey, the air conditioner worked before you moved in; man, you know, you must have broken it.
Here's the bottom line. The fact that the volvulus happened after the surgery doesn't mean the volvulus was caused by the surgery. You know what it means? It happened after the surgery. So there is no credible medical
evidence that links Mr. Perrotto's surgery with his volvulus. And everyone agrees that's what killed him.
So that's theory one. That's okay.
Plaintiff has another theory. So let's talk about that.
Their second theory is that the painkillers that Mr. Perrotto was on because of his lung cancer caused him to have constipation which caused his volvulus. And the steroids he was taking weakened his immune system so he couldn't fight the infection when the stool leaked into the abdomen. And that's what Drs. Hurt,
Rothschild and Neimark told you. There's only one problem with that theory. There are no facts to support it.
So first, Dr. Neimark, the gastroenterologist who decompressed Mr. Perrotto, he testified, you remember, that he carefully reviewed all of Mr. Perrotto's medical records and there is no evidence he ever had chronic constipation.
So here's the treating gastroenterologist, look at your notes, Neimark testified he looked at all of the records and there's no evidence he
ever had chronic constipation. And it's chronic constipation, they said, may be associated with a volvulus. Because if someone has chronic constipation over decades, the thinking is in some people it will cause them to get a longer colon. Their sigmoid, you know, their colon will get longer and it makes it more likely to twist.
In addition, Dr. Neimark testified, and this was critical, I don't know whether everyone got it, but it's critical, he said that after the surgery Mr. Perrotto had acute constipation caused by his volvulus. You hear me? In other words, the kink in the colon caused the constipation. The constipation did not cause the kink in the colon. That's what Neimark said.
So -- and we know that's true because remember when Mr. Perrotto was in the hospital, he had his surgery on the 16th, he had not had a bowel movement up until then. After the surgery he actually had two bowel movements. So you know that the surgery didn't cause constipation that caused the kink, because he was having bowel movements.
So you may remember my very first line of questions to Dr. Hurt. Remember? I finally got to Hurt just before lunch. It was -- what was it? A week ago Monday, I guess. Remember I said, Hey, Dr. Hurt, just a couple of questions. Did you just say that it's your opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that the pain medications caused constipation?
He said, yeah, I did.
I then asked, and that the constipation caused the sigmoid volvulus, right?
And he said that was the most likely cause.
Then I went to lunch. I'm sure you guys were thinking, I don't know why he started with that. All the stuff this guy said, he's asking about constipation.
But later in the day I asked Dr. Hurt to assume, I said, Hey, I want you to assume, because you haven't seen this deposition, that Dr. Neimark, Mr. Perrotto's treating gastroenterologist, testified that the volvulus caused the constipation. The constipation didn't happen until the twist and the constipation didn't cause the volvulus. And I said, Dr. Hurt, would you defer to him?
And he goes, Well, sure. "He was on site so he would have to be in a better position to make that judgment."
So Dr. Hurt's opinion was based on the assumption that the constipation caused Mr. Perrotto's colon to twist. Dr. Hurt's opinion was based on a misunderstanding of the facts. And Dr. Hurt said, I'll defer to Neimark.
So here's the bottom line on that part of the theory. You should not credit Dr. Hurt's and Dr. Rothschild's testimony as to the cause of Mr. Perrotto's volvulus and the cause of his death because it assumes a key fact that simply is not true, and that is that Mr. Perrotto had chronic constipation that caused his colon to twist. And with respect to the testimony about Mr. Perrotto's acute constipation, both Dr. Hurt and Dr. Rothschild assume that Mr. Perrotto didn't develop acute constipation until after the surgery. That's what they said. They said it was a combination of all the analgesics and the steroids and the bed rest and that's what caused constipation and then that's what caused the volvulus.
Well, what they ignore is that Dr. Neimark -- why don't I have that record -well, I don't have the record so you'll just have to -- I'll remind you of what it is.
Dr. Neimark said, "Since admission, the patient has complained of severe constipation and increasing abdominal distension."
Do you remember that? I talked about it with Ganz. Mr. Gdanski talked about it with Ganz. But Dr. Neimark had a record that said, "Since admission, patient complains of severe constipation and increasing distension."
I showed you both the handwritten notes and I showed you the record itself. And we know he was admitted to the hospital on August 13th, three days before his surgery. Dr. Neimark now says, 18 years later, Hey, that was a mistake.
I didn't mean to say since admission. I now remember, or think or putting it together 18 years ago, I must have said since surgery. But we know that's not right because I showed you the contemporaneous nurse's notes. It was called a flow chart. And I walked you through it methodically, probably painfully methodically, but I was doing it because I knew
I wanted to talk to you about it today. And what we know is those nurses who worked 12-hour shifts who watched him 24 hours a day documented that Mr. Perrotto didn't have a bowel movement on the 13th, three days before surgery, on the 14th or on the 15th or on the 16th or on the 17th, didn't happen until the 18th. So the nurse's notes confirm that Dr. Neimark got it right when he wrote -- when he was interviewing the patient and when he dictated it that Mr. Perrotto's history was that he was complaining of constipation and distension since admission, three days before the surgery.
Members of the jury, it happened before the surgery the surgery couldn't have caused it, right?
Now, one more thing about Dr. Neimark. He admitted, okay, he never had chronic constipation, and I don't think that constipation caused the volvulus to twist. I think the volvulus caused constipation. But I still think that as a result of surgery and the pain medication and bed rest that's what caused his volvulus.
So my partner Tom Duncan, who you met this
morning, took his deposition. And he said,
Well, Doctor, tell me why you think that.
What's the basis of your opinion?
And the doctor said -- you saw this, "My 30 years of experience as a treating physician."
So Tom said, Well, Dr. Neimark, in 30 years how many patients have you seen develop a volvulus after surgery?
Do you remember his answer?
None.
He said the only time he's ever seen it happen was Mr. Perrotto. In 30 years Dr. Neimark never saw it happen.
And you learned yesterday from Dr. Ganz that Mr. Perrotto had actually been experiencing a partial volvulus that was twisting and untwisting for a year with medical records dating back to August of 1995.
So this morning plaintiff brought in a radiologist named Dr. Kleinman, and he showed you some x-ray films, and he said, Well, there's no evidence of obstruction on CAT scan or x-ray. Do you remember what Dr. Ganz told you yesterday? He said, x-rays and CAT scans are not very sensitive at picking up partial twists
because they twist and untwist; it depends on when you're taking the x-ray.
So here's the question: If Nick Perrotto was not having a partial obstruction then why was he having the classic symptoms of obstruction -- nausea, vomiting, distension -going back for a year? Why was he hospitalized in August of '85 and January of '96 complaining of the very sort of symptoms that ultimately caused his death? Why?
We know for a fact that he ended up with a full volvulus and that's what killed him September of 1996. Mr. Bass said he wants you to use your common sense, and you know what, I do too. So is that just a coincidence? He died of sigmoid volvulus, a complete sigmoid volvulus and for a year he had been experiencing similar symptoms. Is that just a coincidence?
Plaintiff's argument is it just happened spontaneously after surgery. We can't tell you how. No one has ever seen it. Ignore 1995 August. They didn't see it on an x-ray, ignore it. Ignore January of '96. He was hospitalized for five days, something was going on, but ignore it. Couldn't possibly have been a
partial volvulus, even though he died of one eight months later.
So you have the jury instruction, and it's final instruction 3, and it says, "In this case you've heard opinion testimony about certain technical subjects from persons referred to as expert witnesses." And this is final instruction three, members of the jury.
"Regarding experts, you may accept such opinion testimony, you may reject it, or you may give it the weight you think it deserves, considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training or education of the witness, the reasons given by the witness for the opinions expressed and all the other evidence in this case."
So here's what it comes down to. Who knows more about sigmoid volvulus and the gastrointestinal system, Dr. Kleinman, the radiologist they brought in to rebut Dr. Ganz, because they were so concerned about Dr. Ganz's testimony that they weren't willing to stand on Rothschild's testimony or Neimark's testimony or Alley's testimony. It was bring in the calvary guys, run him in this morning, let's show some films, because Ganz blew him out of the water,
so that's what it comes down to. Who knows more about the gastrointestinal system, a board-certified gastroenterologist who has published 60 peer-reviewed papers and a book chapter, who has invented a device that helps treat people for esophogeal cancer, who is the chief of gastroenterology at a thousand-bed teaching hospital in Minnesota, who teaches med students and post-op doctoral fellows at the University of Illinois, at Northwestern and University of Minnesota, or a radiologist?
And here's the best part of it all.
Dr. Kleinman changed his opinion in the last 12 hours. Last night we took his deposition and Tom Duncan said, Okay. So these don't show that he had a volvulus, right? But if he had one yesterday would you be able to tell?
No.
But so today he came in and said yes. Remember Duncan impeached him. How do you change your mind in 12 hours, folks? What happened in 12 hours?
So bottom line is, jurors have incredible common sense and jurors are the people who decide the facts. And we did bring in Dr. Ganz,
and I'm not sure you would ever find a more experienced, qualified expert. And he never criticized any of the care and treatment that Mr. Perrotto got. He told you, I've missed 'em.
He said, you know what, I may well have missed it. He said it's so rare that who would think of it, really. It's really only having the benefit of hindsight when you know he dies of one. You know he dies of one, so you know he's one of that 100,000 who's going to get it. And then you get a look at the medical records and you say, oh, my God, if I had only known then what I know now.
So that's problem number one with plaintiff's theory.
Problem number two, there's no evidence that Mr. Perrotto's immune system was, in fact, compromised. Did they show you a single record between 1993 and 1996 when he was on steroids that say he was having problems with chronic infection? No. If his immune system was compromised we should have had evidence of that, shouldn't we have? But we didn't.
And there was also no evidence, there was argument and speculation, there was no evidence,
that his immune system was compromised at the time of surgery. How do we know that? I showed you the records. His temperature spiked at 103 degrees. That's a sign that your body is fighting infection. His white blood count went through the roof. It was up to 15,100, three times the normal. You heard that the neutrophils, the part of his white blood count that is specifically designed to fight bacterial infections, his body preferentially manufactured those. They took up between 92 and 98 percent of the components in his white blood. His immune system wasn't compromised; it was overwhelmed.
When people have volvulus is when stool spills into the bowel and it causes an overwhelming infection, and perfectly healthy people die from it. So the bottom line is, members of the jury, when you're asked the question, did lung cancer, did cigarette smoking, did any of that have anything to do with causing Mr. Perrotto's sigmoid volvulus and his death, the answer is overwhelming that it did not. And it's plaintiff's burden of proof, and they did not meet it.
So let's shift gears and talk about cigarette advertising.
There's absolutely no evidence that tobacco advertising caused Mr. Perrotto to become a cigarette smoker. Just like his big brother Santo, Nick began smoking because, quote, it was the thing to do and everybody was doing it.
We know that Mr. Perrotto's dad and big brother were smokers. Is it a surprise that Nick started smoking too? Is it? Your dad, your big brother, your friends smoke, is it a surprise? There is no evidence that cigarette advertising caused him to choose the brands he smoked either. Santo told you Nick smoked the brands I smoked. I smoked Camel, Nick smoked Camel. I switched to Marlboro, Nick switched to Marlboro. I switched to Newport, Nick switched to Newport. I switched to Merit, Nick switched to Merit.
And another reason he smoked Merit is because that's the brand that Mrs. Perrotto encouraged her husband to smoke. She told you, when she would buy cigarettes for him, she would buy him Merit and ultimately Merit Ultra Lights. Remember, she told you she ripped that ad up and
put it on the refrigerator for Merit Ultra Lights. And I asked her about that. And she said she was angry, she was mad at him because she knew that he needed to stop smoking and she knew that tar and nicotine was bad for him, and that was why he started smoking Merit Ultra Lights, was because his wife pushed him to do it and suggested that he do it. And that's the brand he smoked for the rest of his life.
Mr. Bass argued that Mr. Perrotto switched to filters and lights because the defendants fooled him into thinking it was safer. But there was no evidence of that. It's true that Mrs. Perrotto said that her husband didn't think low-tar cigarettes would hurt him, but she also said that he stopped smoking them in 1989 to get healthy. Plaintiff can't have it both ways. If Mr. Perrotto quit smoking in 1989, if he stopped smoking Merit Ultra Lights to get healthy, he can't credibly, they can't credibly tell you he did not know they were unhealthy.
Remember what else Mr. Bass said. Nick thought they were safer. He didn't think they were safe. You remember I asked Mrs. Perrotto about that, and, you know, I was afraid you
thought I might be picking on her, but it was an important distinction that I wanted to make sure that came through clearly. Nick didn't think they were safe, Nick thought they were safer.
So, members of the jury, who was telling the public that light cigarettes were safer, not safe but safer? The Surgeon General and the public health community. You remember I walked through the Surgeon General Reports, the '75 report, the '79 report and the '81 report where the Surgeon General said, you know what, cigarettes are dangerous. There's no such thing as a safe cigarette. But if you're going to smoke you should smoke lighter delivery cigarettes because the evidence suggest they cause less cancer.
And the reason why it is, if tar is bad, less tar is less bad. And what I told you and what you learned through Dr. Proctor and Dr. Hurt, there were epidemiological studies published in the '60s and '70s and '80s and they compared disease rates among people who smoked lower tar cigarettes and higher tar cigarettes and they found they both got cancer but the people who smoked lower delivery cigarettes had
a lower incidence of cancer. And it makes perfect sense because it's dose response. Remember I talked with Dr. Proctor about that, something called dose response. It's something we're all familiar with.
It is undisputed, members of the jury, that all cigarettes, filtered, unfiltered, menthol, non-mentholated, lights, full-flavor cigarettes, they all have the same Surgeon General's warning on the side that advise smokers of the risk.
And the consistent message to smokers from the public health community was, if you want to avoid the risk of smoking, don't smoke at all.
But if you're not going to quit, you're better off smoking lower delivery cigarettes.
Now, today Mr. Bass put up two pictures of Merit, and he said, he thought they were safer, and he drew a big line through them and said, they were not safe. They weren't safer. That was a lie.
You remember what Dr. Proctor said?
I asked Dr. Proctor, I said, Hey,
Dr. Proctor, today, to this very day there are public health authorities who believe that ultra light cigarettes are, in fact, safer, right?
He said yes.
I said, And you are one of them, right?
And he said yes.
And I said, Why?
And he said, Because they deliver much less tar and nicotine.
Check your notes. Plaintiff's own expert Dr. Proctor told you that when he testified in this trial.
So I want to switch topics, one more topic before we get to the verdict form. I told you back in opening statement that if you look back at the -- over the last 60 years at the millions of pages of documents written by the thousands of employees of Philip Morris and the other companies have said some dumb things. But I want you to think about how plaintiff showed you those documents. They literally took a sentence here or a paragraph there from different decades, from different companies and they strung them together and pulled out slides for you. Importantly, did they make any effort to tie any of these documents or any of these statements to Mr. Perrotto? Of course not.
None whatsoever. And they couldn't.
Mr. Perrotto smoked because he enjoyed it and he didn't want to quit. They made no effort to tie any of those things to Mr. Perrotto.
And they didn't tell you the whole story.
Let me give you just a couple examples.
Remember the very first document that Mr. Gdanski showed you. This was the first document. Of course I noticed it because it's a Philip Morris document from Geiger to DuPuis. Why do people smoke? They highlighted this, they highlighted that and they said, addiction. Plaintiff then tries to suggest that Philip Morris knew something the Surgeon General and the public health community didn't know. It wasn't until cross-examination that you learned that for hundreds of years scientists, doctors, lay people had used the word "habit" and "addiction" interchangeably to describe it can be hard to quit smoking.
Remember I showed you this, first document I showed you. This is from 1915. I used this with Dr. Hurt. It was commissioned by the Surgeon General, prepared by the Surgeon General, 1915. What does it say? It is saying that cigarette smoking is by far the most
popular form of tobacco addiction among male garment workers.
Philip Morris didn't keep the fact that some people use the word "addiction" to describe it can be hard to quit smoking from the Surgeon General. I showed you the health notes, the Florida Health Notes, 1906, talked about cigarette smoking as an addiction.
So what happened? Plaintiff just pulled a quote out of context from a Philip Morris document that happened to use the word "addiction." And they didn't even show you the first paragraph.
Early this year I was assigned the task of reading and studying the reports now on hand which pertained to the subject of psychological research.
These were the Chicago Tribune reports. Remember I asked Hurt, What's the Chicago Tribune?
Well, it's the newspaper in Chicago.
And the series of Roper reports.
This wasn't some private internal Philip Morris research. This was a guy that read articles in public literature and said, why
do people smoke, and listed a bunch of reasons.
Here's another example. Plaintiff tried to suggest that defendants knew people smoked for nicotine and tried to hide that from the public health. And frankly, that's silly because Dr. Proctor admitted it's been known since the early 1900s that smokers smoke for the pharmacological effects of nicotine. And I showed you a number of lay publications that showed that. But then plaintiff showed you this, "Motives and Incentives of Cigarette Smoking," Bill Dunn, Philip Morris Research Center. Mr. Bass showed you a portion of this on his opening statement.
"The majority of the conferees would go even further and accept the proposition that nicotine is the active constituent of cigarette smoke. Without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking."
So when plaintiff put this up they showed you that quote and a couple of other quotes. It wasn't until cross-examination until you learned what this document is. It was a public speech.
It was a speech that Dr. Dunn gave at a conference where he said these things, including
"Think of the cigarette as a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine." People from the National Cancer Institute and the Surgeon General were at the conference and heard the speech. It wasn't a secret confidential document. It was a public speech. And after the speech he was interviewed in the Sunday newspaper. That's his picture.
What did he say?
"Why do people smoke? Authorities say full answers still lie hidden. One smokes primarily for the physiological response of inhaled smoke; that is, for the physiological reaction to inhaled smoke."
The other two propositions from the group stated the main ingredient in cigarette smoke which produces a physical response is nicotine. And the 'sought-after responses result in psychological efficiency.'
So we have first a conference where the public is invited and then a speech and then a newspaper article and then a book. He published a book, and it has leading experts in the world on the issue of cigarette smoking and nicotine and pharmacology and Bill Dunn, the editor. You
didn't learn until cross-examination this book has been cited 12 times in four different Surgeon General's Reports. If Philip Morris was trying to hide the fact that it believed that nicotine was an important reason people smoked -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. It violates the finding.
THE COURT: Go ahead.
MR. COFER: Let me just say that this is a funny way of doing it.
One last example, Dr. Proctor showed you a statement from a document written by George Weissman who talked about finding answers. Let me just -- let's back up to what it is.
So Weissman writes a memo to Joe Cullman, his boss, regarding the Surgeon General's Report. And this is what plaintiff showed you. "However, at some point, reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, we must, in the near future, provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking."
Sounds bad, doesn't it? And Mr. Bass told you that those were light cigarettes. What you
didn't learn until cross-examination,
Philip Morris didn't make up the word "psychological crutch." It's in the '64 Surgeon General Report under the chapter on the beneficial effects of tobacco. "The drive to use tobacco, being fundamentally psychogenic in origin, has the same basis as other drug habits and in a large fraction of the American population appears to satisfy the total need of the individual for a psychological crutch."
And then they didn't show you the last paragraph. "In closing" -- and we're back to what Weissman said, "In closing, the main essence of the report and publicity to me is that it still left smoking on an individual basis. The individual's own choice of the psychological benefit versus the alleged hazard," just like the Surgeon General talking about psychological benefits of smoking. "Anything that impinges on the right of the individual to make this choice is contrary for our most basic traditions."
You know, one last thing, you saw a lot of videos and articles from people from the companies and from the Tobacco Institute saying
smoking was not a proven cause of lung cancer.
And I'm sure when you heard that you thought, what in the world are these guys talking about.
And it wasn't until cross-examination where Dr. Proctor explained it was the companies' position that smoking wasn't a proven cause because statistics alone can't prove causation.
And their argument was since 85 to 90 percent of smokers don't get lung cancer and because nonsmokers get lung cancer too they argued it was a risk factor, it wasn't proven and something else must be going on. Now, we all know those are technical arguments and they are not very convincing, of course we know that.
And, you know, looking at those now you have to think, those guys have three heads. What in the world are they saying? But here's the deal, unless plaintiff proves that Mr. Perrotto saw those and relied on those -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. Misstates the jury instruction.
THE COURT: Mr. Hammer should object because he did the closing.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, I would object.
THE COURT: Come sidebar, please.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the basis for the objection?
MR. HAMMER: There's a jury instruction on reliance itself.
MR. COFER: Sure, they still have to prove that they relied on it.
MR. HAMMER: The fact that it's out there in the public, Judge, it's misinterpreting the jury instruction.
MR. COFER: It's arguing the jury instruction.
THE COURT: The word "reliance" is there.
MR. HAMMER: I would point out also it violates the findings.
MR. COFER: No, it doesn't.
MR. HAMMER: Because they've already been found guilty of a fraud.
MR. COFER: But they have to prove he relied on it.
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule that last
objection.
MR. COFER: If the issue in this case was did the companies say stupid things, and you know what, you think, you're appalled, then the case is over. That's not the issue in this case. This is Nick Perrotto's case. This is a case Debbie Perrotto has brought for the death of her husband. And they have to prove that Mr. Perrotto relied on any of these statements and he was fooled by any of those statements and that it caused him to rely to his detriment.
We're going to talk more about that with the jury instructions, but the point is, there is no evidence of that.
THE CLERK: You are an hour and 15 minutes into the closing.
MR. COFER: Okay. You said an hour and 15. Thank you very much.
THE CLERK: You're welcome.
MR. COFER: So what is this case about?
Very simply this case is about why Nick Perrotto smoked, why he waited so long to quit, what caused his death and whether he's a member of the Engle class. So let's go to the verdict form.
So the first question is called the class membership question, and it asks: "Was Nicholas Perrotto addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer or COPD?"
So Mr. Bass told you, we submit that you should only focus on addiction when looking at the class membership question.
Well, I understand why he said that, but if you were to do that then you'd be violating your duty as jurors. Because there's two questions.
Was he addicted, and if so, was addiction a legal cause? There's two questions. First, was he, in fact, addicted? Second, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer or COPD?
And it's plaintiff's burden to prove both of those elements and you must agree unanimously on both questions in order for Mr. Perrotto to be a member of the class. If plaintiff fails to prove either, the case is over and we all go home.
So let's first talk about the word "addiction." Was Nick Perrotto addicted to cigarettes? Well, the answer to that depends on
the definition you use. You look all through that jury instructions, there's nothing in those instructions that defines addiction for you.
You guys get to decide that yourself. You've heard the definition has changed over time. Before 1988 Surgeon General said, it's not addictive, it's not intoxicating. After '88 the Surgeon General said, doesn't have to be intoxicating, it is addicting. Mr. Bass told you that Dr. Hurt relied on the evidence of smoking index. Asks two questions, first cigarette in the morning, how many you smoke a day. What he didn't tell you is no matter what you answer on the Heaviness of Smoking Index you're addicted.
If you answered zero, if you have a zero score on the Heaviness of Smoking Index you're addicted. It's not designed to measure whether someone is addicted. It measures the level of addiction. So I would suggest, members of the jury, that's not really a very helpful test.
So you know the test I want to use. I want to use Dr. Hurt's test. The guy they brought from the Mayo Clinic told you one of the most smartest guy there is about it. So here's what
the Mayo Clinic definition of addiction is. "Nicotine dependence, also called tobacco dependence, is an addiction to tobacco products caused by the drug nicotine. Nicotine dependence means you can't stop using the substance even though it's causing you harm."
Nick Perrotto did not meet that definition, because he did quit. Unfortunately, he waited until he was diagnosed with lung cancer to quit, but he did quit. It's undisputed he quit in '92 and never smoked another cigarette the last four years of his life. Nick Perrotto was not a person who can't stop using the substance even though it's causing you harm.
So plaintiff argues, well, that didn't count because he was too sick to smoke. That wasn't the evidence. Dr. Rothschild, the oncologist that took care of him, that they talked about puts hands on him and treated him,
Dr. Rothschild told you that Mr. Perrotto was not too sick to smoke. Rothschild told you Mr. Perrotto was physically able to smoke cigarettes if he chose to.
So why did he quit? Rothschild said it perfectly. When sufficiently motivated, many
people quit smoking. And we understand why he never wanted to smoke again once he got lung cancer, but he could have. He doesn't meet that definition. You know, they said, oh, he was so sick he couldn't smoke. Well, he could drink four plus beers a day. He could drive 17 hours from New Jersey to Florida and Florida to New Jersey. I'm not saying he was well, but certainly he was physically well enough to smoke had he wanted to.
But here's the bottom line: Was he addicted? Depends on what definition you use.
If you want to use the definition, hey, you know what, if you smoke two to three packs a day for a long time, you're addicted, then he's addicted. But the truth is, whatever definition you use, I don't think it really matters much because plaintiff has to prove more than that he was addicted. It's not what plaintiff wants you to focus on.
There's two questions to the class membership question: Was he addicted, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and COPD?
The evidence was that it is not. So let's
talk about that.
The law makes a distinction between something that is a cause in fact of an injury and something that's a legal cause. And plaintiff has to prove both. So let me give you the classic example. They have to prove addiction in fact and legal cause.
So here in Florida we love our beautiful beaches. We love them. And so we go out and you know we tan. We go to the beach. And when we go to the doctor, someone like Dr. Rothschild, who one of his specialties is skin cancer, melanoma, we go to the doctor and the doctor says, Wear sunscreen, wear a hat, wear long sleeve shirts, don't get too much sun.
And many of us ignore that.
So suppose one day you go to your doctor, the doctor is looking you over and says, you know what -MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, golden rule violation.
MR. COFER: What?
THE COURT: He said golden rule violation. Overruled.
MR. COFER: Suppose somebody, suppose a man
goes to the doctor and the doctor is checking him out and he says, Hey, you've got this little spot on your skin. It's not a big deal yet, but we need to get that taken care of before it turns into something. On your way out talk to my receptionist and get another appointment. And you don't do it.
So six months later you come back. The doctor is looking at you; he looks at your arm and says, Hey, man, this thing is starting to look ugly. I thought we were going to take this off. On your way out the door talk to my receptionist and make an appointment so we can take it off. And you don't do it.
So six months later you come back to him, man, I don't feel good at all. I feel bad.
The doctor says, oh, listen, you have malignant melanoma. It's not just on your arm anymore. It spread throughout your body. It's bad.
What's the cause in fact of the melanoma?
The sun. But what's the legal cause? You ignored the warning. You ignored the advice.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge, this is golden rule.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. COFER: The man ignored the warning.
The man ignored the advice. The man didn't take care of business.
So there are two questions that you have to answer, not just the fact of addiction, was it a legal cause? Plaintiff said, well, you know, we think, quote, we submit you should just only focus on addiction when looking at the class membership question, because they don't want you to look at legal cause.
From the time Mr. and Mrs. Perrotto met in 1975 she was on him to quit smoking. She told him smoking was bad for his health, breathing his smoke was bad for her health. It is undisputed except for a couple of years in the early 1980s when Mrs. Perrotto wanted to get pregnant Mr. Perrotto made no effort whatsoever to quit. And even then he never went more than 24 hours without a cigarette. The Surgeon General and Dr. Hurt agree that stopping smoking for 24 hours or less -- or for 24 hours or more is the recognized definition of a serious quit attempt, and Mr. Perrotto never did that.
Now, think about that. I don't care how
addicted you are. If you're not willing to put them down for 24 hours, I don't care what it is, are you really motivated to quit? You're not willing to tough it out for a day; how bad do you want to quit?
Plaintiff argues, well, the fact that he waited until he got sick to quit means he couldn't quit. No. We know that's not true from Dr. Hurt. The fact that he waited so long to quit just means he wasn't motivated to quit until he got sick.
I had an objection sustained. I think it was Dr. Hurt, said, you know, my dad used to tell us boys, three kinds of people in the world, those that learn easy, those that learn hard -MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge.
MR. COFER: -- and those who never learn -MR. HAMMER: Talking about something that was sustained is improper.
MR. COFER: No, this was with Dr. Hurt. I'm making argument now, Your Honor.
THE COURT: You can -MR. COFER: So this is argument. That's why I was sustained when I was with Dr. Hurt.
MR. COFER: So you might remember, I said, my dad used to tell -MR. HAMMER: Objection, improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. COFER: It's not even that good of a story, but I've got it -- now I'm into it, I'm committed.
So I've got two older brothers, and my dad used to tell me and my brothers, boys, there are three kinds of people in this world, those that learn easy, those that learn hard and those that never learn. You can speculate on what he thought me and my brothers were.
But anyway, the fact is Mr. Perrotto learned hard. He understood that smoking could cause cancer. He understood smoking could be bad. He understood he had a wife that loved him told him to quit. He had a brother that told him to quit. And he didn't try until he got sick.
No evidence he was any different than the 60 million people who have quit. He always had the ability. He just waited until he got lung cancer to give it up.
Mr. Bass didn't show you the legal cause instruction. You have the instruction, I think
it's instruction 5. He showed you this. But it's the top that actually defines legal cause.
So this is the legal cause instruction:
"Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause," it only has to be a legal cause. What this says is there can be more than one, but cigarette smoking has to be the legal cause or he's not a class member and the case is over.
So the instruction you have in front of you is: "Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's lung cancer or COPD if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer or COPD that it can be reasonable said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine the lung cancer would not have occurred."
It's undisputed, even addicted smokers can quit. What this shows, what plaintiff has to prove, that Mr. Perrotto was, in fact, so addicted that his addiction was so strong, so substantial that can reasonably be said that but for his addiction he would have quit smoking, he would not have gotten sick.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection. That's not
the standard.
MR. COFER: That's exactly what it says.
MR. HAMMER: Not at all, Judge. May we approach?
THE COURT: Want to come sidebar?
MR. HAMMER: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. COFER: I'll need more time.
THE COURT: How much more time?
MR. HAMMER: Judge, the standard instruction says nothing about quitting. Mr. Cofer is throwing that in there. The instruction says nothing at all about quitting.
MR. COFER: I'm arguing -MR. HAMMER: Excuse me, counsel.
He's arguing addiction, which he can do and that, you know, his addiction has to be the legal cause, but to say that this instruction talks about quitting is improper.
THE COURT: I don't think he said -MR. HAMMER: He actually did.
MR. COFER: I'm applying the instruction to the facts.
MR. HAMMER: He was reading the instruction.
He's got the board up.
THE COURT: But he didn't mention -- the word "quitting" isn't in there. It's not in there, right?
MR. HAMMER: He's saying that's what the instruction said, those were his words.
THE COURT: Modify it, just say the evidence in this case.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. COFER: So here's what you've got to do as finders of the fact. You have to apply the facts to the law so you're going to have to decide whether he was so addicted that but for the addiction he wouldn't have gotten sick. An so bottom line is, was the evidence such that he couldn't quit, that the addiction prevented him from quitting? We know that's not true because Dr. Hurt said addicted smokers can and do quit smoking all the time. Dr. Hurt told you people quit smoking when they decide it's more important not to smoke than to smoke.
But let me say something. I'm not suggesting it's easy for everyone to quit, not at all. For some people it's really hard and
they've really got to try. But I am telling you this, members of the jury, and we all know this, if you don't try it's not going to happen, it's not going to happen.
Plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proving that Mr. Perrotto was a member of the Engle class. And if you agree, if you agree that addiction to nicotine was not a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's lung cancer, then you should check "no" to question 1, you should knock on the door, and you should tell the deputy that you've reached your verdict.
Now, if you do decide that he was a member of the Engle class you get to the next question: "Was lung cancer a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's death?" I spent lots of time talking about why lung cancer had nothing to do with the sigmoid volvulus, and for all of those reasons the answer is no.
Question 3. "Please state whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by the defendant was a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's death." Again, for all the reasons I discussed the answer to that question is no.
Question 4. "Please state as to each
defendant whether Mr. Perrotto reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by the defendant after May 5th, 1982 which concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effect and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes" -I'm going to take this down for you so you can actually see the screen.
COURT REPORTER: Thank you.
MR. COFER: -- "and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death."
Members of the jury, there's absolutely no evidence that Mr. Perrotto reasonably relied to his detriment on anything the defendants did or didn't do, said or didn't say in his decisions to begin and continue smoking cigarettes.
Mr. Perrotto started smoking because his dad, his big brother and his friends were smokers.
From the time he picked up his first cigarette he was on notice that cigarettes were dangerous and could cause cancer. There was absolutely no evidence in this case that anything any defendant did enticed or seduced or fooled Mr. Perrotto into beginning or continuing smoking.
Plaintiff has to prove that Mr. Perrotto reasonably relied to his detriment on some statement that caused him to smoke, that caused him to begin and continue smoking. Where's the evidence of that? What statement did he reasonably rely on? What statement did Mr. Perrotto reasonably rely on?
In 1966 when the warnings went on the pack he made no effort to quit. In 1970 when the warning was stronger, he made no effort to quit.
In 1971 cigarette ads went on television.
In 1972 the warnings went on all print ads.
In 1985 when the warning was changed to say smoking causes cancer, emphysema, heart disease, quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to health, he made no effort to quit.
In 1986 when his brother was in the ICU and said, Nicky, stop smoking before you end up like me, he didn't say, oh, I don't think it will happen, he just made no effort to quit.
Plaintiff talked a lot about ads for Merit and Merit Ultra Lights and suggested that Mr. Perrotto reasonably relied to his detriment on those ads. All they proved is that when Mrs. Perrotto saw Merit ads she encouraged her
husband to smoke that brand. There was no evidence in this case that if Mr. Perrotto had not switched to Merit he would have quit.
Mrs. Perrotto admitted, no matter what her husband was going to smoke. The only issue is what brand was he going to smoke.
She admitted that if he had never switched to light or ultra lights Nick Perrotto was not going to quit. She said he couldn't quit. As long as he was going to smoke, she wanted him to smoke the lower tar brand.
Did you hear what she said about Merit?
"Merit was the cigarette of his choice and that's what he smoked."
All cigarettes had the same Surgeon General's warnings on them. And the Merits, that's the brand that Santo was smoking when he had a heart attack. They're the ones that put his brother in the ICU. How can plaintiff possibly argue that her husband was misled into believing Merit cigarettes are safe? He saw his brother in the hospital from smoking Merits.
And we've already talked about in 1989 he quit smoking Merit Ultra Lights, if you believe the testimony, in order to get healthy.
THE CLERK: You're an hour and a half in, Mr. Cofer.
MR. COFER: Okay. About to wrap it up.
You heard that the Surgeon General's Report said light cigarettes, the epidemiology shows, cause less disease. They are not safe. You want to avoid the risk, don't smoke. If you're not going to quit, smoke lighter cigarettes.
Mr. Perrotto understood the risk. He just said, it's not going to happen to me.
I want you to think the about the two conduct witnesses they called. Dr. Proctor, remember what he said? I don't know anything about Mr. Perrotto. I'm here to talk about the companies. And I've been paid 2 million dollars to do it over the last how many years.
Dr. Hurt said, well, I got $55,000 for this case and I can't tell you a single thing that Mr. Perrotto relied on.
Respectfully, members of the jury, I don't think that they were neutral and partial witnesses. The bottom line is, plaintiff has not identified a single statement that Mr. Perrotto reasonably relied on to his detriment.
And finally, by May 5th, 1992 he had been ignoring pack warnings for 16 years.
For all those reasons, the answer to question 4 is no.
For the very same reason the answer to question 5 is no as well.
Question 6 is what's called comparative fault. If you decide that Mr. Perrotto and the defendants are both responsible, here's how you decide how much each is responsible.
Mr. Hammer suggested how you divide it up. Let me tell you one thing so there's no confusion. You never get to comparative fault, you never get to this question unless you decide he was a class member. You don't get there unless you decide class member.
And if you do get this far and you answer yes to either question 4 or 5, then comparative fault does not apply. If you check "yes" to question 4 or 5, even if you think Mr. Perrotto was 95 responsible, comparative fault does not apply and the companies are 100 percent responsible. So I want to make sure that everyone understands exactly what this is asking.
Mr. Bass told you that the plaintiff admits that Mr. Perrotto was partially at fault for causing his own injuries. Think about what that means. The only way that he could have been at fault at all is if, one, he knew smoking was bad for him; and two, had the ability to quit before he got sick. Because if he didn't know smoking was bad for him and he couldn't quit before he got sick, how could he have any fault? And they admit, they admit he's at fault, the only issue is how much.
Mr. Bass said Nick is not 100 percent to blame for what happened to him. We're not blaming him at all. He was an adult and he was entitled to make decisions. But I do respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that he was 100 percent responsible for his decisions, at least the decisions he made as an adult.
Damages -- I'm winding up here. May I approach for a moment?
THE COURT: Of course.
Counsel, sidebar.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Yes, Mr. Cofer.
MR. COFER: I don't want to take away from their time, I have about 10 minutes left. I want to make sure they have enough time. We're happy to give plaintiffs more time.
THE COURT: That's fine.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. COFER: I did want to spend -- just a couple more things I want spend a couple minutes on, and it's question 7, damages. You know, if you get this far and you decide that Mrs. Perrotto and Michael Perrotto are entitled to recover some damages you're going to have to rely on your own judgment as to what you think is fair to compensate them. And I would not presume to give you an amount. I wouldn't presume to. But Mr. Hammer suggested that you award Mrs. Perrotto and Mike Perrotto 20 million dollars for her husband and his father's decisions to begin and continue smoking.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge.
MR. COFER: Twelve and a half and seven and a half equals 20.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, that's not for
decisions, that's for pain and suffering. Mischaracterization of the law.
THE COURT: Sustained. That's fine. Just tie it into the -MR. COFER: He asked for 20 million dollars.
So I want to put that number in context.
So if the average family in Florida makes $50,000 a year.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge, improper argument.
MR. COFER: This is not improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. COFER: If the average family in Florida makes $50,000 a year, so every day they get up, whether they feel good or not, and they go to work. Miss their kids' games. They don't -maybe they have a second job.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach?
THE COURT: Sure. Counsel, sidebar.
JUROR: Your Honor, may we, please.
THE COURT: You need a break?
JUROR: Yes, please.
THE COURT: You know my rules by now. Let's take a 10-minute recess. Don't discuss the case during the recess.
(Jury exited the courtroom at 3:40 p.m.)
THE COURT: I'll give counsel a recess too, but is there an objection.
MR. COFER: I'm leaving when I finish.
MR. HAMMER: Absolutely.
THE COURT: What's the basis of the objection?
MR. HAMMER: The compensation that we're asking for for pain and suffering, to equate it to what a family makes per year is improper.
That's for economic damages. That's for economic damages.
MR. COFER: I'm absolutely entitled to put the number in context, absolutely.
THE COURT: I hear that all the time, divide it per day. I can't tell you -- I hear it in 90 percent of plaintiffs' closing arguments. I've never heard a defendant use it.
MR. HAMMER: Except it's not used to say how much somebody makes a year. That's improper.
MR. COFER: I've seen the ones where they have it by hour. The worst one I saw was, Help wanted, 24 hours a day, no larynx. How much would it cost you to do that? I screamed and objected and got overruled all day. This
happens all the time.
MR. HAMMER: And you know what, that's a permissible argument. But to equate it to what somebody makes per year, the average household income, is improper. That's what economic damages are.
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule the objection. Give everybody a 10-minute recess.
(A recess was taken from 3:41 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.)
THE COURT: Is everybody ready?
Sorry, my assistant is going to be out next week so I had to make sure everything was all set for the week.
Bring in the jurors, please.
(Jury entered the courtroom at 4:00 p.m.)
THE COURT: Welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. And I just wanted to remind everybody that one of our jurors needs to leave by 6 so we're absolutely going to make sure we honor your scheduling request.
You may continue.
MR. COFER: Thank you, Your Honor.
First of all, thanks for being so patient with us. I'm going to wrap up here in just a
few minutes. It's been three weeks. It's been a long three weeks, I know, for everyone. We've all heard a lot, and this is our chance, our one chance to at least give you our perspective of the evidence and how it kind of fits and why it's important. So I'm about done and then you'll hear from my colleagues.
Let me go back to the point that I was at least trying to make before we broke, and that is compensatory damages. That's something you guys have to decide.
In one way I was thinking when I heard Mr. Hammer say 20 million dollars, I was trying to think, okay, how can I put that in some sort of perspective what it means? If you have the average family in Florida makes $50,000 a year, so you go to work every day, whether you feel like it or not, whether the kids or sick, whether you want to go or not, whatever, but every day for a year, you know how years it would take to earn 1 million dollars? 20 years.
20 years every day, rain or shine, sick or not,
20 years to make 1 million. You know how many years it would take to make 20 million? 400 years. 400 years.
Here's the bottom line: If you decide that Mrs. Perrotto and Michael Perrotto are entitled to recover damages use your judgment to decide what you think is a fair amount and come to that total amount and that's what you record.
Question 8. So as Mr. Bass told you, they have two different claims, one is a wrongful death claim. If you decide that lung cancer had nothing to do with volvulus -- first if you decide he's a class member, if you decide he's not a class member the case is over. But if you decide he is and you decide volvulus wasn't caused by lung cancer you go to question 8. And this has: Please state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendant was -- key word again -- a legal cause of his lung cancer or COPD.
I want to make a distinction so there's no confusion. Smoking cigarettes was the medical cause. It was not a legal cause. It's the medical cause in that if he had not smoked as long as he did then he would not have gotten lung cancer. That's medically what caused it, but it's not a legal cause for all the reasons I've already discussed.
And let me tell you specifically. From the time Mr. Perrotto smoked his first cigarette he was on notice that smoking was dangerous. Yet he waited until he was diagnosed with lung cancer before he ever put his cigarettes down for even a day.
Dr. Hurt, their expert, told you that if Mr. Perrotto had quit smoking by the time he was 35 years old, basically when he met Debbie, he would have had a normal life expectancy. That's what Dr. Hurt told you. So we're not talking about just decisions made by a kid in the '50s.
If Mr. Perrotto had quit smoking in 1966 when the warning first went on the pack, according to Dr. Hurt, he never would have gotten lung cancer or COPD. Had he quit smoking in 1970 when the stronger warning went on the pack he never would have gotten lung cancer or COPD.
And finally, members of the jury, if like Dr. Hurt in 1975 Mr. Perrotto would have listened to Debbie and made an effort to quit smoking and quit he never would have gotten lung cancer or COPD. But he did not quit. And he did not make a serious effort to quit. And just like the sun is not a legal cause of a man's
skin cancer, cigarettes are not a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's lung cancer and COPD.
These next questions are easy because I've already talked about them. They're the very same questions under the survival claim as you had under the wrongful death claim.
So number 9, all you need to know is everything I said with respect to question 4 applies to 9.
Number 10, everything I said about question 5 goes to 10. Because they're the same questions. It just applies to a different claim.
11,	everything I said about question 6.
12,	everything I said about question 7.
So now that takes us to question 13. "Under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the defendants."
Okay. You only get to this question if you answer yes to question 4 or 5 or 9 or 10. If you answer no to questions 4 and 5 and 9 and 10, you never get to punitive damages. It's in the instructions but I just wanted to, you know,
make it clear because it's not actually on the verdict form itself.
So let me talk for just a minute about punitive damages and what you're being asked to decide. And Mr. Bass, or maybe it's Mr. Hammer, one of them alluded to it. You're not being asked to decide an amount of punitive damages. The issue here is whether by clear and convincing evidence, and that's defined in the instructions. It's a much higher standard.
I'll talk about that. It's not the scales, you know, preponderance of the evidence. It's clear and convincing evidence.
You're being asked to decide whether by clear and convincing evidence plaintiff has shown that she is entitled to punitive damages.
So don't spend one second thinking about amount. If you decide, if you check "yes" that she is entitled there will be another phase to the trial. Plaintiff will put on evidence. We'll put on evidence. Reynolds will put on evidence. Lorillard will put on evidence. Liggett will put on evidence. We'll have another closing argument, and that's when you get to the amount phase. I just want to make it clear when you're
looking at this question what you're being asked to decide.
So I want you to look at the jury instructions if you get this far. And please look at how clear and convincing evidence is defined. It's a much higher standard of proof.
And with respect to punitive damages, you will see, and this is from the instructions, the evidence must be precise, "the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue."
It's a much, much higher standard. You have to be really, really convinced from the evidence that punitive damages are appropriate.
And let me tell you something else. You have to decide, if you get there, that punitive damages are warranted based on conduct that harmed Nick Perrotto.
MR. HAMMER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled, from the instruction.
MR. HAMMER: Actually, Judge, the instruction -THE COURT: You can use the instruction. Is
it up there?
MR. COFER: It is not up there.
This case is about Nick Perrotto. It is not a class action anymore. This is Mrs. Perrotto's case. Other people have opportunities to bring their own lawsuits.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection.
THE COURT: Counsel, sidebar, please.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. HAMMER: Other individuals have their opportunity to bring other lawsuits. They file a motion in limine to preclude us from talking about other lawsuits in other litigation, it's improper.
THE COURT: Other Engle litigation?
MR. COFER: I said this is about Nick Perrotto and his case, you know, this isn't a class action anymore. Other people can bring their own lawsuits. This is Nick's lawsuit.
You have to award punitive damages based on the conduct that harmed Nick. That's all I'm saying.
THE COURT: Just clarify it, please.
I'll sustain the objection.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. COFER: Let me be very clear. In order to decide whether punitive damages are warranted, it must be based on conduct that harmed Nick Perrotto. This is Nick Perrotto's case. This is a case brought by his wife to recover for the harm she alleges that he suffered. This case isn't about other people.
They can bring their own lawsuit for damages.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge. We just had that discussion at sidebar.
THE COURT: Just clarify. Sustain.
MR. COFER: Sure. Okay. This is about conduct and whether it harmed Nick Perrotto. So bottom line is: When you think about the evidence, think about, did they tie it to Nick Perrotto? Did it harm Nick Perrotto? You heard lots and lots and lots of accusations. And plaintiffs talked about, oh, this grand conspiracy and all these things that happened, but the bottom line is, did it harm Nick Perrotto? Did they prove by clear and convincing evidence that it harmed Nick Perrotto? And if the answer to that question is
no, the answer to this question is no.
And I respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that nothing defendants did or did not do harmed Nick Perrotto. We sold cigarettes. It's a legal product. The fact that we sold cigarettes alone cannot be a basis for liability. The Engle findings are not a basis for liability. It's important to know that.
The evidence was that Mr. Perrotto always had the information he needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking. The evidence is that at all times Mr. Perrotto had the ability to quit smoking.
Dr. Proctor spent two days, two days, talking about the culture of the cigarette companies, but then you remember when I tried to cross-examine him about Nick Perrotto, do you remember? I don't know anything about Nick Perrotto. I'm not here to talk about Nick Perrotto. I'm here to talk about the tobacco companies. Well, we spent a lot of time talking about tobacco companies, but you're here to decide whether Debbie Perrotto has proved her case and whether under the facts and the law she's entitled to money. This is a case about
one smoker and whether he was a member of the Engle class and whether his wife is entitled to recover money for his decisions to begin and continue smoking.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge, that's not what it's about. It's pain and suffering damages, Judge. It's improper.
MR. COFER: I'm not even damages. I'm actually -- this is my wrap-up.
THE COURT: That's fine. He's wrapping up. Overruled. Let's finish it up.
MR. COFER: The evidence was that Mr. Perrotto had the information that he needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking. And the evidence was that he had the tools. He always had the tools to quit if he wanted to quit.
And finally, the evidence was that smoking and lung cancer is not what caused the sigmoid volvulus.
So back in jury selection I told you that there was two sides to the story, and I told you all we really wanted, we wanted a jury that waited to hear both sides before they made up their minds, and we told you really at the end
of the day all we really wanted was a fair shot. We wanted to be able to tell our side of the story and have the jury listen to that with an open mind and then make the right decision, and I know you've done that.
And it is true, I told you this in jury selection too, we do have the greatest civil justice system the world has ever known. And sometimes we forget that. You know, we'll read the paper, we'll see something, say, well, that's crazy. But the bottom line is our system is the envy of every system in the history of the world. As Mr. Bass told you, we all stand equal. Hey, I represent Philip Morris, but you know what, I have the very same slate as Mrs. Perrotto, because that's the way our system works.
So I want to say this: On behalf of my client, the defendants, I think I can even speak for the plaintiffs, thank you very, very much for your willingness to serve in this case. You guys have been prompt. You've put up with our shenanigans. And you've been here for us. And it's an important case for everybody, we appreciate very, very much your service.
Thank you.



MR. WEAVER: May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MR. WEAVER: Mrs. Perrotto.
Counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
Just to let you know, I think I have probably 15 minutes.
You know, like anything in life, whether you want to become accomplished, play the piano, you want to become smart, increase your intelligence or you want to become proficient in something you want to learn a foreign language, you have to do the work, you have to pass goals, you have to meet thresholds. Another way to look at that is the way I look at the burden of proof. A burden of proof to me is like an empty glass.
It's like a glass -- four glasses here, one for each defendant. And in order to reach the preponderance of the evidence you have to fill up the glass just past the half point.
MR. HAMMER: Objection. That's not the standard.
THE COURT: It's the greater weight, that's fine. But it's the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
MR. WEAVER: That was my next line.
THE COURT: There you go. I saved you a minute.
MR. WEAVER: I pointed out in my opening statement, ladies and gentlemen, that the defendants are different companies. They're separate companies with different people who make different products.
You heard Dr. Proctor talk about how the defendants are all fierce competitors. They wouldn't share information with each other. What they would do is they would go buy another's product, reverse engineer it looking for some sort of competitive advantage.
And the defendants are different. And the plaintiff has a burden as to each defendant. That's why when you look at the verdict form you'll see was there a statement made by that defendant. You have to be very conscientious when you look at the verdict form about each defendant. It's not just a single burden. It's
not just even a single scale, like Mr. Bass pointed out.
I told you in opening that my role in this case would be limited, limited by the facts and the evidence. And that's how I want to spend my time with you this afternoon.
Now, I agree with Mr. Cofer's broad analysis of how this case should be decided, but there are specific claims, specific evidence, specific documents that relate to my company,
RJ Reynolds. And I'd like to talk about those.
First, as to brand use, you know, I pointed out in my opening that my suspicion was that the plaintiff would try and broad-brush brand use. They would just try and say things like, all cigarettes contribute, that all cigarette smoking resulted in the disease that Mr. Perrotto obtained. But that doesn't meet the plaintiff's burden of proof.
The instructions that you'll have with you in the jury room define legal cause as follows. This is instruction number 9. You'll be looking for things that directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially so that it can be reasonably said
that but for the smoking of a defendant's or that defendants' product, the disease would not have resulted.
Another way to look at it, I showed you this in opening, was that each defendants' brand use must be a substantial contributing factor or a but for cause of the lung cancer and the 1996 death.
Dr. Hurt's broad-brush testimony that cigarettes contributed simply is not enough, ladies and gentlemen, because you know through the facts and the evidence that medicine and science has a threshold. And plaintiff has to demonstrate that Mr. Perrotto's threshold was exceeded as to Reynolds. According to Dr. Hurt, you heard him focused on a testimony, a threshold of 10 years or 10 pack years.
Dr. Hurt, as Mr. Cofer pointed out, also noted that if Mr. Perrotto had quit before the age of 35 he would not have significantly increased his risk of dying from a smoking-related disease.
If you assume that Mr. Perrotto started smoking in 1953 or 1954 and if he had quit by 1935 [sic], this is where the Reynolds brand history lies.
So what does that mean? That means, according to Dr. Hurt, that his risk was not increased if he had stopped by age 35. So the Reynolds brand use is not a substantial contributing factor. It's not a but for cause.
Dr. Alley also noted that there's a pack year threshold for increased risk that would necessitate CT imaging. And what that means is if a person smokes 20 pack years or more CT imaging is recommended so they can be checked for an increased risk.
So what that means is at the outset in order for there to be but for cause for Reynolds brand use, whether it's Camel or Salem, plaintiff had to bring you evidence that he smoked between 10 and 20 pack years of Reynolds brands.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge. That's not the standard.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WEAVER: The answer is no, ladies and gentlemen. The facts that you were provided will not allow you to get to that point. You remember the Camel demonstrative that I used and we constructed together with Dr. Hurt. Santo Perrotto's deposition specifically identified a
number of points in time to which he has a clear recollection. He says he didn't see Nick smoking Camels before age 14 or 15. That's 1953 or 1954. He said Nick was not a daily smoker of a pack a day until 1957 or 1958 when he was 18 or 19 years old. When Nick met Barbara in '58 or '59, remember she was born in 1943 and she recalls meeting Nick about 16 years old, so sometime between '58 and '59 Nick was a Marlboro smoker.
And Dr. Hurt, when I asked him, said that there's no evidence in the record that Mr. Perrotto was to two- to three-pack-a-day smoker at any point from the time period in which he was a 13-year-old boy. Dr. Hurt simply assumed that Mr. Perrotto smoked 10 years of Camel history.
And let's look at Santo Perrotto's specific testimony on this issue.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
Q. Although I know you're not able to say exactly how long he smoked each of those brands, . those the brands that you recall he smoked as his primary brands for a number of years?
A. Absolutely.
Q. And with regard to Camels, you said you smoked Camels for about 10 years before switching.
A. I think so.
Q. Is that your recollection of how long Nick smoked Camel?
A. Could be, yeah.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. WEAVER: When Mr. Hammer asked Santo Perrotto that question, "could be" was the best they could do. Unfortunately, ladies and gentlemen, "could be" does not satisfy a but for standard against Reynolds.
When you view Santo's testimony and Mr. Perrotto's first wife, Barbara Heppinstill's testimony together, there's no way you can get up to 10 years. And you certainly can't get to between 10 and 20 years.
Let's talk about some other brands that you heard a little bit about.
Let's go to the Salem slide, please,
Marissa. That's 12. Keep going. There we go.
Mrs. Perrotto referred to Salem as "on occasion." Barbara Heppinstill referred to Salem as "I'm guessing, I'm not positive," "I
saw it when he was bartending."
Santo Perrotto never said that he smoked Salem.
So that's how we get to the chart of Camel maybe a couple of years with some Salem thrown in on occasion.
Plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proof as to Reynolds, ladies and gentlemen. Reynolds' cigarettes were not a legal cause of Nick Perrotto's injury. And if you agree you should put no in questions 3 and 8.
I want to spend just a minute to talk about addiction, because Dr. Hurt spent a lot of time talking about that. The evidence showed that Mr. Perrotto had the ability to quit but he simply chose to continue smoking. He did quit in 1992 when he was motivated to. Now, none of the evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, described Nick Perrotto as helpless or fragile or powerless, someone who was controlled by addiction and nicotine and was left with no choice no matter how hard he tried but to continue smoking until his death. That's just not who Nick Perrotto was, according to the witnesses that you heard from.
His brother Santo told you in that video, if he had been motivated to quit, he would have quit.
Now, Mr. Cofer talked to you about Dr. Hurt and the Mayo Clinic standard. What I want to focus on is one of those two questions that Dr. Hurt used to reach his opinion that Mr. Perrotto was addicted. He said that based on his understanding of the facts and the evidence in this case that Mr. Perrotto smoked every day within the first five minutes of getting out of bed. But how did he get there?
Mr. Bass showed you slide number 22, remember this with the scales, entitled "Nick Perrotto was addicted"? If you looked at this carefully, there was a witness who wasn't listed anywhere, Barbara Heppinstill. Why wouldn't she have been listed? Why would the plaintiff have not wanted you to focus on her testimony?
That's because when they were married, Nick and Barbara were together from 1958 or 1959 until 1973 when they separated, 1974 was the year of their divorce. We know that during that 15-year period Barbara testified that she observed Mr. Perrotto having his first cigarette in the
morning with his coffee. But before he would come down he would get out of bed, he'd wash up, he'd shave and clean himself up. He'd put on a suit and tie for work and then he would come down for coffee and a cigarette. Fifteen years that Dr. Hurt didn't even acknowledge. You can't do that in five minutes, ladies and gentlemen. It's impossible.
The evidence simply does not bear out plaintiff's assertion. Drs. Hurt, Alley and Rothschild all admit that anyone can quit. You heard the evidence that over 60 million people have quit smoking. And Nick Perrotto was one of those. He did quit when he wanted to.
I want to talk about Dr. Proctor and some company conduct issues.
Now, I told you in opening that one of the things that I would encourage you to do is every time you saw a document ask yourself: What does the document have to do with Nick Perrotto? If we can go to 18. Let's apply that to what I was thinking Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of last week.
What does Robert Proctor have to do with Nick Perrotto? Mr. Cofer told you about it,
nothing. Absolutely nothing. He's not his biographer. He told you that. He couldn't remember whether or not he had read the first volume of Mrs. Perrotto's deposition and Santo's deposition.
So why did he come? And it kind of dawned on me during Mr. Bass' closing argument. Remember the Engle findings were up here?
Mr. Bass said, you know, Dr. Proctor talked a lot about that and we showed you all the evidence, and he went like this to the findings. Plaintiffs have spent an inordinate amount of time reproving the Engle findings when, as Mr. Cofer pointed out to you, this case is Mrs. Perrotto's case -MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge, negating the findings.
THE COURT: I'm sorry, didn't hear it.
MR. HAMMER: Negating the findings.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WEAVER: -- and this case is about Nick Perrotto's decisions.
It was plaintiff's job to show you how the conduct was connected to Nick Perrotto, and that never happened. So today, 22 days after you
first showed up for voir dire down in that massive jury assembly room, you still haven't been shown a statement by a defendant that Nick Perrotto reasonably relied on to his detriment.
Let's talk about company issues now, in particular Reynolds' documents.
Mr. Bass told you in opening and Mr. Hammer told you in closing that Nick Perrotto was lied to and information was concealed from him. But how? What was the lie or information that was not publicly otherwise available? What was secret that wasn't in the public domain?
Mr. Gdanski and Dr. Proctor spent a long time talking about snippets of information from documents. And, you know, Mr. Cofer covered this, and one thing that I always think of when I'm in these cases is that we live today in a sound bite society. Everybody has to be so concerned about how they say things because just that little phrase is going to get turned around. Well, that's exactly what happened with these company documents, ladies and gentlemen. Let's look at youth marketing first, number 22.
This was the Diane Burrows document from 1974 that you were shown about younger adult smokers.
Dr. Proctor indicated that youth marketing was simply not an issue when Mr. Perrotto was a teen. Remember he said the '30s, the '40s, the '50s and the '60s youth marketing was not an issue. And by the time the '70s and '80s got around Mr. Perrotto was 45. But even with respect to this document, you remember I showed the very first paragraph where it talked about looking at 18- to 24-year-olds and how that was the area that the company was focused on.
There's no evidence in this case, none, that Mr. Perrotto was affected in any way by what Dr. Proctor calls youth marketing.
Dr. Proctor also -- go to 23, please -wanted to leave you with the impression that this document written by the bench chemist Claude Teague, and remember he talked about this document with Mr. Gdanski, but I showed it to you. This was the document that Dr. Proctor said was proof that RJ Reynolds in particular knew about the hazards of cancer but we kept it somehow buried in a vault somewhere. But it was during cross-examination when Dr. Proctor admitted everything in Dr. Teague's memo was publicly available. It was all published
research. It was known and available. You can't conceal something that's known and available.
I want to focus on -MR. HAMMER: Judge, they've been found to have concealed.
THE COURT: Is there an objection?
MR. HAMMER: Negates the findings.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. HAMMER: Negates the findings in this case.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WEAVER: Let's remember some of the history that Dr. Proctor talked to you about.
In the early to mid 1950s -- and we'll go through these quickly. This is just for context. Let's go to 24.
We talked about how information spreads, how working -- a scientist working in a laboratory writes an article, it gets peer reviewed, the media picks it up, it goes out to the masses.
And that's exactly what happened. That's exactly how Dr. Proctor described it.
And if we can look at 26. You're familiar with these two articles. Dr. Proctor noted
that -That's okay, Marissa. Go to the next one.
Dr. Proctor noted that this article by Ray Norr, "Cancer by the Carton," was the start of what he called the cancer scare for a one- to two-year period during the mid '50s. So in the middle of the great cancer scare Nick Perrotto decides to smoke. What are the chances that he wasn't aware of what Dr. Proctor himself describes as one of the most impactful, popular reports on the hazards of smoking during that one- to two-year period?
Dr. Proctor also told you what Reynolds was doing in the '50s to identify chemicals constituents in tobacco. We talked a lot about Alan Rodgman, one of the most important scientists at RJ Reynolds. Dr. Hurt showed you this document, and Mr. Gdanski pointed out this one sentence about some 30 odd polycyclic hydrocarbons have similarly been characterized, but what you weren't shown was that the same month in Reader's Digest they discussed the exact same thing. You can't conceal what's already known.
Dr. Proctor also discounted the work funded
by the industry outside its own laboratories.
29,	please.
We talked about TIRC and CTR. Twenty-six Nobel laureates. Dr. Proctor corrected me when I showed him the slide with 10 Nobel laureates on it. He said, No, it's more. It's 26.
7,000	articles in peer-reviewed journals.
Research conducted by 239 independent scientists at over 186 research institutions.
These -- this work was cited by the Surgeon General when the Surgeon General thought it was important enough to put in their reports on smoking and health.
30,	please.
And the stubborn fact, the stubborn fact is that CTR and TIRC funded research in '59 and '63 about addiction and about the possibility of pulmonary carcinoma.
THE CLERK: You're 20 minutes in,
Mr. Weaver.
MR. WEAVER: Thank you.
The last thing in terms of company documents I want to point out are these three slides, 12,
13 and 14, that Mr. Bass showed you. The one is, the power of addiction is the secret
ingredient, and it talks about nicotine. Three full slides on nicotine.
But you remember 31 in the document from Reynolds' files on the crucial role of nicotine.
This is the sine qua non document. Nicotine is the sine qua non of cigarettes. Reader's Digest from 22 years earlier said essentially the exact same thing.
Ladies and gentlemen, by now you know that the issue is simply not as simple as whether or not tobacco employees may have written silly things or written wrongheaded ideas. It's about whether or not there's a connection in any of this to Nick Perrotto, whether or not he was directly, continuously impacted by these documents, by these statements. This case isn't about wishes, inclinations or the dictates of your passions. If you focus on the things that aren't connected to Nick Perrotto you'll allow yourself to be guided by something other than the facts and the evidence.
When is comes down to it -- 36, please.
Santo Perrotto said the most important stubborn fact of all: He could have quit when he wanted to.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mrs. Perrotto or her attorneys have not given you any reason to second guess Nick Perrotto's decisions. He had the right to make those decisions and it's tragic that he got lung cancer, COPD and died, but his death was not legally caused by RJ Reynolds or by any of the defendants. As a result, your answer to all of the questions should be no.
I thank you for your time, attention and your service.



MS. KASCHEL: May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MS. KASCHEL: Counsel.
Mrs. Perrotto.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Nancy Kaschel, and along with my colleague Kelly Luther, we have represented Liggett Group in this case. It's been a pleasure to be before all of you in Judge Sasser's courtroom, and I thank you on behalf of my client for your time, your patience
and your service.
At the beginning of this trial I emphasized the importance of considering the claims and the evidence as to each defendant in this case separately. Liggett submits for the reasons already outlined by other counsel, plaintiff's case fails against all of these defendants. However, nowhere is plaintiff's failure to meet their required burden of proof more apparent than the case they have brought against my client Liggett.
Indeed, the vast majority of plaintiff's evidence has absolutely nothing to do with Liggett.
But first I'd just like to back up and go over what we know about plaintiff's case and Liggett. This is my first time using this, okay.
What we know about Liggett and Mr. Perrotto is that Mr. Perrotto never smoked a Liggett brand cigarette; Mr. Perrotto did not become addicted to Liggett cigarettes; and Liggett cigarettes did not cause any disease that Mr. Perrotto had or may have had. We know that Mr. Perrotto did not rely on any Liggett
statement or advertisement.
So what does that mean? Unlike our co-defendants, there is no claim against Liggett for negligence. There's no claim for strict liability, and there's no claim for fraudulent concealment against Liggett. Liggett is in this case defending one claim, what's been generally called the conspiracy claim. So let's focus on that.
And I'd like to show you question 5 of the verdict form. I'll try to go over this quickly because you've already seen this. Now, you may well not even have to get here, but this is the first time that you'll see Liggett's name in the verdict form. And you'll be asked to resolve this question if you get this far. "Please state as to each defendant whether Mr. Perrotto reasonably relied to his detriment on any act/statement made after May 5th, 1982 in furtherance of that defendants' agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death."
Now, that's a lot to say. But with that as
our framework, I'd like to break that down and just focus on two things. Two terms that we've heard a lot about throughout this case, "agreement" and "concealment." And then I'd like to take a look at the evidence as it relates to Liggett.
First, in an effort to convince you that Liggett was part of an agreement that caused harm to this plaintiff, her attorneys and experts identified a number of industry events and organizations as purported proof. Most of this evidence, however, had no connection to Liggett.
Now, Dr. Proctor gave his opinion anyway, that there were two dates that were the most important in the conspiracy; specifically December 14th and 15th, 1953, the Plaza Hotel meetings. And Dr. Proctor went on to tell us that Liggett did not take part in these two most important events. We know that Liggett did not sign the Frank Statement. We know that Liggett did not form the TIRC. We know that Liggett did not hire the PR firm of Hill and Knowlton. And Dr. Proctor told us that Liggett was not a member of other industry groups such as the ETS
group, the Center for Indoor Air Research and ARISE.
In fact, we learned that Liggett was a member of CTR, TIRC's successor, but it was a member for a mere three and a half years when it sort of tried it out and then quit sometime in 1968.
Now, in an attempt to prove Liggett was part of an agreement in this case, plaintiff relies on the fact that Liggett was a member of the Tobacco Institute. Indeed, Dr. Proctor told us TI membership was the basis for his opinion that Liggett joined the conspiracy in 1958. That date is important to my client to the extent that evidence that predates 1958 is not evidence as to Liggett.
Now, we learned that Liggett joined the TI in 1958 and then quit all on its own a few years before the Tobacco Institute disbanded when the other companies were still in the Tobacco Institute. But other than attending some conferences and paying dues, plaintiff has not demonstrated that Liggett ever controlled or decided, authorized what the TI did or said.
And Dr. Proctor told us that because Liggett has
had such a small market share Liggett's total contribution to the TI was a fraction of what was paid by the rest of the industry. In fact, it was less than one half of 1 percent.
And also Dr. Proctor described Liggett's participation with the other companies during this period as, quote/unquote, merely off and on. And he said that Liggett was the least involved. And those are his words.
We also learned that along with these defendants as members of the Tobacco Institute there were several other members of the Tobacco Institute, including farming and wholesale companies. Those other Tobacco Institute members are not defendants in this case. If somehow plaintiff wants you to believe that Liggett's membership alone is enough to prove to you that plaintiff's claims against Liggett are supported by evidence.
Now, the second thing that I'd like to talk to you about is concealment, plaintiff's allegation that Liggett kept secret the information it had regarding smoking, cancer and addiction which caused harm to this plaintiff.
Now, first of all, I just want to touch on
two things. Plaintiff has not submitted any Liggett-specific evidence on the issue of addiction. Dr. Hurt was here for a while, and he showed you dozens of company documents on the topic of addiction, but none that came -- you can turn that off -- came from Liggett or pertained to Liggett's products.
Similarly, there is no Liggett-specific evidence that Liggett manipulated nicotine or used ammonia in its own products.
Let me just talk about research and Liggett and what Liggett was doing in the 1950s.
Because, as we learned, beginning in the 1950s scientific evidence was surfacing concerning the risks of cigarette smoke. And instead of joining the TIRC, Liggett decided to independently invest in a large-scale biological research program with the premier scientific firm named Arthur D. Little, and it did so to study the health effects of smoking at the time.
And when asked about this research, Dr. Proctor told us that Liggett's research, that this was, quote/unquote, a good thing and further described Liggett ADL's work as honest work.
Now, plaintiff has argued that Liggett kept
secret information it had relating to smoking and cancer based on one document, a document not from Little -- I'm sorry, from Liggett but from Arthur D. Little. And I'd like to briefly touch on that document.
This is what they showed you and this is what they highlighted in plaintiff's case. It's PTO2138. It's a 1961 document entitled "L&M, A Perspective Review. Let's take a look.
They showed this to you in Dr. Proctor's case, in his direct, and it is from Arthur D.
Little and it states: "There are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco.
These are cancer-causing, cancer-promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful."
Now, this document does indeed demonstrate that ADL had been conducting research regarding cigarette smoking and cancer, but what plaintiff's attorneys didn't show you in their case but I had a chance to clear up with Dr. Proctor is that these experiments were not concealed or kept secret but given by Liggett directly to the Surgeon General, the most public health official in the world at the time.
And I specifically asked Dr. Proctor about the disclosure of these experiments. I asked him: "And there came a time that Liggett gave the results of the cancer research it was doing to the Surgeon General; is that right?
"Answer: Yes, some of the Arthur D. Little experiments.
In fact, these findings were contained in Liggett's nine-volume submission, some 1500 pages of research, that Dr. Proctor discussed and is in evidence as Liggett 231.
I'd just like to show you a few excerpts from Liggett's submission. And, again, this is dated right after that Arthur D. Little document.
This is the cover page of Liggett's exhibit.
It's a submission to the Surgeon General containing research. Here in volume 1, page 3, it's a little hard to see, but you'll have it back in the jury room if you're so inclined to read it, but it does state that Liggett's researchers concluded that there was an association between cigarette smoking and overall death rates. And they go on to tell the Surgeon General that this effect increases with
the amount smoked and very probably with the amount of years smoked.
Here's a table in the submission that it's a table of contents which lists the materials which have been suggested as possible carcinogens for the human lung. And indeed Dr. Proctor, when I asked him, did tell me that Liggett identified carcinogens in its submission to the Surgeon General.
This is another page, and I won't go through. There's 1500 pages. I just wanted to highlight a few. But this page represents the results of Liggett's mouse skin-painting studies showing that they, in fact, produced carcinomas with cigarette smoke.
Nicotine's role in smoking was also covered in the nine-volume submission. Liggett states here: "The action of nicotine on the central nervous system is complex and varies with the dose administered. There is little doubt that nicotine is a potent central nervous system stimulant."
In volume 4 Liggett says: Nicotine is the highly addictive pharmacological agent in tobacco. The pleasurable effects of nicotine
are the reasons why people smoke tobacco instead of some other material. Nicotine is a potent stimulant of various key receptors, one of the most potent central nervous system arousal agents known.
So you see the very research plaintiff accuses Liggett of hiding is the research that was given and later incorporated by the Surgeon General in its own 1964 report. Liggett publicly identified carcinogens and Liggett talked about how nicotine is the reason people smoke and that, quote/unquote, it's stimulating, pleasurable, flavorful and habit-forming.
And evidence demonstrating and thanking Liggett for its contribution is in evidence as well.
I don't have enough time to go over every single area where plaintiff's case against Liggett is unsupported, but I'd just like to mention a few other issues.
There is no evidence in this case relating to Liggett's cigarettes.
There is no evidence that Liggett put its products in any movies.
There's no evidence that Liggett put its
products in cartoons or used cartoons.
There's no evidence that Liggett used ammonia in its products.
And there's no evidence that Liggett's sales increased -- Dr. Proctor told us so -- over the time of this purported conspiracy.
Now, just to touch upon about punitive damages. I submit that you will not find that punitive damages are appropriate in this case. Liggett turned over almost a decade's worth of research to the Surgeon General and it did extensive reserve to find the harmful constituents in cigarettes to look for ways to reduce or remove them. It was recognized for that work.
Today Liggett is the smallest of the major tobacco companies with about 2 percent of the market share, and for decades Liggett's advertising expenditures have been, in Dr. Proctor's own words, Dr. Proctor told us that Liggett's advertising expenditures were tiny.
And in 1996 it was the first tobacco company to publicly admit that smoking causes disease and it's addictive. Liggett is the only company
to list the ingredients on its packages, and Liggett is the only company to place an addiction warning on each and every cigarette pack itself. Liggett has continued its long history of doing business differently.
Last point, when I began my comments, I said nowhere in plaintiff's case is their failure of proof more apparent than their case against Liggett. And to point out just how devoid their case is of evidence as to Liggett, I have to mention our amazing clerk Stephanie, who you can't see there, but who has undertaken the not-so-easy job of keeping track of all the exhibits, all the documents that you've seen come in, and that you will see back in the jury room. And I asked Stephanie, and I went over the list that plaintiffs provided us, how many pieces of evidence plaintiff has admitted in this case to support their claims against these defendants. And we counted up close to 130 pieces of evidence. And out of almost 130 pieces of plaintiff's evidence you may or may not be surprised to learn how many of plaintiff's exhibits came directly from Liggett.
Mr. Bass talked about how the best evidence was
the defendants' own words when referring to internal company documents, well, there's not one internal Liggett company document in this case. And I think that's very telling.
Bottom line, folks, plaintiff has not met their burden against Liggett, and I respectfully request that you return a verdict in Liggett's favor. Thank you for considering my comments and thank you for your service.



MR. MAGUIRE: Please the Court.
Mrs. Perrotto.
Counsel.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. On behalf of Lorillard, thank you for your service.
Mr. Cofer, Mr. Weaver, Ms. Kaschel have already covered a lot of the evidence. So we know that at least from the time Mr. Perrotto was a young teenager he was on notice, he was already on notice that smoking was bad for his health and that it was linked to cancer.
Mr. Cofer showed you the big news stories from the 1950s that came out then, and Santo
Perrotto, his brother, testified that his father used to warn him about smoking every single time he caught him smoking.
So let's skip forward 20 odd years to that couple of years where Mr. Perrotto was smoking cigarettes made by Lorillard, and that's the couple years between 1975 and 1977.
By 1975 Mr. Perrotto had been warned many, many times. The warnings went on the packs almost 10 years before Mr. Perrotto picked up a Newport cigarette. Despite all the warnings,
Mr. Perrotto chose to continue to smoke and for many, many years he never tried to quit.
Despite all the warnings, some people choose to smoke. And that is their right. It was his decision. It was Mr. Perrotto's decision to continue to smoke or to try to quit. It was his health. No one else could make that decision for him. His wife Debra Perrotto could not make his decisions for him, nor could his family make his decisions for him. And certainly tobacco companies couldn't make his decisions for him.
By 1975 when Mr. Perrotto picked up a Lorillard cigarette, he was 36 years of age. He had the right to make his decisions about how to
live his life, even if those decisions were risky, even if what he wanted to do was dangerous to his health. That was his right and that was his responsibility.
So if we go to question 1 on the verdict form. Can we pull that up? Here we go.
Mr. Cofer explained that the answer to this question, question 1, is no. It's a two-part question. And no matter what you think of the first part, was Nicholas Perrotto addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, the answer is no.
If you find that Mr. Nicholas Perrotto was not addicted then the answer is no. If you find that Mr. Perrotto was addicted the answer is still no. Why? Because this is a two-part question, and as Mr. Cofer explained, the second part concerns legal cause. It turns on legal cause. You have to decide whether for all those years, 40 odd years, there was something, an addiction that forced Mr. Perrotto to smoke, or whether he smoked because that was what he wanted to do. It was a personal choice.
Plaintiff's expert Dr. Hurt was a perfect example of a personal choice of how an addiction
is not a legal cause of disease or illness, because when Dr. Hurt came to that fork in the road, he made a personal choice to quit.
So Dr. Hurt's addiction was not a legal cause of any injury or illness or harm. If you find that Mr. Perrotto was addicted or even that he was highly addicted, like Dr. Hurt, but when Mr. Perrotto came to the fork in the road every day for 40 years and he chose a different path, he made a personal choice because he wanted to continue to smoke. He didn't want to quit.
The legal cause of his injury was not an addiction, the legal cause of his injury is his personal choice in deciding to do what he wanted to do.
Mr. Perrotto was not that hopeless, helplessly addicted smoker who was struggling all the time trying everything and unable to quit. Mr. Perrotto was not struggling. And for many, many years he was never even trying.
Ultimately Mr. Perrotto showed that he could quit when he was motivated. And plaintiff's witnesses, Dr. Hurt, Dr. Alley, Dr. Rothschild, they all agreed that smokers, addicted smokers can quit if they are motivated and try.
You heard about Dr. Koop. Dr. Koop was the Surgeon General who issued the 1988 addiction report, all the science of addiction, pharmacology, chemistry of nicotine, everything.
And you saw that Dr. Koop, you may remember this, made clear that no matter how addicted a smoker may be, an addiction does not force you to smoke. Dr. Koop said, it is up to you, the smoker, to make the personal choice, the decision to quit.
Here's Dr. Koop's website from 2002.
Dr. Koop said: "Ultimately you are the one that has control over your behavior. The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. No matter how much you have smoked or how much you like to smoke, the choice to light up is always yours."
The choice to light up was always Mr. Perrotto's. Whether he was addicted or not, his decisions to light up every day for 40 some years were his personal choice. His personal choice to continue to smoke and not to try to quit were the legal cause of his illness.
And that's why the answer to question 1 on your verdict form is no. And the same goes for questions 2 and question 3 because they all turn on legal cause.
If you get to some questions like question 3, same for question 8, you have to make a separate decision as to each defendant. So for those, remember the evidence about Lorillard. Smoking Lorillard cigarettes could never have been a cause of Mr. Perrotto's illness because he only smoked Lorillard cigarettes for such a short period of time, that couple of years between 1975 and 1977. Your common sense tells you that a couple of years is not what caused Mr. Perrotto's illness. Let's face it, you heard from a lot of doctors here, and there's not one, not a one said that just a couple of years smoking Lorillard cigarettes was enough to cause Mr. Perrotto's illness.
So if you get to question 3 or question 8, if you get to the Lorillard line, just follow your common sense and answer no.
Your form has a number of questions, 4, 5, 9 and 10, which are all concealment type questions. And they -- these questions all ask
you if Mr. Perrotto relied on anything that the defendants said or didn't say after 1982. In other words, did anyone fool Mr. Perrotto? Was he misled into thinking that smoking was safe or that it was easy to quit? And this has to be at a date -- after a particular date in 1982.
These questions are the path to punitive damages. And that's why you spent days here listening to witnesses who get paid a great deal of money to go around to the courts and present all the dumb things you can find when you go through 81 million or 85 million documents from a bunch of companies over the last 50 years.
And I'm not going to justify anything in any of those old files. But that question is still out there. What on earth does any of that have to do with Mr. Perrotto? Mr. Perrotto already knew that smoking was addictive and that it was dangerous. He knew the risks from his family, his father, his brother, his brother-in-law, his wife. He knew from the Surgeon General. He knew from the front page of the newspaper. He knew from the TV. Yul Brynner and all the celebrities who talked about cancer, and he knew it years before 1982. And none of it made any
difference to Mr. Perrotto. So you should answer no to all of those questions.
And think about Lorillard. Because you heard the evidence that Mr. Perrotto smoked Lorillard cigarettes in that couple of years between 1975 and 1977. That's several years before 1982.
You heard some stuff about advertisements. There's no advertisements that Mr. Perrotto could possibly have relied on after 1982 because every single advertisement after 1982 had the Surgeon General's warning of the danger right on it. In fact, every advertisement that came out after 1971 had the warning on it.
So the answer to all those questions is no.
We move to question 6. This talks about responsibility. Mr. Perrotto and only Mr. Perrotto is responsible for his decisions.
Mrs. Perrotto, as you've heard, admits that her husband was at least partially responsible for his decisions, for continuing to smoke and for not trying to quit. And his brother Santo told you that Mr. Perrotto kicked himself in the you know what over his smoking.
Let's take a quick look at two excerpts from
his brother Santo's testimony.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
Q. Did he ever mention a desire to sue the tobacco companies for his illness?
A. I know he kicked himself in the ass for smoking, but I don't know. I don't remember that.
Q. Did he say it was the tobacco company's fault that he smoked?
A. No, I don't think he said that. Because it's his fault.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. WEAVER: That was Santo Perrotto's testimony. Did he say it was the tobacco company's fault that he smoked? I don't think he said that, "because it's his fault."
Santo Perrotto knew his brother. They were close. They grew up together. And he knew him as a smoker. Santo smoked two or three packs a day for over 30 years, and he didn't quit until he had a heart attack. And Santo Perrotto recognized that the only person who was responsible for his brother Nicholas Perrotto's decisions was Nicholas Perrotto.
So when you get on question 6 to the line
for responsibility, respectfully submit that you put 100 percent down for the responsibility for Mr. Nicholas Perrotto.
If you find that Mr. Perrotto is less than 100 percent responsible then you have to split up whatever percentage remains among the defendants, and that must be based on the evidence. And if you do that, then I ask you to remember the evidence about Lorillard and how limited and short was that couple of years in which he used Lorillard cigarettes.
There's something else I think that's very important that you should know about with respect to this question 6. I think there's a similar question as well, maybe question 11.
And that is, when you do the assignment of percentages and you allocate a percentage of responsibility to Mr. Perrotto, you'll see this on your verdict form for question 6, at the end of it there's some italics. Might be able to show you on the ELMO.
What it says is, at the very last line of that italics, "However, there will be no reduction in the total amount of any damages you award if you answer yes to question 4 or 5." So
if you answer yes to any of the questions about concealment, 4 or 5 or 9 or 10, then any allocation of responsibility that you have to Mr. Perrotto will not reduce any damages. So it's important that you understand that in your verdict form and your instructions both expressly say that.
If you answer yes to any of the concealment questions then the plaintiff, Mrs. Perrotto, gets 100 percent of damages no matter what percentage of responsibility you allocate to Mr. Perrotto.
If you answer yes to any of those questions then the plaintiff will get 100 percent of all damages.
THE CLERK: You have five minutes,
Mr. Maguire.
MR. MAGUIRE: Thank you.
My last point is on question 13 on your verdict form. I described the concealment and conspiracy questions as leading to punitive damages, but there's still no punitive damages unless you answer that Mrs. Perrotto is entitled to punitive damages in response to this question on your verdict form. And as Mr. Cofer told
you, this is not about amount, this is only about entitlement. Amount will be another phase of the trial with additional evidence. That's a whole separate thing. This is only about entitlement. Is Mrs. Debra Perrotto entitled to punitive damages? And that's means extra damages over and above, extra money over and above what is necessary to fully compensate a plaintiff.
Those punitive damages would go to the plaintiff, Mrs. Perrotto, not to the government, not to research, to the plaintiff.
MR. HAMMER: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. WEAVER: Punitive damages, as you've heard, have to be proved with clear and convincing evidence. You have to be convinced there can be nothing unclear that the conduct you're punishing was intended to hurt Mr. Perrotto and that the defendant acted with conscious indifference or reckless disregard.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is no evidence in this case that Mr. Perrotto was misled. And there is no conscious indifference or reckless disregard.
You heard a lot in this trial about a Dr. Ernst Wynder. Everyone agrees that Dr. Wynder was a giant, a legend is how Dr. Proctor described him, who helped to transform the way that we think about smoking and health. You may remember that Life Magazine where his colleague Dr. Evarts Graham -- this is a large picture. And you saw Dr. Wynder in one of the videos during the trial and in closing statements. Is there any doubt in this courtroom that the work of Dr. Wynder and Dr. Graham was a breakthrough in medicine and science and health? Their famous studies encouraged millions of Americans to quit smoking. And Lorillard helped Dr. Wynder and Dr. Graham.
You may remember the testimony you heard. Lorillard gave Dr. Wynder its cigarettes and the materials that he asked for and that he needed for his famous research studies. And after Life Magazine made that work famous, Lorillard continued to work with Dr. Wynder and Dr. Graham through the 1950s, the 1960s and the 1970s. Lorillard worked not only with Dr. Wynder, but also with Dr. Dietrich Hoffmann, both of them
then at the Sloan-Kettering Institute for scientific cancer research and later at their American health foundation on series after series of studies into what was in tobacco smoke, into how to find a safer cigarette, into a way to reduce harmful phenols and PMO. And Lorillard did that all voluntarily. That's not reckless disregard. Lorillard gave its research, it shared its knowledge, it shared its money with Dr. Wynder and Dr. Dietrich Hoffmann.
Lorillard came up with a filter that reduced phenols in cigarette smoke, got two patents. Lorillard made a special submission to the Surgeon General to share its research on phenols. Lorillard helped the Surgeon General and the Surgeon General thanked Lorillard and he thanked the other cigarette companies. That is not conscious indifference. That's not reckless disregard.
And while we're on the subject, you may remember Dr. Proctor, he's the witness who threw everybody into the conspiracy, including the poor farmers' organizations. You may remember him telling you that Lorillard had a longstanding policy against having any of its
products placed in Hollywood movies.
Ladies and gentlemen, there's no need for punitive damages. Punitive damages certainly are not necessary to prevent any company from concealing the dangers of smoking. The dangers of smoking are well-known, and Lorillard helped the scientists, who did as much as anyone, to make those dangers well-known.
So you should answer no to question 13 on your verdict form.
In a couple moments you'll hear from the plaintiffs. Plaintiff always gets the last word. We do not get an opportunity to respond. So what I ask you, as you listen to the plaintiff on rebuttal, please, again, continue to use your great common sense. Please bear in mind that question, the question: What has any of this to do with Mr. Nicholas Perrotto and with the decisions that he made every day for 40 years to smoke, to continue smoking and not to try to quit?
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your time and thank you for your service.
