       MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please the Court,
 counsel.
       Good morning.  First of all, on behalf of
 Ms. Pollari and the rest of the -- her lawyers,
 and people who have been working on her case, I
 want to thank you very much.
       I know you've given up three weeks of
 your lives every day to come here, and it's important work that you did here, because it
 upholds the civil justice system, and it's very
 important work to serve as a juror.
       One of the things I told you at the
 beginning, when I first met you all -- it seems
 like ages ago, but it was only a few weeks
 ago -- was --
       And I think it was received with a little
 bit of skepticism, when I said, if you're one
 of the lucky seven, at the end of this case, I
 think you're going to feel that, you know, it
 enriched you in some way, that you learned
 something.  And I hope that's the case.
       We went through great effort to bring you
 world-class experts to teach you some things
 that you probably didn't know when you walked
 through this courthouse a few weeks ago.  And I
 just wish they could give college credits for
 that, because it's an interesting experience.
       There's a lot of information over these
 last few weeks that you've learned, that I
 think have changed the way you view things and
 see things.  And now that you know the science,
 now that you know the facts, now that you know
 the medicine, you know, I think it puts you in a much better position to evaluate the case
 today.
       Okay.  So I have some time, and I'm going
 to tell you that I'm going to go for a while,
 so if you need a break, please don't hesitate
 to raise your hand.  You know, you're not going
 to hurt my feelings.  We'll --
       The Judge will see it, and we'll stop.  I
 don't mind having my presentation, you know,
 stopped because someone has to use the -- you
 know, the facility.  I don't have a problem
 with that.  So it's not a problem.
       So let's get into it.  You're going to
 get a verdict form with nine questions, okay?
 Nine questions.
       It seems like a lot, nine questions.  And
 every single one of them is very, very
 important, okay?
       But the first one is the most important,
 because we can't go forward unless you answer
 the first question "yes."  The case ends
 after -- if you say "no" to the first question,
 okay?
       So let me tell you what the first
 question is, and let me explain what it means. So the first question is:  Was Paul
 Pollari addicted to cigarettes containing
 nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a
 legal cause of death by primary lung cancer?
       So there's several things going on in
 that question, okay?
       The first part of that question is, was
 Paul Pollari addicted to cigarettes containing
 nicotine.  That's the first determination you
 have to make, was he addicted, okay?
       And we're going to talk about the
 evidence in this case and the science behind
 this case and the medicine behind this case
 that supports that, okay?
       The second part of it is -- is, if so,
 was such addiction a legal cause.  And we're
 going to go through that instruction about what
 "legal cause" means.
       I told you a few weeks ago, in opening
 statement, what it meant; the Judge read it to
 you today.  We're going to go over it a little
 bit more in context with the facts of this
 case.
       And then the next part of it is, did it
 cause a death -- his death, right?  Did it cause his death?  Was -- was the addiction a
 legal cause of his death by primary lung
 cancer?  Meaning, did he have lung cancer that
 started in the lung, that caused his death?
       Was he addicted to cigarettes containing
 nicotine, was that the legal cause of his death
 by primary lung cancer, okay?
       It sounds confusing, but it's really not
 that confusing.  You know, we have to word it
 this way for legal purposes, but I'm trying to
 explain it to you as simply as I can, okay?
       That's what it means.  And if you answer
 "no" to that, the case is over, we go home, and
 that's it, okay?
       If you answer "yes" to that, then we move
 on to the next questions.
       Okay.  So let me tell you the evidence
 behind that.  Let's start first with the
 definition of "legal cause."
       Addiction is a legal cause of lung cancer
 if it directly and in natural and continuous
 sequence produces or contributes substantially
 to producing such lung cancer, so that it can
 be reasonably said that, but for the addiction
 to cigarettes containing nicotine, such lung cancer would not have occurred.
       What does that really mean?  Lung
 cancer --
       I mean, legal cause, if it directly
 produces or contributes substantially to
 producing lung cancer...
       Contributes substantially.  Did it play
 an important part?  Did it play an important
 role?
       But for the addiction, the lung cancer
 would not have occurred.  If he had not smoked,
 if he had not --
       If he was not addicted to nicotine, would
 he have smoked two to two-and-a-half packs a
 day for over 40 years and not develop lung
 cancer?
       Did it play an important role?  Was the
 addiction an important role?  Why -- what kept
 him smoking?
       That's all it means, did it contribute
 substantially.
       So let's apply the facts to the law,
 okay?  He was addicted, it caused him to smoke,
 and the smoking caused his lung cancer.
       Directly produces or contributes substantially to producing lung cancer, okay?
       Now, when you saw the instruction -- let
 me go back to it -- what word is missing there?
 "Choice."  "Choice" is not in the instructions.
 Whether he chose to smoke does not make -- is
 not a factor on whether he was addicted, okay?
       We're going to get to choice and where
 that applies, but it doesn't apply to the first
 question, which is, is he a class member, is --
 was -- did he have an addiction, and was that a
 legal cause of his death by primary lung
 cancer, okay?
       Choice has nothing to do with that.  You
 don't find it anywhere in any of the
 instructions, okay?
       Well, let's talk about addiction.  It's
 an important factor.
       What does our government say about
 addiction?  In 1988, the Surgeon General found,
 in its major conclusions, that cigarettes and
 other forms of tobacco are addicting.
       Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that
 causes addiction.  The pharmacological and
 behavioral process that determine tobacco
 addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
       I mean, nicotine addiction is a problem.
 It's a very addictive drug.  That's what keeps
 people smoking.
       Nicotine addiction is a fundamental
 reason the individual persists in using tobacco
 products, and this persistent tobacco use
 contributes to many diseases described in this
 report.
       The 2010 Surgeon General report, the
 conclusion:  Nicotine is the key chemical
 component that causes and sustains the powerful
 addicting effects of commercial tobacco
 products.
       The powerful addicting effects of
 commercial tobacco products are mediated by
 diverse actions of the -- of nicotine at
 multiple types of nic -- nicotinic receptors in
 the brain.
       Nicotine is an addictive drug.
       By the way, the other thing we're going
 to have to show you is, was he addicted, right?
 That's one of the things.
       You're not going to have a definition of
 "addiction."  The Judge, in all those instructions he gave you, there's no definition
 of "addiction."
       You know why?  Because you guys decide
 what it is.  You use your own common sense to
 decide what "addiction" means.  There's no
 definition.
       You might have -- let me go --
       This is the definition that Dr. Drobes --
       You know, we brought in a world-class
 expert to talk about addiction.  This is the
 definition that he uses.  And it's widely
 accepted among scientists that study nicotine
 addiction.
       "Addiction" is defined as a chronic,
 relapsing brain disease that is characterized
 by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite
 harmful consequences.
       Okay.  How does that fit with the facts
 in this case?  How does that fit?
       Okay.  He continued to smoke.
       Let's talk about Paul Pollari.  What are
 the facts in this case to show that he was
 addicted?
       He smoked for over 50 years.  He smoked
 not only two packs, up to two-and-a-half packs a day for the majority of that time.
       He smoked first thing in the morning.
 And why is that important?  Because you heard
 from Dr. Drobes that when you're sleeping,
 you're obviously not smoking; but when you wake
 up after several hours of being asleep, your
 body is in withdrawal from nicotine.
       So the quicker you go for a cigarette in
 the morning after you wake up is the strongest
 indicator that you are addicted, because you
 are in withdrawal and you need that drug,
 right?
       What's the first thing this man did every
 morning when he got up?  He grabbed his
 cigarettes off the nightstand and lit up.
       He smoked everywhere.  He smoked in bed.
 He tried countless times over the decades to
 try to quit.  He tried quitting on his own.  He
 tried candy, he tried gum.  He threw his
 ashtrays away, he threw his cigarettes away.
       The last thing he did before going to bed
 was smoke.  In fact, there were times when he
 couldn't go through the whole night without
 getting up in the middle of the night and
 smoking.  That's addiction. He smoked immediately before going and
 leaving church.  He would go -- leave movies.
 They would go to smoking --
       They would smoke in restaurants, where
 they allowed him.  When they didn't, he would
 leave.
       He went to a smoking-cessation seminar.
 I mean, this is a man who, if he wasn't
 addicted, why did he need all that help?  Why
 did he go to -- why did he go to a
 smoking-cessation seminar if he wasn't
 addicted?
       Why did it take him decades -- why did he
 try decades and decades and decades to try to
 quit if he wasn't addicted?  If it's so easy to
 quit, why didn't it happen?
       Use your common sense.  Look how much
 time he spent smoking, okay?  If he smokes two
 packs a day --
       There's 20 cigarettes in a pack.  We know
 how much time it takes to smoke a cigarette.
 It's 400 minutes.  Four hundred minutes, over
 an hour -- 6.6 hours a day, okay?
       That's 4,000 -- I mean, 2,409 hours a
 year.  That's 120,000 -- over 120,000 hours in a lifetime.  That's 5,118 days of smoking,
 okay?
       That equates to 13.75 years that he
 smoked.  And if it's two-and-a-half packs, it's
 slightly over 20 years that he spent smoking.
       But think of this:  Six-and-a-half --
 six -- a little over six-and-a-half hours of
 his day is spent smoking.  That's not
 addiction?
       Dr. Drobes, very well-respected
 scientist, over 60 peer-reviewed articles on
 nicotine addiction, written seven chapters in
 books on the effects of smoking, he's lectured
 all over the country.  The man knows --
       He's a scientist.  He knows this area of
 medicine.  And when he went through the DSM --
       By the way, he found that he probably met
 all of them, okay?  But I'll tell you what.
 Let's just go with the ones that he was sure
 about.  Nine out of 11, okay?  Nine out of 11.
       Nine out of 11 is highly, highly
 addicted.  Severe addiction.  Severe.  This
 guy's not mildly addicted; this guy is severely
 addicted.
       But think about it.  He smoked for over 40 years, two- to two-and-a-half packs a day.
 Who does that unless they're addicted?
       But here's the testimony of Ms. Pollari:
       Was Paul addicted to smoking?
       Yes.
       Any doubt in your mind?  Do you have any
 doubt about that?
       Oh, no doubt at all.
       No doubt.
       Their daughter-in-law, Cindy:  When you
 were dating Richard, was Paul trying to quit
 smoking?
       Yes.
       And was that just during that time period
 when you guys were dating, or did that continue
 through the next 15 years?
       Continued through the next 15 years.
       Did you talk to him about that?  Did you
 have a conversation with Paul about his
 quitting?
       Yes.
       When he was trying to quit, did his
 character, his personality, change in any way?
       Yes.
       How? Agitated, irritable, annoyed in general,
 very difficult.
       Was that normal for him?  Was that his
 normal character?
       No.  Very mild-mannered man.
       What is that telling you?  That when
 you're trying to quit, you're in withdrawal,
 your personality changes.  Those are the things
 that Dr. Drobes explained.  That's the science.
 That's the medicine behind addiction.  You take
 away the -- the drug, and it changes you
 because you're craving for it, you want it.
       You know, the defense has no burden of
 proof.  Remember I told you that?  We went over
 it.  I want to make sure you guys know.  The
 defense has no burden of proof.  We have the
 burden of proof.
       We've met our burden of proof.  We've
 been here for three weeks.  We've pounded that
 there.  We know --
       We overwhelmingly met our burden of
 proof, but they have no burden of proof.  But
 they did not --
       There's no doctor that came in to
 contradict who?  Dr. Drobes.  There was -- He was the only addiction expert that
 testified in this case.  No one refuted him.
       Dr. Abel.  Let's talk about Dr. Abel.
 Because you know what?  He was the only
 oncologist --
       This is a cancer case.  This is a lung
 cancer case.  He's the only oncologist that
 testified in this case.
       Harvard Medical School, 44 years of
 practice in the specialty of oncology.  He's an
 oncologist for thousands of patients.  The only
 oncologist that testified.  The only treating
 doctor to testify, involved in the care and
 treatment of Paul Pollari.
       The only doctor that testified that he
 even ever met Paul.  The only doctor to testify
 that diagnosed Paul with any medical condition.
 The only doctor to testify that ever examined
 or provided treatment to him.  The only doctor
 to testify that was involved in trying to save
 Paul's life.
       The only doctor to testify that had
 access to all of Paul's medical records.  The
 only doctor to testify that he had access to
 all the medical records of medical professionals involved in Paul's care and
 treatment from August 1993 to January '94.
       The only doctor to testify that saw Paul
 during the hospitalization in December 1993;
 and saw him daily, for those 13 days, at least
 one time a day.  At least one time a day.
       The only doctor to testify that was
 charged with the responsibility of determining
 Paul's cause of death in 1994.  He was --
       The buck stopped there.  The buck stopped
 there.  The only doctor to testify about
 what -- about the cause of death, and that had
 the benefit of four months of treatment with
 him, medical records, access to the family, and
 other medical personnel.  The only doctor to
 testify that he actually made a medical
 conclusion as to Paul's cause of death in 1994.
       Who was in a better position in this case
 to say why this man died?  The man who treated
 him for 14 -- four months, and saw him 13 of
 his last 15 days alive, every day, at least
 once.  Is there anybody in the world that knew
 more about what Paul was going through than
 this man right here?
       And what did he say?  My opinion is that Paul Pollari died with a lung cancer,
 metastatic in his brain, and this was caused by
 cigarette smoking.
       And are those opinions held to a
 reasonable degree of medical probability?
       They certainly are.
       Notice "reasonable degree of medical
 probability," because he's the only doctor that
 came in here and said, to a reasonable degree
 of medical probability, I know why this man
 died.  He's the only one.
       With regard to your opinion about the
 cause of Mr. Pollari's death, is that something
 that you arrived at recently, or is that
 something you've held for almost a couple
 decades now?
       It's more than a couple of decades.  I
 signed the death certificate on January 11th,
 1994, and indicated on the death certificate
 that Paul Pollari's death was due to -- I wrote
 "bronchiogenic tumor," which is a technical
 term for lung cancer, metastatic to the central
 nervous system, and the brain is a component of
 the central nervous system, so my opinion was
 established more than 20 years ago.  Okay? He signed that death certificate before
 there was even a lawsuit.
       Okay.  And how do you know that -- that
 he had lung cancer as opposed to a cancer in
 the stomach, cancer in the colon?  I mean, how
 do you know that?
       I was there.  I'm confident that, in my
 evaluation of Mr. Pollari, a physical
 examination was accomplished, a history,
 complete history, physical examination,
 relevant laboratory data, and the studies that
 would be required to properly stage the tumor.
 I'm confident that those studies were done,
 because that would be my routine practice and
 the practice of any capable oncologist who
 would be encountering a patient with a
 malignancy.
       How else would he have known that he had
 lung cancer?  How else would he have known that
 it had metastasized to the brain, unless he did
 all those tests and scans?
       Where did he get that if he didn't do it?
 Why would he write it on the death certificate?
 What do you think he was doing for four months?
 What do you think he was doing for the last 13 days of his life?
       When you certified the death certificate,
 the cause of death, did you have the benefit of
 all the records, his care and treatment that
 you had been providing him for over four months
 before his death?
       All the records related to his care,
 since August 1993, up to January 1994, were in
 my possession and available to me when I
 certified that the cause of death was lung
 cancer which had spread to his brain.
       I mean, we can go on.  I mean, he --
 he --
       Let's talk about the gastric bleed.
       And do you know, more likely than not,
 what caused the acute gastric ulcer with recent
 hemorrhage?
       I believe I do.
       And -- and why don't you tell the members
 of the jury.
       Mr. Pollari was taking corticosteroid
 hormones to control the swelling around the
 tumor of the brain, and these medications have
 a propensity to cause peptic ulceration and
 gastrointestinal bleeding. And was that -- this acute gastric ulcer
 bleed a complication of the medications he
 was -- you were giving him to treat the
 metastatic cancer to the brain?
       Yes.  I believe the ulcer was a
 complication of the treatment given to treat
 the tumor in the brain, yes.
       And is that -- and is that to a
 reasonable degree of medical probability?
       Yes.
       This is a man who never once had a peptic
 ulcer, never once had an upset stomach, never
 once was taking any medication for this until
 he started getting treated for the lung cancer.
       And this is about --
       This testimony about how sure are you
 that you evaluated all these other
 possibilities, look what he says:  An important
 component of the evaluation is a CT scan that
 is taken of the chest and carried down over the
 upper abdomen, so that the scan will visualize
 the chest, the liver, the pancreas, the adrenal
 glands -- adrenal glands; and if there were
 tumors manifested in the upper abdomen, the
 scan would have showed that. As far as the other sites of possible
 tumor development, you're asking the patient
 about his symptoms and you're examining him, so
 you are able -- so you are being as complete as
 is practical.
       So what did he write on the death
 certificate?  Bronchiogenic tumor, small cell,
 metastatic to the central nervous system.
 Okay?
       If he didn't do all those tests, all
 those scans, why would he have put that there?
       Okay.  And look when he does it.  Look
 when he does it.  This man dies at 1:15 a.m. on
 the 10th, and the very next day he certifies --
 he certifies the death certificate.  The very
 next day.  No delay, no confusion.  He knew
 what this man died of.
       And so the defense in this case --
       And I'm not criticizing the defense.  Let
 me tell you right now, I am not critical of the
 defense.  They have the right to defend the
 case, so don't take anything that I say that I
 am critical of the defense or the lawyers.
       They're very good lawyers, okay?  I have
 a lot of respect and, you know, they're very, very professional.
       So whatever I'm going to tell you, do not
 take it as I am attacking them.  I am not.  I
 am simply pointing out the inconsistencies in
 the defense with the facts of this case.  Are
 we clear?
       Okay.  But I've got to -- but I've got to
 point them out, okay?
       This is their expert, okay?  This is
 their gastro expert, Dr. Haines.
       Based on the information you reviewed, do
 you have an opinion -- this word again --
 within a reasonable degree of medical certainty
 or probability as to what caused Mr. Pollari's
 death?
       Based on the data, I cannot be absolutely
 certain the cause of death.
       Okay.  Now -- now, you talked about the
 cause of gastric ulcers in general.  Do you
 have an opinion as to the possible cause of
 Mr. Pollari's gastric ulcer?
       No.  I would have to speculate based on
 the odds.
       Well, we're not here to speculate based
 on the odds, okay?  We have to prove our case by the greater weight of the evidence, the more
 convincing weight in the case.
       We brought the guy in here who treated
 him and signed the death certificate, and they
 brought in a guy who's guessing and
 speculating.
       Okay.  You used the term like "if,"
 "speculate," "possible" and "risk."  Do you --
 you do not have an opinion within a reasonable
 degree of probability -- of medical probability
 as to what Mr. Pollari died from, correct?
       We do not know what -- I do not know what
 Mr. Pollari died of.
       You said --
       I'll get back to that.
       Now, you can only speculate as to what
 happened to Mr. Pollari in the last days of his
 life, correct?  You can only speculate?
       That's correct.
       Okay.  You're talking about what could
 have occurred; but in terms of what did happen,
 you -- you know that you would only be
 speculating as to whether or not he had a heart
 attack --
       It applied -- -- that in any way was related to his
 cause of death?
       Yes, as it applies to his cause of death,
 I have no data.
       So all these things, all these
 possibilities that he was throwing around, has
 no data.  He's speculating.  He can't testify
 to a reasonable degree of medical certainty.
       We are in a court of law and we have to
 prove things to the greater weight of the
 evidence.  We have.  And this is -- this is a
 man who died, and you're not supposed to be
 speculating why he died, or guessing.
       My question to you, you would be
 speculating as to whether or not an infection,
 gastric bleed or heart attack, contributed to
 his -- to his cause of death, correct?
       That's correct.
       Everything short of what you know in
 these lab records to you is speculation?
       That's correct.
       You can only testify to what the possible
 causes of death are, correct?
       Correct.
       It is not your opinion that he was dying of an infection when he was discharged on
 January 8, correct?
       It would be speculation.  I cannot say.
       So even the -- even the possibilities,
 they are speculating.
       You could not fill out a death
 certificate and certify what he died from,
 based on the information you have?
       That's correct.
       I mean, it goes on.  I mean, this
 witness, over and over and over again, said he
 had -- he was speculating, he didn't know.
       All right.  And so when Dr. Abel came to
 the medical conclusion, he had much more
 information than you have sitting here today,
 correct?
       I would hope so, yes.
       You would have expected that, right?
       I would.
       And you would have expected him to have
 done everything -- everything necessary and
 reasonable in order to come to the medical
 judgment, correct?
       Correct, I would expect that.
       Right.  And you would have no evidence to suggest that he did not do everything necessary
 in order to make a medical conclusion as to the
 cause of death, correct?
       He says:  I have no data, yes, sir.
       Now, you can only speculate as to what
 happened to Mr. Pollari in the last days of his
 life, correct?  You can only speculate?
       That's correct.
       That's what they brought you,
 speculation.  Pure speculation.  This is a
 court of law.  You need more than that.
       I couldn't bring in -- an expert in here
 and say he's speculating and prove my case.  I
 wouldn't have met my burden of proof.
       Dr. Peterson.  This is the medical
 examiner.  He's not an oncologist, either,
 okay?
       Let me ask you, do you think it's
 plausible, Doctor, that if a patient like
 Mr. Pollari, who is given chemotherapy,
 radiation treatment, is not worked up to find
 out where the cancer originated, do you think
 that's a reasonable hypothesis?
       And listen what this doctor says:  I do.
       He thinks that Dr. -- He says, I think it's possible that
 Dr. Abel, a Harvard-trained, very experienced
 doctor, who is very specific --
       He's a guy who's detail oriented, that
 when you say one word that's incorrect in a
 question, he calls you out on it, okay?
       That's the guy you want treating people
 for cancer, right, a guy who's not going to
 make a mistake, who's paying attention to
 detail.
       And this man says:  I think it's
 reasonable that he didn't work him up.
       Where is he getting that from?  Nowhere.
       Use your common sense.  You saw the man
 testify.  Do you really think that's a
 possibility in this case?
       In fact, is there any evidence of that?
 None.
       You cannot say where the cancer started?
       Correct.
       And you have no opinion as to what caused
 the cancer?
       That's correct.
       But one of the reasonable hypotheses in
 this case is that it could have been lung cancer, right?
       It could have been, yes.
       Do you think that, more likely than
 not -- more likely than not, if he had lung
 cancer, it was caused by smoking?
       I think if he had a primary lung cancer,
 that's the only risk factor -- the only risk
 that I can identify that would most likely be
 the relation.
       So he even admits that, hey, by the way,
 if this is a primary lung cancer, it was
 probably caused by smoking.  He finally had to
 give that up.  He finally had to give that up.
       Would you agree that smoking can cause
 bronchiogenic carcinoma, non-oat cell?
       Well, listen, he -- I got him to agree on
 a lot of things, but for the sake of time, let
 me get through this.
       So when you gave -- so when you gave the
 opinion --
       This is the corticosteroids.
       This is a man who says corticosteroids
 don't cause, okay, don't cause an ulcer -- a
 gastric ulcer bleed.  That's what -- that's
 what he says. But look at this:  So when you gave the
 opinion, did you ever review the literature of
 these -- of these drugs to see if that was
 correct?
       I have not reviewed the literature on
 corticosteroids, no.
       So when you gave this opinion earlier
 today that corticosteroids does not cause
 ulcers and bleeds, you know, you had not
 reviewed the literature on this; right?
       I have not reviewed the literature
 recently, that's correct.
       And have you reviewed any product labels,
 you know, for corticosteroids like Decadron to
 see if maybe this drug this man was getting
 caused ulcers or bleeds?
       I have not reviewed the package insert
 for Decadron, no.
       By the way, have you reviewed the package
 insert for any corticosteroids, to see what the
 concomitant use of NSAIDs and corticosteroids
 would be?
       No.  I think I said I haven't reviewed
 the package inserts, no.
       He's given an opinion, he hasn't even reviewed the medication to see what the
 complications of the medication were.
       I'm not asking --
       I'm not sure what you're asking me.  Are
 you asking me what in -- what informed his
 death certificate?
       Yeah, I'm asking you, would you expect
 that he had more information than those two
 sets of things when he certified the death
 certificate?
       What he may have had in front of him or
 not, I don't know.
       I mean, he -- he would not admit that a
 doctor who certified a death certificate with a
 specific cause of death would have the benefit
 of the medical -- of this man's medical records
 for his care and treatment.
       So, was Paul Pollari addicted to
 cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was
 such addiction a legal cause of his death by
 primary lung cancer?  Yes.
       And then we move on to the second
 question.
       Okay.  The second question is:  Please
 state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by the defendant was a
    legal cause of Paul Pollari's death.
          And there's a line for Reynolds and
    Philip Morris, and you say "yes" or "no" to
    each.
          So let me tell you what this is.  What
    this is -- if you answered --
          We're going to take a break.
          Judge, is that okay to take a break?
[#DELETED RECESS#]
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Where I left off was explaining
    Question 2 and what the significance of
    Question 2 is.
          And, basically, what it means is, what we
    want to know is which cigarettes that Paul
    smoked caused his death, okay?  Which --
          You know, which brand of cigarettes by
    which manufacturer -- not brand, but which
    manufacturer.
          So that's what this question is.  If you
    answered "yes" to Number 1, at least one of
    these has to be "yes," okay?  At least one of these have to be "yes."
          And we suggest to you that they're
    both -- they're both "yes."  They're both
    "yes."
          And what's the testimony about that?  The
    testimony about that --
          And I asked the doctor, the oncologist,
    specifically that question.  I said:  I want
    you to assume, Doctor, that Mr. Pollari smoked
    approximately two packs per day of Philip
    Morris brand cigarettes from 1971 until his
    death -- until his death in January 1994.  Was
    that brand --
          Did that brand of cigarettes contribute
    substantially to producing --
          You see how I used those words?  Because
    that's the legal cause instruction, right?  It
    has to contribute substantially to producing
    his lung cancer and death.
          And look what the answer was:  Yes, I do.
          I want you to also assume, Doctor, that
    Mr. Pollari smoked approximately two packs of
    R.J. Reynolds or its related company brands of
    cigarettes from 1954 until 1971.  Would that
    brand of cigarettes -- smoke that brand of cigarettes contribute substantially to
    producing his lung cancer and death?
          And he answered:  Yes, it would.
          So both of them, you know, both of them.
          And in combination with both of them,
    caused his lung cancer, okay?
          And let me --
          The legal cause instruction, there's two
    parts to it.  The first part of it talks about
    how it contributes substantially to producing
    such disease or medical condition; and then the
    second part of it says, even though it operates
    in combination with some other cause.  Right?
    So it can be two.  It could be two.
          You know, you could dovetail RJR's brand
    with Philip Morris' brand, and they both -- if
    they're both in combination, over a 50-year
    period, over a 40-year-period, caused his
    death; okay?
          But the testimony is that, independently
    of each one of those, they both caused it,
    okay?  They both contributed substantially to
    producing it, and that's all the legal
    requirement we have to prove.
          We don't have to prove it was the sole cause; all we have to prove is it's a -- a
    legal cause.  A contributing factor, not the
    contributing factor.  Big difference between
    something -- "a contributing factor" and "the
    contributing factor."  You see the difference?
          Okay.  So this question, we suggest that
    you say "yes" to both, okay?
          Question Number 3 --
          Now, Question Number 3 is about
    apportioning responsibility among the parties.
    And you'll have a line for Reynolds, Philip
    Morris, and Paul Pollari.  And they all have to
    total to -- to 100.
          But let me tell you, if you say "no" to
    example -- in Question Number 2, to Philip
    Morris or R.J. Reynolds, whichever one, then
    you put zero for whatever one you said "no" to
    in this one, okay?
          Because if they didn't cause his death by
    smoking their product, then you can't apportion
    fault to them on this question, okay?
          In all fairness to them, I'm kind of
    explaining that to you because you'll -- you'll
    also see it on the instructions.  It's a little
    bit confusing, but I want you to understand, okay?
          So what is the evidence in this case?
    How should you apportion responsibility amongst
    these three parties?
          You have two cigarette manufacturers and
    you have Paul Pollari, okay?
          Well, I suggest that it shouldn't be, you
    know, Paul gets 50 percent and the tobacco
    companies share some 50 percent because, you
    know, this isn't, you know, everybody came in
    this knowing the same thing, right?
          If both people come in to -- to an
    agreement and both people know the same thing,
    then maybe you could say, well, it's 50-50; but
    that's not what happened here.
          That's not what happened here, because
    you know that they concealed information and
    didn't tell the truth.  And when someone
    doesn't know the truth about things --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  What's the objection,
    Counsel?
          MS. HENNINGER:  The allocation of fault,
    your Court's instructions as to what it applies
    to.    Should we come up to sidebar?
          THE COURT:  Sure.
          (The following discussion was held at
    sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  Sorry, I'm not understanding.
          MS. HENNINGER:  I can't do it without a
    speaking objection.
          THE COURT:  Sure, no problem.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Mr. Alvarez is saying
    that the comparison of fault, you look at the
    fact that they withheld information in the
    concealment and conspiracy claim.
          Well, the -- your Court -- the Court
    already instructed the jury that the
    comparative fault applies only to strict
    liability and negligence.  That's the
    comparative fault.
          So you have to be looking at the fault
    with regard to those two claims and those two
    claims only.  You can't take the fault from an
    intentional tort and mix it into --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm sorry, I didn't mean to
    interrupt you.
          MS. HENNINGER:  I didn't want to say that
    in front of the jury.    MR. ALVAREZ:  I appreciate that.
          Judge, I'm only pointing out that a
    reasonable and prudent corporation would have
    done --
          A reasonable and prudent corporation
    doesn't lie, doesn't conceal things.  I can do
    that, too.  You know, it's --
          THE COURT:  So do it that way.
    Sustained.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.
         (The sidebar discussion was concluded and
    the following was held in open court:)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  May I proceed?
          THE COURT:  Please.  Thank you, sir.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  You're welcome.
          A reasonable and prudent corporation
    won't withhold information from its customers,
    okay?  They won't do that.
          So what's the evidence in this case?
    Because this man started smoking when he was
    young, when he was 12 years old.  That's when
    they got him.  That's when they got him, right?
          It was a different time, it was a
    different place, it was a different world, all
    right?  And they knew -- they knew that their market was young people, that you had to
    capture them before their --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Same objection, Your
    Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  They have to capture them
    when they're young, okay?
          So what's the evidence in this case?
    Eighty-five to 90 percent of all smokers start
    as teens, okay?  That's the evidence.
    Eighty-five to 90 percent of them start as
    teens.  That's the market.
          They've got to get these young people.
    They've got to get these -- they've got to get
    these smokers as they're kids, so they can be
    customers for the rest of -- decades going
    forward.  And they knew that.
          And these are the internal documents.
    The Importance of Younger Adult Smokers:  Young
    adult smokers have been the critical factor in
    the growth and decline of every major brand and
    company over the last 50 years.  They will
    continue to be just as important to
    brands/companies in the future for two simple
    reasons.           MR. REILLY:  I object, Your Honor.  May
    we approach?
          THE COURT:  Yes.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          THE COURT:  Thank you.  Ladies and
    gentlemen, there was an objection, I sustained
    the objection.  Disregard the last comment of
    counsel.
          Proceed.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So --
          I'll tell you when to put it up.  Give me
    a second.
          One of the things you're going to have to
    evaluate in this case is whether punitive damages are warranted in this case.
          And we're going to talk a lot about that
    a little bit more in detail in a few minutes;
    but what's important to know is, when punitive
    damages are warranted, there's certain evidence
    that comes in, and that evidence is youth
    marketing, and it goes to show how
    reprehensible their conduct was.
          So let me go and show you how
    reprehensible their conduct was, okay?
          The renewal of the market stems almost
    entirely from 18-year-old smokers.  No more
    than five percent of the smokers start after
    age 24.  The total brand -- the total brand --
    the total --
          Excuse me.  The brand loyalty of
    18-year-old smokers far outweighs any tendency
    to switch with age.  Thus, the annual influx of
    18-year-old smokers provides an effortless
    momentum to success [sic] "first brands."
    Marlboro grows at about a .8 share points per
    year due to the 18-year-old smokers alone.
          Young -- younger adult smokers are the
    only source of replacement smokers.
          That's what they call them, replacement smokers.  The replacement smokers are the
    people who are coming in to replace the people
    who died, or quit.
          Less than a third of the smokers start
    after the age of 18.  Only five percent of the
    smokers start after the age of 24.
          If young adults turn away from smoking,
    the industry must decline, just as a population
    which does not give birth will eventually
    dwindle.
          And that's the percentage there, if you
    look at the -- it's 68.7 percent by 18.  And
    the median age is almost 17 years old.
          This is an R.J. Reynolds document.  It
    says:  It is suggested to develop a new RJR
    youth-appeal brand based on the concept of
    going back to -- at least halfway to the
    technology design of the Winston and other
    filter cigarettes of the 1950s.
          It is apparently established beyond a
    doubt that Philip Morris' Marlboro cigarette
    has a much stronger hold on the up and coming
    new generation of smokers than Winston or our
    other brands.  It seems to me that a "me too"
    brand stands very little chance of changing this situation.  What is needed is a new
    concept.
          So they recognize that if there is a
    concept that works with young people, like
    Marlboro, Reynolds is going -- we got to -- we
    got to do something like Marlboro does, because
    Marlboro is very successful in getting these
    young people.  We've got to do the same thing.
          That's their mentality.  That's their
    mentality.  That's what this document shows
    you.  This is their state of mind.  Their state
    of mind is, these guys are doing it better than
    us.  We got to do it, too.  We got to go after
    these kids.
          Many manufacturers have studied the
    14-to-20-years market in hopes of uncovering
    the secret of the instant popularity of some
    brands enjoyed by -- almost completely to the
    exclusion of others, as shown above.  Creating
    a fad in this market can be a great bonanza.
          The progression of Marlboro preference
    shares from 50 percent at 14 to 15, to
    21 percent at 21 to 24, while an indication of
    the brand's great popularity among young
    people, is also a clear signal of the "in" status the brand enjoys among them.
          This has been confirmed in the recent
    series of group sessions we conducted.
    However, it does not -- it does also appear
    that maturity and broadened experience have a
    definite effect on the reduction, over time, of
    Marlboro's astounding popularity among the 14
    and 15 age group.
          I mean, they're studying it.  I mean,
    they want to know what these kids are doing.
    They want to know why these kids are smoking.
          Why do you think they're doing that?  Why
    do you think they want to know what 14- and
    15-year-olds are doing, why they chose their
    cigarettes?  Why?
          1975 memorandum:  From time to time when
    describing market categories and target
    audiences, we use references such as "young
    smokers," "youth market," "young market,"
    "youth market," et cetera.
          The terms do not accurately describe what
    we are talking about.  In the future, when
    describing the low-age end of the cigarette
    business, please use the term "young adult
    smoker" or "young adult smoking market." Please advise all members of your department
    that these terms should be used in all written
    materials in the future.
          Why are they doing that?  Because they
    want to make sure that they -- that these --
    they don't get caught using these terms.
          The Federal Trade Commission, 1981:
    Although many experts now classify cigarettes
    as an addictive substance, many teenagers
    believe smoking is okay if they quit before it
    becomes a habit, and approximately 50 percent
    of all those polled did not know that smoking
    is addictive for many people.
          Because when you're a kid, you know, when
    you're 15, you don't think the same way as
    your -- as when you're 20.  And when you're 20,
    you don't think the same way as when you're 30.
    And when you're 30, you don't think the same
    way as when you're 40, and 50, and 60.  You
    change, okay?  You change.
          This is who they're targeting:  Young
    people with diminished judgment.
          Knowledge of more information about the
    health effects -- hazards of smoking is
    relevant to consumers' awareness of whether the health risks associated with smoking -- smoking
    have any personal application to themselves or
    whether they are among those people who are
    particularly vulnerable to these health
    effects.
          For example, some consumers incorrectly
    believe that while smoking may be hazardous to
    others, it is not hazardous to themselves
    because of the particular type of cigarette
    they smoke or the smoke -- or the amount they
    smoke.
          Of particular concerns in this group are
    teenagers who are unable -- unaware of the
    potential addictive nature of cigarette smoking
    and who, therefore, may be tempted to
    experiment with smoking.
          Let me just go through these real quick.
    Okay.  So let me talk to you about why there
    should be percentages of fault.
          And when we get to this question, which
    is Question 3, you can only assess percentage
    of fault for Paul Pollari and those defendants
    that you've found in Question 2, right?  You
    got that?
          It's important, okay?    They knew what they were doing.  They
    knew what they were doing.  They purpose --
          They did not act like a reasonable,
    prudent corporation should act.  They acted
    recklessly, they acted intentionally, they knew
    what they were doing.
          These were smart people.  This whole
    thing was engineered by executives and lawyers
    who worked at the company, to do one thing and
    one thing only:  It's to keep people smoking.
          So when you apportion fault, what I --
    this is what I --
          And, by the way, you can put whatever
    numbers you want there.  It's up to you.  You
    know, you guys are the jury.  You guys decide
    this, okay?
          This is what I would suggest:  I would
    suggest 47.5 percent for Reynolds, 47.5 percent
    for Philip Morris, and five percent for Paul
    Pollari, okay?
          Because he didn't know what they knew.
    When he was 12 years old, he didn't know what
    they knew, okay?
          And they continued in a campaign of doubt
    and confusion so that they could keep these addicted smokers smoking.
          Because think about this:  If you're
    addicted, if you're truly addicted and you get
    two competing messages, one from healthcare
    personnel saying, hey, look, you should stop
    smoking, it's bad for you, okay, and then you
    get messages from the tobacco industry, saying,
    don't worry, it hasn't been proven, but if
    there's anything bad in there, smoke a filtered
    cigarette, it will filter out all the bad
    stuff, less tar, less nicotine, it's safer for
    you, and then from there, you go, oh, do a
    light cigarette, it has even less tar and
    nicotine.  If the person's truly addicted,
    which message are they going to receive, which
    ones are they going to accept?  Common sense.
          Okay.  So, after Question 3, Question 4
    is a damage question which I want to talk --
          We're going to put that all the way at
    the end.  We're going to talk about it at the
    end.
          The next question, Question 5, I call it
    the path to punitive damages, okay?  This is
    the path to punitive damages, okay?
          This case warrants punitive damages.  But you have to answer "yes" to these questions in
    order for us to get to punitive damages.  So
    the next --
          The next questions, the next five
    questions, you have to answer "yes" to or we
    don't get to punitive damages, okay?
          So what's the question?  Did Paul Pollari
    reasonably rely to his detriment on R.J.
    Reynolds and/or Philip Morris' concealment or
    omission of material information not otherwise
    known or available concerning the health
    effects or addictive nature of smoking
    cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a
    legal cause of Paul Pollari's death?
          And it will be "yes" or "no" to -- for
    each of the defendants here.
          And, again, on this question, if you
    answered "no" to one of the defendants in
    Question 2, you can't answer this question to
    that particular defendant, okay?
          All right.  So what's the evidence in
    this case?  What did they conceal?  Because
    this is about them concealing, okay?  This is
    about them not telling the truth, concealing
    the information they knew about the health effects and addictive nature of cigarettes and
    not telling people.  That's what this is.  Them
    not coming forward with the truth when they
    knew it.
          If you're a corporation and you know your
    product's addictive, you know that it causes
    diseases, many diseases, and you tell people it
    hasn't been proven, you know, smoke a filter,
    smoke lights, there's no doubt, if you pay
    scientists to say those things, if you -- if
    you conduct a conspiracy to do that, if you
    continue to lie to the American public for
    decades, okay, and not tell the people what you
    know, that is wrong, okay?
          And if people rely on that information,
    like Paul Pollari did, then they are
    responsible.
          And what's the evidence of that?  What
    did they do?
          Okay.  This is what they concealed.  They
    concealed from the public that they were
    conspiring to conceal the health effects and
    addictive nature of smoking.
          They didn't tell people, hey, we met at
    the Plaza Hotel, we all got together, we're going to do this, you know, we're going to form
    the TIRC, we're going to form the Tobacco
    Institute, we're going to do all these things,
    we're going to manipulate the science, we're
    going to tell doctors -- we're going to pay off
    the AMA, we're going to pay off scientists,
    we're going to spread our money around and do
    what it takes to get -- keep people smoking and
    cast doubt in their minds about the health
    effects.  That's wrong, okay?
          Mislead -- and they mislead real
    scientists about the health effects of smoking.
    They misled the Surgeon General and other
    public health authorities, okay?
          They knew that smoking was killing over
    450,000 Americans a year, and they didn't say
    that they knew that it even killed one person.
    They knew that 50 percent of all smokers --
    50 percent of all regular smokers --
          Think about that.  Half of the people who
    smoke regularly will die of a smoking-related
    disease.  That's a significant, significant
    percentage.
          And they knew that.  You're making a
    product that you know that half the people that are going to use it are going to die and you
    don't tell them?
          They concealed that they had studied
    nicotine and knew that it was a highly
    addictive drug, yet they go in front of
    Congress and they lie.
          They manipulate the levels of nicotine.
    They can take nicotine out altogether.  And if
    people want to smoke for their enjoyment,
    because they want to go out for a social drink
    and they want to smoke, they can do that
    without nicotine.
          But that's not what they want.  They want
    people smoking their cigarettes 20, 30, 40, 50
    times a day, because that's how they make
    money.  So that's why they don't take the
    nicotine out.  They manipulate the levels to
    keep it up there just so it's enough to keep
    people addicted.
          They don't tell people there's arsenic,
    cyanide, radioactive Polonium-210 in
    cigarettes.  They don't tell people, hey,
    there's 70 carcinogens in every puff of smoke
    you're going to take.
          They don't tell people that filters are no safer than unfilters.  Well, what's the word
    "filter" mean?  It means it's filtering
    something out.  That's the whole purpose of the
    scam, okay?  They don't tell them --
          The whole purpose of putting a filter on
    the cigarette is to get people to think that
    it's doing something, when they know it's not.
          They mislead the public about the effects
    of lights.  They know that "lights" means
    nothing.  You end up smoking more and getting
    more carcinogens in your lung.  They know that.
    They don't tell people that.
          But they're supposed to tell them all
    those things.  And that's what this case is
    about:  Their failure to tell people they
    concealed this information from the public.
    And they did it for decades and they did it to
    a guy with a ninth-grade education.
          They knew it.  From 1961:  Carcinogens
    are found in practically every class of
    compound in smoke.  Present technology --
          This is 1961:  Present technology does
    not permit selective filtration of particulate
    smoke.
          They knew it back then.  They knew they couldn't filter it out, okay?  This is 1961.
    Dr. Wakeham writes this, right?
          This is 1963, the same Dr. Wakeham from
    Philip Morris who is responding for the whole
    tobacco industry, to the Surgeon General.
          Look what he says:  None of the chemical
    substances listed therein, to our knowledge,
    have been found by scientific research to be
    harmful to the health of smokers in amounts
    reported in smoke.
          That's a lie.  They weren't telling the
    truth.
          It is possible, of course, to modify the
    chemical composition of smoke by the use of
    filtration.  Two years later, present
    technology does not permit selective filtration
    of particulate smoke.
          They lied.
          1958:  When they come over from Britain,
    and they go to most of these tobacco companies
    and the TIRC, what do they say?
          That everybody except one guy in the
    United States is now -- believe that smoking
    causes lung cancer if by "causation" we mean
    any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an
    indispensable link.
          Okay.  Doubt and confusion.  These are
    the documents.  Obviously, the word is
    "confusion," and anything we can do to confirm
    such a situation could work to our advantage.
          Doubt is our product.  They're selling
    doubt.
          Doubt is our product since it's the best
    means of competing with the body of fact that
    exists in the mind of the general public.
          The other thing is polls.  They know what
    people are thinking.
          It is also the means of establishing a
    controversy.
          This was a well-executed, well-planned,
    well-funded scheme on the American public for
    one purpose and one purpose only:  To make
    money.
          And it worked.  And it worked.  Look what
    their own Dr. Farone, who worked for Philip
    Morris, said.
       (Excerpt of the videotaped deposition of
    William A. Farone, Ph.D., was played to the
    jury as follows:)        Q.    Can enough nicotine be removed to make
the cigarette not addictive?
       A.    Yes.
       Q.    Have nitrosamines been known by the
industry for a long time?
       A.    Yes.
       Q.    About how long?
       A.    1961, 1962.  That range of time.
       Q.    And did they express to you that they
knew that smoking was, in fact, addictive?
       A.    Yes.
       Q.    And did they think that -- that these
compounds, ammonia, urea, and so forth, enhanced the
addictive nature of cigarettes?
       A.    Yes.
       Q.    Was it thought at Philip Morris that
addiction was the reason people smoked?
       A.    Yes.
       Q.    Is what Philip Morris was selling,
nicotine?
       A.    Philip Morris was selling nicotine in the
form of smoke, delivered by smoke, cigarette smoke.
       Q.    And is the same true of the other
cigarette companies?
       A.    Yes. Q.    Philip Morris --
             Did Philip Morris want smokers to smoke
as many of their cigarettes as they wanted to?
       A.    Sure, yeah.
       Q.    Did they place any limits on how many
cigarettes you should smoke?
       A.    No.
       Q.    Was Philip Morris aware that, the more
you smoke, the more chance you have of getting cancer
or emphysema?
       A.    Yes.
       Q.    Or some other disease?
       A.    Yes.
               (Video clip concluded.)
             MR. ALVAREZ:  That's the guy who worked
       for Philip Morris, okay?
             They knew it back in the '70s and the
       '80s, like he said.  Why didn't they come
       forward?  That's concealing, omitting material
       information.
             This is the former president of American
       Tobacco Company's deposition in 1986.  He
       admits that he wanted people to rely on what
       they were saying.
          (Excerpt of the videotaped deposition of Robert K. Heimann was played to the jury as
       follows:)
       Q.    Does advertising play a role in a
person's selection of a cigarette?
       A.    We hope so when we advertise.  It's
difficult to confirm this, but we do make the effort,
and I think it's fair to assume that the -- the
expenditure of large funds for advertising does give
status to a brand and, therefore, influences some
people to select that brand.
       Q.    Okay.  Is one of the objectives of
advertising for cigarettes simply to put your
advertising best foot forward and hope it will serve
all purposes, it will --
       A.    Yes.
       Q.    -- it will attract new smokers and keep
your loyal ones?
       A.    Exactly.
               (Video clip concluded.)
             MR. ALVAREZ:  You know, they -- they got
       exactly what they wanted, okay?  They got
       people smoking.  They got people doubting, when
       they knew it was -- what they were saying
       wasn't true.  And when people did that, and
       smoked and got ill, they should have known. They should have known.
             This is the testimony of Rose Pollari:
             Did you believe that there was a
       controversy about smoking and health?
             Yes.
             By the way, did Paul read the newspapers
       and publications?
             Yes.
             Did he watch TV and news and stay current
       on events?
             Yes.
             And was Paul aware of the controversy
       about smoking and health?
             Yes.
             Okay.  By the -- by the way, were you and
       Paul receiving conflicting information about
       smoking and health?
             Yes.
             Okay.  Some reports -- did some reports
       say it's hazardous and other reports say that
       it had not been proven?
             Yes.
             Okay.  And, so, just so it's clear, did
       Paul hear both sides?
             Yes.              And --
             Okay.  And did Paul believe that there
       actually was a controversy about smoking and
       health?
             Yes.
             Okay.  In the '70s -- in the '60s, did he
       believe that there was a controversy about
       smoking and health?
             Yes.
             And in the '70s, did he believe that
       there was a controversy about smoking and
       health?
             Yes.
             And in the '80s, did he believe that
       there was a controversy about smoking and
       health?
             Yes.
             And up to the time that he died, did he
       believe that there was a controversy about
       smoking and health?
             Yes.
             They got what they wanted.  He believed
       the controversy.  That's why they spent all
       those tens of millions and hundreds of millions
       of dollars. What do you think they were doing?  Why
       do you think they set up these front
       organizations like the TIRC, the TI?
             These are smart people.  You think
       they're spending millions of dollars for
       nothing?
             So, did Paul Pollari reasonably rely to
       his detriment -- you know, you have the
       evidence -- on Philip Morris and R.J.
       Reynolds -- I'm sorry, R.J. Reynolds and/or
       Philip Morris' concealment or omissions of
       material information not otherwise known or
       available concerning the health effects or
       addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if
       so, was such a -- was such reliance a legal
       cause of Paul Pollari's death?
             And the answer to that is "yes" and
       "yes."
             Okay.  Question 6.  This says:  Did any
       of the concealment or omissions of material
       information that R.J. Reynolds and/or Philip
       Morris on which you found Paul Pollari
       reasonably relied to his detriment occur after
       May 5th, 1982?
             And it's R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris, okay?
             Now, here's the important part of this:
       May 5th, 1982, has no factual significance in
       this case.  There's nothing about May 5th
       that's anything particular to Paul.  It has
       legal significance, okay?
             We have to prove that he -- that after
       May 1982, okay, after May 5th, 1982, he
       continued to rely on stuff that was concealed
       from him.
             MS. HENNINGER:  Objection.  Misstates the
       law.
             THE COURT:  Sustained.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  Did he --
             We have to prove that -- did any of the
       concealed or omitted material information by
       R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris on which you
       found in the previous question -- you found in
       the previous question --
             If you say "yes" to that, you answer this
       one, okay?  If you say "yes" to 5, you answer
       this one, okay?
             And, here, what we want to know is, after
       1982, did he continue, okay?  Did he continue
       to believe, okay? MS. HENNINGER:  Same objection, Your
       Honor.
             THE COURT:  Sustained.
             MS. HENNINGER:  Move to strike.
             THE COURT:  The jury is to disregard the
       last comment.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  So what's the evidence?
             Okay.  They have known for a very long
       time that filters provided just as much or more
       nicotine and carcinogens to people.  They've
       known this for a very, very long time, okay?
       They knew that filters were --
             This whole thing about filters was a scam
       to keep people smoking and keep in their minds
       some doubt that the filter was doing something,
       okay?
             Here's a 1966 document that says:  The
       illusion of filtration is as important as the
       fact of filtration.  Okay?
             1976:  The new filter brands vying for a
       piece of the growing filter market made
       extraordinary claims.  In most cases, however,
       the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting
       as much or more nicotine and tar as he would
       have gotten from a regular cigarette.  He had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on
       the grounds of reduced risk to health.
             This is what they knew.  This is what
       they knew.  They knew people were smoking
       filters because they thought it was safer.  And
       they knew -- they knew that it didn't reduce
       the risk and they were getting more nicotine.
             1975:  The smoker profile data reported
       earlier indicated that Marlboro Light
       cigarettes were not smoked like regular
       Marlboros.  There were differences in the size
       and frequency of puffs, the large -- larger
       volumes taken on Marlboro Lights by both
       regular Marlboros and Marlboro Light smokers.
             So they knew that people were smoking
       more with these lights.  They knew it.
             1975, this is more on Marlboro Lights:
       The smoker data collected in this study are in
       agreement with the results found in other
       project studies.  The panelists smoked the
       cigarettes according to the physical
       properties; i.e., the dilution, and the low RTD
       of Marlboro Lights caused the smoker to take
       larger puffs on the cigarette than on
       Marlboro's 85s.  The larger puffs, in turn, increased the delivery of Marlboro -- Marlboro
       Lights proportionally.  In effect, the Marlboro
       85 smokers in this study did not achieve any
       reduction in smoke intake by smoking a
       cigarette, parentheses, Marlboro Lights,
       normally considered lower in delivery.
             I mean, that's them.  I mean, that's
       Philip Morris' own --
             They know that "lights" means nothing,
       but they continue to do that.  They continue to
       market it as a safer cigarette, when they know
       it's not true.  In fact, people were smoking
       more.  And that's not right.
             And it wasn't until 2001 when it first
       came out.  Public health authorities
       dramatically underestimated the ability of
       cigarette manufacturers to engineer cigarettes
       that would yield very low tar and nicotine
       values when machine smoked, but yielded much
       higher levels of tar and nicotine when smoked
       by smokers.
             The switch to low machine-measured-yield
       cigarettes with the illusion of risk reduction
       was, therefore, substituted for a real risk
       reduction that would have occurred had the smoker quit smoking altogether.
             Let me go to this conclusion:
       Advertisement of filtered and low-tar
       cigarettes were intended to reassure smokers
       who were worried about their health risks of
       smoking and were meant to prevent smokers from
       quitting based on those same concerns.
             Advertising and promotional efforts were
       unsuccessful [sic] in getting smokers to use
       filtered and low-yield cigarette brands.
             Internal document -- internal tobacco
       company documents demonstrate that the
       cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent
       deception of advertising -- advertising that
       offered cigarettes as lights or ultra lights or
       having the lowest tar and nicotine yields.
             They concealed that.  They concealed
       that.  That wasn't known until 2001, way after
       Mr. Pollari died.  They concealed that from
       him.
             And what did she say?
             Okay.  What cigarettes did he switch to?
             Marlboro Reds.  A filtered cigarette.
             Okay.  And how -- and how were filters
       being advertised back then? As safe.
             And was -- and what was Paul's
       understanding about the filtered cigarettes?
             That it was safe to smoke.
             Did Paul ever switch to another cigarette
       after Marlboro Reds?
             Yes.
             And what was -- and --
             And what cigarettes were that?
             Marlboro Lights.
             And do you remember when that was?
             Early '80s, I think.
             Is it the Marlboro Lights or Marlboros?
             Marlboro Lights.
             And what was your understanding of why
       your husband was smoking Marlboro Lights?
             They were safer.
             Direct evidence, after May 1982, that he
       believed that smoking Marlboro Lights were
       safer.
             And you were asked some questions about
       why your husband switched to lights.  Do you
       remember those questions?
             Yes.
             And you were married to him for 40-plus years?
             Yes.
             Did you know your husband?
             Yes.
             Did anybody in the world know your
       husband better than you?
             No.
             Okay.  And do you know why your husband
       switched to light cigarettes?
             You can answer.
             Because he thought it was safer.
             And did your husband ever tell you that
       he thought cigarettes were completely safe?
             No.
             Right.  That's the reason he smoked the
       lights.  That's the concealment.  That's what
       kept people smoking.  That's what kept these
       addicted smokers smoking.  Smoke the filters,
       smoke the lights, these are safer, don't worry
       about it, you're safe.
             The daughter-in-law, Cindy:  And at some
       point did he switch brands?
             Yes, he did.
             And what brands did he switch to?
             Marlboro Lights. And do you know when that happened?
             About the time we were married in '86,
       mid-'80s.
             Do you -- did you ever have any
       conversations with Paul why he switched from
       Marlboro to Marlboro Lights?
             Yes.
             My question was:  Did you have a
       conversation with Paul about why he switched
       from Marlboros to Marlboro Lights?
             Yes.
             And what did he say?
             He felt they were safer.
             And did he actually say that to you?
             Yes, he did.
             Did you have a conversation with Paul in
       which he told you how he got the impression
       they were safe --
             Yes.
             -- safer?
             Yes.
             So that question, is there any -- did any
       of the concealed or omitted infor -- material
       information by R.J. Reynolds and/or Philip
       Morris on which you found Paul Pollari        reasonably relied to his detriment occur after
       May 5th, 1982?
             "Yes" for both.
             Now, the next questions, 7 and 8, are
       very close to the same questions as 5 and 6,
       okay, with a little bit of difference.  This is
       our --
             This is our claim that they concealed --
       that they agreed with other tobacco companies.
             Did Paul Pollari reasonably rely to his
       detriment on any act or omission taken by
       Reynolds and/or Philip Morris in furtherance of
       an agreement with other tobacco companies or
       organizations to conceal or omit material
       information not otherwise known or available
       concerning the health effects or addictive
       nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was
       such reliance a legal cause of Paul Pollari's
       death?
             And then the same question, the post-1982
       question, okay?
             So what's the evidence there?
             Okay.  They were -- They formed this
       whole conspiracy.  They all got together, they
       threw money at it.  This is what they were telling the American public.
             (The video clip was played and taken down
       to the best of the reporter's ability as
       follows:)
             VOICE:  Well, obviously, a filter takes
       out certain tar and nicotine.  I don't think
       the industry admits there are any bad elements.
       If there are bad elements, through our
       laboratories, through the Surgeon Generals,
       through the AMA, through acts of God and luck,
       we hope we may find them.  And if they are
       found, they will be removed.  But, at this
       point, we do not know.
               (Video clip concluded.)
             (The video clip was played and taken down
       to the best of the reporter's ability as
       follows:)
             VOICE:  We do not believe cigarettes are
       hazardous.  We don't accept that, because when,
       as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is
       identified as being injurious to human health,
       we are confident that we can eliminate that
       ingredient.
             VOICE:  Do you believe that cigarettes
       are safe? Have they been proved to be safe,
       Mr. Cullman?
             VOICE:  I believe they have not been
       proved to be unsafe.
             VOICE:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
             VOICE:  I don't know if they do or not.
             VOICE:  I'm not in a position to give you
       a "does" or "does not" answer.
             VOICE:  What will it take for this
       institute or for the various tobacco companies
       to be convinced?
             VOICE:  Well, that's a good question, and
       one that I think has been confounding a lot of
       scientists for decades.
             VOICE:  To this question, it must be
       answered, insofar as the correlation between
       lung cancer and cigarette smoking are
       concerned, no one knows.  It may, it may not.
             VOICE:  The case is still open.  The jury
       has not come in.
             VOICE:  It may not be harmful?  You're
       not convinced?
             VOICE:  It may be or it may not be.  We
       don't know.
             VOICE:  And as far as I'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply don't know
       scientifically what makes a normal, healthy
       cell suddenly go malignant.  Whether it's
       cigarette smoking or diet or genetics or
       occupational exposures or physical or mental
       stress, we simply haven't the vaguest notion.
             VOICE:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
       cancer, "yes" or "no"?
             VOICE:  It is not known whether
       cigarettes cause cancer.
             VOICE:  All right, sir.
             VOICE:  It has not been causally
       established.
             VOICE:  Cigarette smoking -- no causal
       relationship between cigarette smoking and
       emphysema?
             VOICE:  Despite all of the research to
       date, there has been no causal link
       established.
             VOICE:  No causal relationship between
       cigarette smoking and heart disease?
             VOICE:  No.  As a matter of fact, there
       are studies that while we are accused of being
       associated with heart disease, there have been
       studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over
       these forces.
               (Video clip concluded.)
             MR. ALVAREZ:  And the last gentleman you
       saw was president of Reynolds.  That was in
       1984, okay?  1984, after the -- May 5th, 1982.
             Now, this is the testimony of the CEO
       from 1993:  Does cigarette smoking cause
       cancer?
             Not to my knowledge.  It's not been
       proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer.
             This is CEO Campbell, 1993.
             All right.  Is cigarette smoking -- is
       tobacco addictive?
             No, I do not believe that tobacco smoking
       is addictive.
             I mean, they were all doing it, they were
       lockstep with each other.
             "Yes," "yes," "yes," and "yes."
             Question 9.  Okay.  Question 9 is -- this
       is the final step in this phase for punitive
       damages.  If you don't answer "yes" to this, at
       least for one of the defendants, we don't get
       to punitive damages.
             And this is a case for punitive damages. Let me show you evidence of that, okay?
             And if we have a punitive damage phase,
       it's a very short phase, a day, day and a half.
       It's not -- we're not going to be here for
       three weeks again.  You know, we told you we
       would finish by March 26th, and we will; okay?
             So what's the evidence there?  Let's
       listen to some of their own people.  You know,
       let's -- let's listen to Figlar, Dr. James
       Figlar, a representative from R.J. Reynolds
       Tobacco Company.
          (Excerpts of the videotaped deposition of
       James N. Figlar, Ph.D., was played to the jury
       as follows:)
       Q.    Sir, sir, no, no, no, I -- I understand
those are your beliefs.  I want to know, do you
believe that they were being honest with the American
public when they were making those statements?
       A.    If I may answer the question now.
       Q.    You may answer my question, and you can
expand on it as much as you want, like you've been
doing.  So do you believe they were being honest?
       A.    At the time, they were, because that is
what they believed at that time.
               (Video clip concluded.) MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  That is not a
       truthful statement.
             MS. HENNINGER:  Objection to the comment
       on the witness' testimony.  We need to make a
       motion.
             THE COURT:  Sure.  Come sidebar.
             (The following discussion was held at
       sidebar:)
             THE COURT:  Yes, ma'am?
             MS. HENNINGER:  Mr. Alvarez just looked
       the jury in the eye, told them that Dr. Figlar,
       a representative of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
       Company, lied to them.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  Right.
             MS. HENNINGER:  I move for a mistrial.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  And he's --
             THE COURT:  Excuse me.  One at a time.
             MS. HENNINGER:  He can't come in here and
       say my corporate representative lied under
       oath.  That's not proper closing argument.
             THE COURT:  Thank you.
             Anything else?
             MS. HENNINGER:  No.
             THE COURT:  Mr. Reilly?
             MR. REILLY:  No argument. THE COURT:  Yes, sir?
             MR. ALVAREZ:  I can.  That's exactly what
       the Supreme Court says.  If somebody --
             If a witness comes in and says something,
       gives an untruthful statement, I -- I can call
       them out on it.  And I did, okay?
             THE COURT:  Anything else?
             MR. ALVAREZ:  No.
             THE COURT:  Objection's overruled.  There
       is no manifest necessity for a mistrial.  I'm
       overruling the objection.
            (The sidebar discussion was concluded and
       the following was held in open court:)
             MR. ALVAREZ:  He said that they believed
       it, and that's not true.  And they knew it.
             They even formed a corporation in Germany
       to do secret studies that they didn't want to
       do here, so it wouldn't be discovered.
             And look at these documents.  Ship all
       documents to Cologne.  On the phone and telex,
       these will be destroyed.  If possible -- if
       important letters have to be sent, please send
       to my home.  I will act on them and destroy.
             That's how they wanted to keep --
             That's the -- the extent and the level of the secrecy of the concealment which merits
       punitive damages.
             If, however, the results with nicotine
       are similar to those gotten with morphine and
       caffeine, we want -- we will want to bury it.
       Accordingly, there are only two copies of this
       memo, the one attached and the original which I
       have.
             Dr. Wakeham rose to the head of research
       for Philip Morris.  Listen to what he says.
             (The video clip was played and taken down
       to the best of the reporter's ability as
       follows:)
             VOICE:  None of the things which have
       been found in tobacco smoke are at
       concentrations which can be considered harmful.
             VOICE:  But the components, themselves,
       can be considered harmful, can they not?
             VOICE:  Anything can be considered
       harmful.  Applesauce is harmful if you get too
       much of it.
             VOICE:  I don't think many people are
       dying from applesauce.
             VOICE:  They're not eating that much.
             VOICE:  People are smoking a lot of cigarettes.
             VOICE:  Well, let me say it this way:
       The people who eat applesauce die, the people
       who eat sugar die, the people who smoke
       cigarettes die.  Does the fact that the people
       who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that
       smoking is the cause?
               (Video clip concluded.)
             MR. ALVAREZ:  I mean, this company went
       to every extent to conceal the truth from
       consumers, to conceal the truth from people
       like Paul Pollari, okay?
             And they knew -- and they knew that they
       were doing it, okay?  And they didn't care, and
       they were bold about it, okay?  They were bold
       about it.  They didn't care.
             Anne Browder, 1983.
             (The video clip was played and taken down
       to the best of the reporter's ability as
       follows:)
             VOICE:  Well, how can you stay in
       business if you can't hook the kids?
             VOICE:  We've been in business very well,
       thank you, for some time now.
               (Video clip concluded.) MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  They know -- they
       know they had to get the kids.  They knew it.
       They knew it.
             Without the chemical compound, the
       cigarette market would collapse, Philip Morris
       would collapse, and we'd all lose our jobs and
       our consulting fees.
             That's all they cared about.
             However, we cannot ever be comfortable
       selling a product which most of our customers
       would stop using if they could.  That is to
       say, if the exit gates from the -- our market
       should suddenly open, we could be out of
       business almost overnight.
             I mean, where do you see in here, we
       should tell the customers, we should tell -- we
       should tell these smokers, these addicted
       people, that they should find help, that they
       shouldn't smoke our products, that we know that
       it's causing cancer, we know all these things?
             Not one document in the millions of
       documents have they ever said that -- not one
       time -- because that's not what they cared
       about.
             We do not foresee any difficulty to remove certain reports from research files.
       Once such -- when --
             Once such action is necessary for the
       successful defense of our present and future
       suits, we will promptly remove all such
       reports.
             As an alternative to invalidation, we can
       have the authors rewrite those sections of the
       report which appear objectionable.
             They stopped at nothing:  Destroy,
       rewrite, manipulate.  That's why punitive
       damages are appropriate in this case.
             Since we have a major program at INBIFO,
       and since this is a locale where we might do
       some of the things that -- which we are
       reluctant to do in this country.
             We have done -- we have gone to great
       pains to eliminate any written contact with
       INBIFO, and I would like to maintain this
       structure.  If this procedure is unacceptable
       to you, perhaps we should consider a dummy
       mailing address in Koln for the receipt of
       samples.
             I mean, that's what they --
             I mean, these guys are pretty sharp guys. These guys are doing everything they can so
       this stuff -- let's throw all this research out
       because I don't want it coming back to us and
       hurting us.
             Meanwhile -- meanwhile, every year,
       450,000 Americans were dying, every year, of a
       smoking-related disease.  Every year.
             This is another example of a CEO making
       statements in 1986.
             (Excerpts of the videotaped deposition of
       Robert K. Heimann was played to the jury as
       follows:)
       Q.    I want to show you what's marked as
Plaintiff's Exhibit 17, which is simply a package of
Pall Mall cigarettes that's currently being sold.  Can
you verify that as a package of Pall Mall?
       A.    Yes, sir.
       Q.    And would you read the warning that's
placed on that for us, please?
       A.    Surgeon General's Warning:  Quitting
smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your
health.
       Q.    That is not a warning that is voluntarily
placed there by American Tobacco, is it?
       A.    No, it is not.        Q.    Would you put that warning there if
Congress didn't require it?
       A.    No.
       Q.    And the reason is, simply, American
disagrees with the warning, doesn't it?
       A.    We certainly do.
       Q.    You don't think they harm smokers, so
there's no reason to put any warning on them, do you?
       A.    We believe our product is not injurious
to health.
       Q.    As far as you concern --
             As far as you're concerned, is the
Surgeon General simply wrong in concluding that
cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
       A.    I would use the term "misguided."
       Q.    Okay.  If he's misguided, then I take it
that your opinion is he's wrong?
       A.    I was simply trying to be polite about
it.
       Q.    Okay.  But not being polite about it, in
your opinion, he's wrong, right?
       A.    Dead wrong.
       Q.    Congress is wrong in requiring these
warnings, correct?
       A.    We do not think they're justified. Q.    So they're wrong?
       A.    They're wrong.
               (Video clip concluded.)
             MR. ALVAREZ:  All right.  Back then --
             It wasn't until 2000 that they first
       admitted that smoking was harmful to health and
       that it was addictive, okay?  Six years after
       this man died.  Too late for him.
             THE COURT:  Five minutes, Counsel.
             MR. McPHARLIN:  I have 13 minutes.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  We have 13 minutes.
             THE COURT:  Proceed, Counsel.
             If you want to come sidebar --
             MR. McPHARLIN:  No.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  Yes, if we can.
             THE COURT:  Yes.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  I don't think I can do this
       in five minutes.  Give me a second.
             (The following discussion was held at
       sidebar:)
             THE COURT:  I don't know where you're
       coming from with --
             MR. ALVAREZ:  Because every time we go to
       a sidebar, we stop the clock.  We have a clock.
       And they agreed to that, just -- I mean -- MR. McPHARLIN:  I stopped it on the
       breaks.
             THE COURT:  I stopped it on the break,
       too, but not when we come sidebar.
             MR. McPHARLIN:  I stopped it on the
       sidebars.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  I think we all want that,
       right?
             MS. HENNINGER:  I mean, it would stop
       gamesmanship about people trying to ask for
       sidebars just to waste time.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  I won't do that.  I'm --
             MS. HENNINGER:  I'm not doing that.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  I don't think it's
       appropriate that a sidebar counts against me.
       I didn't ask for a sidebar.
             THE COURT:  Counsel, two hours is more
       than enough.  We have a running clock on this
       thing.  We are not going to --
             You know, it's not a gamesmanship issue.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  I didn't know that's how we
       were doing it.  I didn't know that.  I thought
       we were stopping the clock.
             THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you.
            (The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
             MR. ALVAREZ:  May I proceed, Your Honor?
             THE COURT:  Thank you.  Please.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  So this is another
       thing that they were doing to try to conceal
       from the -- from the American public back in
       the '60s, '70s, '80s, and '90s.  This is what
       they were doing, okay?
             Criteria for selection:  First, the
       reports should be a new research --
             MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  Can
       we approach?
[#DELETE SIDEBAR#]
             THE COURT:  I apologize.  Go ahead, sir.
             MR. ALVAREZ:  Thanks.
             The next question:  So, under the
       circumstances of this case, state whether you
       find by clear and convincing evidence that
       punitive damages are warranted against R.J.
       Reynolds Tobacco Company and Philip Morris USA
       Inc.
             The answer to both is "yes."
             And that is the path to punitive damages.
             Okay.  So I want to now change subjects and talk about Question Number 4, okay?
             And Question Number 4 is:  Please state
       the total amount of damages sustained by Rose
       Pollari for the loss of her husband's
       companionship and protection and for her mental
       pain and suffering as a result of Paul
       Pollari's lung cancer and death.
             You know, this is where you decide how
       much money to award in this case.  And there is
       no standard, there's no book, there's no --
             You know, it's whatever you believe is
       fair and reasonable in light of the evidence.
       You guys decide that, okay?
             And, you know, I'm going to make a
       suggestion, and it could be -- you could agree
       with it, you could say it's too little, it's
       too much, or it's just right.  It's up to you.
       It's within your purview to do whatever you
       think is right in light of the evidence, okay?
             But there's certain things you need to
       consider.  You know, she was 58 years old when
       she lost her husband.  She was a young woman.
       Paul was only 62 when he passed away.
             You know, the nature -- if you look at
       the nature of their relationship, they were married for 40 years.  They had a loving
       family.
             For Paul and for Rose, the most important
       thing in their life was their family.  They
       cherished the fact that they had grandchildren.
       She cherished the fact that -- and hoped that
       they were going to live a long and prosperous
       life just being surrounded by their families,
       making pasta for Sunday dinners, and watching
       their grandkids grow.
             And she'll never see any more the love
       that you see in a grandfather's eyes when a
       grandchild comes running and just jumps on top
       of them and gives them this big hug of pure,
       unfiltered love.  And she's not going to have
       that.
             She's not going to have the husband that
       she'd hoped she would have for the rest of her
       life, that they could take walks after dinner,
       just hang out, just have a companion.  That's
       something she's going to -- she's lost.
             And when you look at, you know, Paul and
       Rose, you know, they -- they lived a simple
       life.  They lived a humble life, you know?
             You know, she's the butcher's wife.  But even the butcher's wife deserves to be happy.
       And they took him from her purposely,
       intentionally.  They knew what they were doing,
       and they didn't care.
             You know, Paul loved his grandkids and he
       saw -- he got to meet one just right before he
       died.  In fact, this is the last picture we
       have of Paul alive, holding his granddaughter
       who's only a week old, okay?
             That's the last picture we have of him.
       And the last picture we have of him is holding
       one of the things he cherishes most in life,
       which is a member of his family.  Because, to
       them, it wasn't about wealth, material things.
       To them, the most important part of who they
       were, at their core, was family.
             And when you have a family that's so
       close and you've -- it's like taking a rock and
       throwing it in a small pond.  It has a ripple
       effect.  And that ripple effect affects,
       closely, Rose, and it will affect her for the
       rest of her life.  She was 58 years old when
       she lost her husband.
             So, I mean, you know, like I said, I have
       a suggestion.  It sounds like it's going to be -- when you see it, it's a lot of money, you
       know?  It is.  But the loss is enormous, what
       she suffered since 1958 -- excuse me, since
       1994, when she was 58 years old, until now.
       She hasn't remarried.
             So we would suggest $11 million.  And
       it's a suggestion.  It could be more, it could
       be less.  It's whatever you find is reasonable
       in light of the evidence and what the evidence
       supports.  It's completely within your purview.
       And with that, I'm going to leave you.
             And thanks, Judge, for giving me some
       extra time.
             And on behalf of Ms. Pollari, we want to
       thank you for your consideration.  And when
       they're finished, we'll have a few moments to
       address you, and Mr. McPharlin will address you
       one last time.  Thank you.


          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Thank you, Judge.
          All right.  Afternoon.  You heard a lot so
      far, right?
          I only have a half an hour so I'm going to
      talk fast.
          Sorry.
          She's used to it though.
          I'll start with some of the most recent
      things that you just saw.  You just saw a
      timeline from each of them, right, remember the
      timeline that each of them just showed you.
      Well, what was missing from that timeline?
      Well, we could have put a line in for 1920,
      right?  When the evidence that showed that they
      were corralling people to go get high schoolers,
      remember that 1920, high schools, big business
      for tobacco.  Right? So they want to talk about, well, youth
      marketing, youth marketing is a distraction,
      that's what they want you to think.  It's not a
      distraction.  It was a shameful part of their
      business.  It's the shameful base of their
      business.  It's what they built their business
      on.  So it is not a distraction.  To call it a
      distraction shows that they are company --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  All right.  1940s.  They're
      following the science.  They could have put that
      in their timeline, right, when they're
      advertising "More doctors smoke Camels" using
      nurses, medical personnel, dentists to advertise
      their products.  They could have put that in
      their timeline.  When they're talking about no
      cough, "Our product doesn't produce a single
      cough."
          Mr. Reilly talked about how Rose's brother
      was told not to smoke because it made him cough.
      But what did the tobacco industry do when
      doctors were saying that?  When they were
      thinking, well, it might irritate you, maybe it
      will make you cough.  Well they produced advertising, they put doctors, or fake doctors
      on TV that said more doctors smoke our product.
          You saw the Lucky Strike ad, 21,000 doctors
      surveyed smoke Lucky Strikes.
          More doctors than any other doctor in the
      world smoke Camels.
          "No cough in a car load."
          Inhale.  "Do you inhale?"
          Every time medical -- the public health
      community said something, tried to make -- tried
      to put a message out to the public, tried to get
      some information out to the public that smoking
      could be harmful to your health, they reacted
      like no business ever did.
          You heard that they were the most prolific
      advertisers in the history of this country; 250
      billion dollars over 60 years.  Sixty years.
      250 billion dollars just on advertising alone.
      That does not include the hundreds of millions
      of dollars they spent on the fake scientific
      organization, on the Tobacco Institute.
          They could have put in when they put in
      filters.  Remember the timeline?  They produced
      filters 1950s.  Before 1950 it was .6 percent of
      the market were smoking filters.  After some information started coming out by 1975 76
      percent of the market were smoking filters.  Why
      were they smoking filters?  Well, you don't have
      to listen to me, you can look at their own
      documents.
          You know, when they thought nobody was
      listening, when they thought nobody was hearing
      their words, you heard what they really truly
      believed.  You saw from their own mouths what
      they thought.  And what they knew was that their
      marketing campaign, and filters were a marketing
      campaign, they weren't an actual health benefit
      they were a marketing campaign.  They knew that
      their marketing campaign was working, that it
      was affecting people.
          Do you remember the document from 1964, it
      was talking about the affects of the Surgeon
      General's Report and it was a Philip Morris
      document and they were talking about how it
      wasn't that bad of an impact.  And you know
      what, 1965 is going to be a banner year just
      like 1963 was.  We sold -- I can't remember the
      exact number, it was like 500 billion cigarettes
      in 1963.  So don't worry, we have a crop of
      replacement smokers coming in.  These young folks who are not affected by -- or who are not
      persuaded by what just came out in 1964.  So
      they knew exactly what they were doing.
          Mr. Reilly suggested that this case is about
      one smoker's decision, which is an attempt to
      just sweep under the rug decades of misconduct,
      lies, a conspiracy by an industry that was
      putting out a consumer product that they knew
      millions of people were using, teenagers were
      using.  They did unthinkable things.
          So trying to just make this all about Paul
      Pollari, and it is about Paul Pollari, because
      it affected Rose and Paul in a horrific way.
      But to tell you this is just about his decision
      is -- that's the distraction.
          They talked about Paul looking in a mirror.
      Rose was with him for decades when he tried to
      quit.  His family was with him for decades when
      he tried to quit.  When he looked in the mirror
      he saw a man who wanted to quit.
          Well, why didn't Mr. Reilly ask you:  I
      wonder what Philip Morris' executives saw when
      they looked in the mirror in 1953, or '64.  Or
      what did Ed Horrigan -- when Ed Horrigan woke up
      in 1984 and he got ready for his interview on Ted Koppel, right, put a suit on, when he looked
      in the mirror to get himself ready for that
      interview, what did he see in the mirror?  Why
      didn't Mr. Reilly point that out to you?
          They showed you a board and said defendants
      can't be held liable for merely selling
      cigarettes.  Well, that is not what we're asking
      you to do and that is not what this case is
      about.  They didn't just do that.  They did far
      more than that, they did unthinkable things and
      you saw the evidence of that.  This is not a
      claim about warnings.  It's not a claim about
      the warning labels.  Fine.  It's not.  It's
      about intentionally selling a product that you
      know is addictive that you know kills and you
      lie about it and you do everything you can to
      confuse the public and confuse public health
      about it.  That's what this case is about.
          They talk about a safer cigarette, how
      Dr. Proctor is so bold to suggest that they stop
      doing what they did to the product to make it so
      dangerous, right?  They talk about tobacco being
      sold for hundreds of years.  It's true, been
      used for hundreds of years except it didn't
      produce lung cancer.  Their product produces lung cancer.  Their product produces emphysema,
      throat cancer, bladder cancer, stomach cancer,
      pancreatic cancer, not the tobacco that Columbus
      smoked, not the tobacco that was around for
      hundreds of years, the product that they made
      that they told everybody was just fine.
          He talked about Dr. Proctor and all the
      things that he had to say, but you didn't see
      one witness come in from RJ Reynolds or
      Philip Morris to refute a single thing he said.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MS. HENNINGER:  We need to make a motion.
      We can preserve.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  They said -- Mr. Reilly said
      this and I think Ms. Henninger said this too,
      nothing RJ Reynolds did or Philip Morris did
      influenced Mr. Pollari.  That just defies common
      sense.  They wallpapered this country with
      advertising with messages about what their
      product was, with statements and claims that it
      wasn't harmful, that it didn't do anything
      wrong, that if you were concerned, smoke a
      filter.  And then all of a sudden hundreds of
      thousands, millions of people are moving over to filters and then to lights.  And they have the
      incredible audacity to tell you nothing they did
      influenced him.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  What's the objection, Counsel?
          MR. REILLY:  "Audacity," we have -- I have
      the audacity, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Thank you.  Objection sustained.
      Jurors disregard.
          Proceed.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Their defense is that
      nothing they did influenced Paul Pollari.  The
      billions of dollars that they spent advertising
      and marketing their product.
          They say pH, well, the Surgeon General said
      something about pH and unprotonated.  Well, you
      saw their own documents, remember when they
      thought nobody was listening or they thought
      they weren't going to get caught, they talked
      about pH and how they were manipulating was
      causing their sales to skyrocket.  Right?
      That's what they said privately.
          Mr. Reilly said it's pleasurable, dangerous
      and addictive.  Well, two and three they denied
      for 50 years. He talked about the World Book and Reader's
      Digest.  Why wasn't that impactful on
      Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds?  If it was such
      an impactful publication, how come it didn't
      convince Philip Morris, the people who actually
      manufactured the product, that there was
      something wrong that you should be warning
      people about?
          They criticize Mr. Pollari for telling his
      kids not to smoke.  So that must mean --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  They bring up that he told
      his kids not to smoke.  What does that mean?
      Does that mean somehow that Mr. Pollari knows
      for certain that cigarette smoking is bad for
      you?  He knows more than RJ Reynolds and
      Philip Morris in 1970 just because he didn't
      want his kids to smoke?
          Does that mean he knew that filters were a
      scam, that lights were a fraud?  Of course not.
          They talk about material facts.  Okay,
      material facts:
          It's addictive. It has 7,000 chemicals.
          They manipulate nicotine to make it more
      addictive.
          Filters are a fraud.  They don't give you
      less tar and nicotine.
          Lights are a fraud.  They don't give you
      less tar and nicotine.  Their own documents
      speak directly to that.
          Fifty percent of the people who smoke will
      die.
          They'll kill millions of people.
          Those are all things that Philip Morris knew
      and RJ Reynolds knew that they intentionally
      withheld from consumers, that they intentionally
      withheld from Paul Pollari.
          They talk about awareness.  The federal
      government, the FTC investigated awareness in
      the '60s and the '80s.  And they concluded that
      what the cigarette companies were doing was
      extremely effective, was working, was
      undermining the public's understanding as to the
      true health effects of smoking.  That's not
      coming from us, from the lawyers, that's the
      federal government investigating what the
      cigarette companies were doing and how effective their marketing was and their activities were.
          You have those reports, just read 'em.
          They talk about 1982.  For legal reasons it
      has meaning in this case, but for practical
      reasons it doesn't mean anything, because what
      they did they never stopped doing until Paul
      Pollari died.  His entire life, the entire time
      that he smoked they lied, they concealed and
      they conspired.  They never stopped.
          They produced and manufactured and sold
      filtered cigarettes and convinced him that they
      were safer.  He switched to lights in the mid
      1980s thinking that they were safer and that's
      exactly what they wanted the public to think.
      That's exactly what their own documents say they
      thought.
          Can you go to 1820, please.
          I'm sorry, not 1820.  2023.
          This is a Brown and Williamson document that
      you saw in the trial.  And it talks about what
      they understood and knew about their reaction,
      their response to health issues, filters.
          "In most case, however, the smoker of a
      filter cigarette was getting" -- oh, no, that's
      not it.  Yeah, I'm sorry -- "was getting a filtered cigarette much or more nicotine and tar
      than he would have gotten from a regular
      cigarette.  He had abandoned the regular
      cigarette, however, on the grounds it reduced
      health risk."
          And then over here, blow up that first point
      please.
          Remember, when they thought -- when they
      didn't think people were listening, when they
      thought they could talk privately, they said
      exactly what they thought, what they believed.
          Nowhere in the instructions does it say the
      reliance had to be on something that happened
      for the first time after 1982.  Nowhere does it
      say that.
          They responded to the health controversy by
      producing more filter brands and brands with
      lower tar delivery.  They knew exactly what they
      were doing.  It was a deliberate attempt to
      mislead the public to keep people smoking and
      get more people to start smoking.
          Go to 4818, please.
          So that was Brown and Williamson who
      Reynolds is responsible for, right?
          Nowhere in the instructions will it say that reliance on "lights" cigarettes as a fraud does
      not support reliance, nowhere in the
      instructions will it say that.  So when they
      tell you there's no evidence of reliance,
      there's no evidence that we did anything wrong,
      he switched to light cigarettes believing that
      they were safer when Philip Morris and
      RJ Reynolds knew that was a scam.
          The verdict form will say relied to his
      detriment after 1982, not what Mr. Reilly told
      you, relied to his detriment after 1982.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you rely
      on the instructions that I gave you, all right?
          Counsel, don't indicate what counsel did in
      his argument; you worry about your argument.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Okay.  Yes, sir.
          He told you there's no testimony about why
      he smoked a Marlboro.  Remember that Marlboro
      video that we showed you?  According to -- that
      was made by Philip Morris.  It was the most
      effective advertising plan of all time; the top
      selling product in the entire world.  Number one
      selling cigarette in the entire world.
      Philip Morris knew that that advertising was effective and they had wallpapered the
      landscape, wallpapered the country, making it
      the most popular cigarette in the country, in
      the world.  And there's no -- there's nothing to
      suggest that they influenced Paul Pollari in any
      way.  So the world was influenced, but Paul
      Pollari was not influenced.  The world thought
      cigarettes were -- light cigarettes were safer,
      but not Paul Pollari.
          This is what Philip Morris said, "Those who
      are currently smoking lights do so because they
      are better for you than full flavor cigarette.
      Although some experience that they actually
      smoke more lights they perceive that they are
      cutting down and it is an alternative to
      quitting, which most cannot."
          So when nobody is listening they talk about
      how what we're doing is effective, what we're
      doing is working on people.
          The conspiracy, how about that as a material
      fact, all right.  That was a secret that they
      denied and they kept the secret until this Engle
      trial, right?  Until 1994 were they first called
      out again.  And then in 2000 they don't admit
      what they did, not until 2000. They talk about choice, nowhere in the
      instructions, not in the verdict form, nowhere
      will you see the word "choice."  It's not part
      of the definition of addiction.  It belies, it
      defies their own documents in their own words
      what they knew why people were smoking.  It's
      not in the DSM; it's not in any NIDA definition;
      the Surgeon General; if you look in the
      Heaviness of Smoking, which we talked about with
      Dr. Drobes, none of the tests and measurements
      that you would look for in just assessing if
      somebody is addicted, which you don't have to
      use, you can just use your common sense, it's
      amazing, to suggest that he was not addicted to
      nicotine, not addicted to their cigarettes.  He
      smoked two to two-and-a-half packs of cigarettes
      a day for over 40 years and they want you to
      think he wasn't addicted.  That defies common
      sense.
          Here's Dr. Koop from 1988.
          4725A, please.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  Surgeon General C. Everett Koop has
      issued two major reports on smoking.  One on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on
      nicotine addiction.
          The tobacco industry disputes both reports
      as more political than scientific.
          VOICE:  We have been told so frequently by
      the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter
      of free choice, you start when you want and you
      quit when you want, but anybody who has ever
      smoked knows that is not true.
          VOICE:  What does the record, the long-time
      record say is the most dangerous age to get
      hooked on tobacco?
          VOICE:  The indications are very clear that
      the people who are most heavily addicted to
      nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting
      are those who began smoking when they were 14 to
      16.  I think the studies in all over the world,
      in every country and every culture, the younger
      you start the greater the addiction and the more
      difficult it is to quit.
          VOICE:  Now you've said that you consider
      tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin; isn't
      that an overstatement?
          VOICE:  No.  I think the evidence is very
      clear if you understand what we're talking about.  Addiction is a specific physiologic
      problem.  And the manner in which you become
      addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner
      in which you become addicted to cocaine or to
      heroin.  And that even after you have quit and
      you think you're clean that there's a tremendous
      tendency to relapse.
          There is no such thing as a safe cigarette.
      There's no such thing as a quality death.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Can you go to 2184, please.
          This is from 1980.  Again, from their
      archives, from their secret documents, from what
      they said to each other when nobody is
      listening.
          "The lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the
      entire matter of addiction is the most potent
      weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung
      cancer/cigarette case.  We can't defend
      continued smoking as 'free choice' if the person
      was addicted."
          That's what they said.  They know exactly
      what addiction does, they know exactly why
      people smoke and they know exactly what it
      means.  It is the reason that people continue to smoke for decades and it is the reason that Paul
      Pollari continued to smoke for decades.
          I need to talk a little bit about the issues
      that were raised as it relates to Paul's lung
      cancer.
          So for over 20 years, not until we got to
      this trial, was there any dispute about
      Mr. Pollari's death certificate or his cause of
      death.
          "Bronchiogenic tumor, nonsmall cell,
      metastatic in the central nervous system."
      Nobody disputed that.  Nobody called it into
      question.  Dr. Abel's medical conclusions stood
      for over 20 years.
          Here's what Dr. Abel said.
          "I was there.  Right.  The material is
      obtained from the lung, and we have an
      individual who's a heavy smoker.  Now, when the
      patient is evaluated, and he's evaluated by his
      primary doctor, he's evaluated carefully by me,
      subsequent in his course he will be evaluated by
      other physician specialists as well.  The
      initial evaluation encompasses a complete
      history.  The patient is asked about his current
      symptoms, his past history, and a careful note is made in detail regarding any other symptoms
      he may have.  The patient is then examined, a
      routine, customary but detailed physical
      examination.  After that, laboratory data is
      obtained and imaging studies are obtained.
          At the conclusion of this process of the
      history, physical exam and laboratory data, and
      the laboratory data includes the cytologic
      examination of the needle biopsy, the
      determination was made that Mr. Pollari had a
      lung cancer."
          And what does Dr. Haines, their expert, say
      about Dr. Abel?
          "So when Dr. Abel came to the medical
      conclusion, he had much more information than
      you have sitting here today, correct?
          "I would hope so, yes.
          "You would have expected that, right?
          "I would.
          "And you would have expected him to have
      done everything, everything necessary and
      reasonable in order to have come to that medical
      judgment, correct?
          "Correct.  I would expect it.
          "Right.  And you have no evidence to suggest that he did not do everything necessary in order
      to make that medical conclusion as to his cause
      of death, correct?
          "I have no data, yes, sir.
          "Now you can only speculate as to what
      happened to Mr. Pollari in the last days of his
      life, correct?  You can only speculate.
          "That is correct."
          So the expert that they brought in not only
      testified that he believed that Dr. Abel did
      everything he needed to do in order to come to
      the conclusion that Paul Pollari had lung cancer
      and that his lung cancer is what his cause of
      death was.
          Nobody disputed that.  Dr. Haines does not
      even dispute that Dr. Abel did everything he was
      supposed to do to make that -- come to that
      conclusion.  They brought you no experts to come
      in and refute --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  There was no evidence to
      refute --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. MR. MCPHARLIN:  The only evidence you got
      about what caused his lung cancer was from
      Dr. Abel.  Actually, that's not true, you also
      got some from Dr. Peterson too.  Dr. Peterson
      said if Dr. Abel is right, which Dr. Haines is
      clearly saying he did everything he needed to do
      to be right, Dr. Peterson said if it is a lung
      cancer, then it was caused by smoking, I'll
      agree with that.
          So there is no question here, there is no
      mystery.  We do know, maybe Philip Morris
      doesn't know, maybe RJ Reynolds doesn't know,
      but we do know, Dr. Abel knew, the physicians
      who treated him knew, who took care of him, who
      was trying to save his life knew, the nurses,
      the lab techs, those people knew what was going
      on with him.
          THE COURT:  Five minutes, Counsel.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Yes, sir.
          RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris when they were
      conspiring to deceive tens of millions of people
      back in 1993 [sic], when we talk about
      entitlement to punitive damages, when we talk
      about if they should be punished when they were
      doing that, do you think they thought about       their victims?  Do you think they thought about
      Paul Pollari and Rose Pollari and Lorraine and
      Claudia and Richard?
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Motion.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  When RJ Reynolds learns
      about this, when Philip Morris learns about this
      verdict --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  The evidence compels a
      verdict that says it is not okay to do what they
      did.  It is not okay to lie.  It's not okay to
      produce a product that kills millions of people
      and claim it doesn't when you know it does.
      It's not okay to make a product as addictive as
      you possibly can, to do everything that you can
      within your power, and these companies were they
      powerful they had lots of funds to do -- and
      resources to do whatever they wanted with these
      products.  They could have made them safe.  They
      could have made them nonaddictive.  They could
      have done everything within their power to put the public's health as a priority, but what they
      did was they used all that technology, they used
      all that power, they used all that money to do
      exactly the opposite of that, to make it as
      addictive as possible, to sell as much
      cigarettes as they could because their priority
      was profits not human life.
          So if you want to talk about whether they
      should be punished, there is no question that
      these companies put human life way below
      profits.  And that requires punishment.  That's
      how it works, when you act like -- when a
      company behaves the way they have, you punish
      them.  It has to work that way.  They have to be
      told you can't do it again, other companies
      can't do it again.  They have to be held out as
      an example to other companies --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Part of what punitive
      damages are for is to deter conduct.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor, wrong
      case.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  It's in the -- it's in the
      instructions, Judge. THE COURT:  Excuse me, Counsel, I'm not
      going to argue with you, move on.
          Let's go.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  All right.  Just a couple
      more minutes.
          Rose was asked in her testimony why they
      moved here, why they moved to Florida.  And her
      answer illustrates what Rose and Paul Pollari's
      life meant to each other, family.  They moved
      here to better their family and make a better
      life for Lorraine.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  They fell in love in two
      weeks.  They spent 40 years together.  It took
      four months to separate them forever.  Four
      months of watching her husband go from the man
      that you saw with his grandson to the man that
      you saw who didn't even resemble that man with
      his granddaughter.  RJ Reynolds and
      Philip Morris had an opportunity to change that
      history.  Those four months, they had an
      opportunity to change that.  They chose -- their
      choice was not to do that.  Their choice was to
      conspire, was to get together, to lie, to deceive, to conceal, to do everything they could
      to keep people smoking when they knew they
      shouldn't have been smoking.  To do everything
      they could to make people think that it's okay
      when they knew it wasn't.
          Rose lost her husband, she lost her partner,
      she lost the man that she had been with who
      helped her raise her kids, who helped her raise
      her daughter Lorraine.  She's lost that for the
      last 20 years and that will be gone forever for
      the rest of her life.  That's what Philip Morris
      and RJ Reynolds took from her.
          And lastly, 1771, please.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  I'd like you to rise and those who
      will be testifying as well with you to rise.
          If you'd raise your right hand.  Do you
      swear that the testimony you're about to give is
      the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
      truth?
          Please consider yourself to be under oath.
          VOICE:  Let me begin my questioning in the
      matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
      Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that
      nicotine is not addictive.  I heard virtually
      all of you touch on it.  And just yes or no, do
      you believe nicotine is not addictive?
          VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not addictive,
      yes.
          VOICE:  Mr. Johnson.
          VOICE:  Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine
      clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
      addiction.  There is no intoxication --
          VOICE:  We'll take that as a no.
          And, again, time is short.  If you can
      just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is
      not addictive, we just would like to have this
      for the record.
          VOICE:  I don't believe that nicotine or our
      products are addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
      addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
      addictive.
          VOICE:  And I too believe that nicotine is
      not addictive.
          (Video clip concluded.) THE COURT:  Wrap it up, Counsel.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Thank you, ladies and
      gentlemen, for your time.
