          MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please the Court.
          Counsel.
          Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, it's a
      long road, three weeks.  This is the last time
      I'm going to address you.  This is the punitive
      damage phase and there's one question, one
      question only on this verdict form.
          It's one question and one question only on
      that verdict form.  This is the question:  "What
      is the total amount of punitive damages, if any,
      which you find by the greater weight of the
      evidence should be assessed against RJ Reynolds
      Tobacco Company and Philip Morris?"
          That's the only question.  Notice whose name
      is missing from there; that's my client's name
      is missing because this isn't about Paul Pollari
      or Rose Pollari.  This is about them, okay.
      This is about assessing -- you've already said
      by your verdict in the first phase that they
      should be punished.  The issue now is how much should they be punished.
          Punishment is about one thing, for what they
      did to this family, for what they did to Rose.
      That's the sole issue in this case.
          They talked about how all the executive --
      by the way, all the executives that they said no
      longer were there, they were there when Paul
      Pollari was smoking.  They made the decisions.
      They made the decisions that cost this man his
      life.  They don't get a pass because the company
      changed CEOs or executives.  They don't get a
      pass.  Punishment, they have to be punished for
      what they did to this lady.  They have to be
      punished.
          They purposely misled Paul and others.  They
      have to be punished for their bad conduct.  They
      said, We heard you.  They came in this morning
      and said, They heard you in Virginia, they heard
      you.  But hearing is not the same thing as
      feeling.  They may have heard you, but now it's
      time for them to feel it because for punishment
      you have to feel like you got punished or it's
      not punishment.
          The instruction, one of the instructions
      you're going to get it is, "You will now decide the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be
      assessed against RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company
      and/or Philip Morris USA Inc. as punishment," as
      punishment, "and as a deterrent to others."
          Well, what does that mean, "as a deterrent
      to others"?  The purpose of this is to deter
      other corporations, other companies, not just
      tobacco companies, other companies who are
      thinking, well, maybe this is okay to do, to lie
      to consumers, to mislead people, to conceal
      information, by your verdict what you're doing
      is you're deterring other companies from doing
      this because they see this verdict and they go,
      We're not going to do this because look what
      happened to them.  That's the policy argument
      behind why punitive damages are allowed in the
      state of Florida, is to deter other
      corporations.
          They still market to children.  They still
      do it.  90 percent of all regular smokers today
      start as children.  It doesn't happen by
      accident.  It doesn't happen by accident.
          These FDA regulations have not prevented
      them from selling one cigarette.  3200 children
      start smoking or try their first cigarette every day.  It's not by accident.
          These are companies -- and we put in the net
      worth of these companies that make net earnings,
      they make billions of dollars every year.  In
      order to feel it, in order for them to feel that
      they're being punished and to deter other
      corporations it can't be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 million
      dollars to a company like Philip Morris or RJ
      Reynolds, because that's not punishment to them.
      They're not feeling it.  In order for something
      to be -- in order for a company to feel punished
      they've got to feel it so they say, I won't do
      this anymore, one; and two is, I have to be
      punished for what I did to this family.
          And you saw how much -- the billions of
      dollars they make a year.  And we're not asking
      for that.  But we're asking you to make sure
      that your verdict is truly a punishment, a true
      punishment, because if it's not it would be in
      vein.
          So if you just look for a few days of their
      net earnings for just a few days, couple days
      for each one of them, just a couple days, that
      would be a punishment that fit the conduct, that
      fit the harm that was caused to this family. They want zero.  They want minimal.  They don't
      want to be punished, but they have to be
      punished for what they did to this lady.  And
      that's fair and it's right and the law provides
      for it.
          And we respectfully request that each one of
      them 15 million dollars.  15 million dollars for
      each one of them is the appropriate punishment.
      They will not only hear but they will feel like
      they were punished.  And unless they feel like
      they were punished, then punitive damages did
      nothing, did nothing.
          Thank you.


          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you, Judge, I'll be
      brief.  Thank you.
          Ms. Henninger said that it was the
      responsible thing to do, but they want to ignore
      what they did to Paul Pollari.  And that is not
      the responsible thing to do.  They ask you to
      look at the jury instructions.  Let's look at
      the jury instructions and let's look.
          It says, "In making the determination you
      should consider the following:"
          Look at number 1 and number 2.  It says,
      "the nature, extent and degree of the misconduct
      and the related circumstances."
          That's the number 1 determination, "the
      nature, extent and degree of misconduct."  It
      cost this man his life.  "and the related
      circumstances." And 2 is "the financial resources of the
      defendants."
          Look at how much money they make and when
      you punish someone, the punishment has to be
      felt or it's not punishment.
          They want you to decline punitive damages
      and say the compensatory damages satisfies it.
      They don't want -- listen, here's the thing,
      they understand one thing and one thing only,
      money.  That's all they care about.  That's the
      only thing they care about.  Look at their -- at
      the records back there.  The only thing they've
      ever cared about is money.  That's how you make
      them feel it.
          This is not about revenge.  This is about
      justice.  This is about doing what's right.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  What's the objection?
          MS. HENNINGER:  J --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  And all these things they're
      doing now, guess what?  You know who it's too
      late for?  It's too late for Paul Pollari.  It's
      way too late.  Too little too late.  They could
      have done many things decades ago that could have changed the course of history for this
      family, for this lady, for this man and they
      chose to ignore it.
          They said their conduct was wrongheaded and
      out of line.  That doesn't even come close.
      That doesn't come close to what these people
      did.  They trivialize it with words like
      wrongheaded and out of alignment.  Lying to the
      American people?  Lying to Paul Pollari when
      they know?  That's not wrongheaded.  They say,
      well, these executives are dead now.  Well, you
      know who else is dead because of their conduct?
      Paul Pollari.  That's who's dead.
          And there's a reason, there's a reason,
      there's a reason that the FDA has to regulate
      them.  There's a reason that they have to pay
      hundreds of millions of dollars to regulate
      themselves, because for decades they couldn't do
      it and it caused harm to many people and killed
      this lady's husband.
          And Ms. Henninger wants you to award $750 --
      $750,000 against RJ Reynolds, which is less than
      a couple hours a day profit for them.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, no evidence in
      the record. THE COURT:  Overruled.  This is argument.
          Proceed, Counsel.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That's all it amounts to to
      them, just a couple hours.
          They heard you, now they gotta feel it.
          Thank you.
