MR. PAIGE:  Good afternoon. 
A JUROR:  Good afternoon. 
MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  So I'm going to be quick, 
or a lot quicker than I was yesterday.  And I just 
want to go over the whole -- it was pretty quick.  
So I want to go over some of the jury instructions 
with you-all and -- that the judge had read to you 
earlier. 
Can you put up the first thing, Robert?  4825
And so we -- as Alex said in opening, you 
know, we do appreciate that, you know, your hard 
work and obviously the verdict, that's what we 
wanted.  And so we're pleased and we're happy, but 
we know that you guys now saw all the evidence.  
So you-all figured that punitive damages are 
warranted, that this type of conduct, the 
corporations, these corporations, or industry are 
going to get together and do something like this 
for so long.  It's amazing how long they were able 
to get away with it.  That there has to be some, 
some ramifications for it.  You can't just come in 
here 50 years later and say, oh, well, we were 
forced to change and so, therefore, we don't want 
to be punished because -- and that's what they're 
going to ask for, quite frankly.  They're going to 
say, look, we're changed now, we're now FDA 
regulated, we're now -- 
MR. FURR:  That's attacking the defense of the 
lawsuit.  
THE COURT:  "We're now," correct.  Sustained.  
MR. PAIGE:  Well, you will probably hear -- 
and anything I say is not meant in any way to 
attack Mr. Furr or Mr. Tepikian.  As I said 
yesterday, I do respect them very much.  4826
But one thing that you will hear is that 
because they're FDA regulated or because they pay 
MSA funds, it is a mitigating factor.  Okay?  And 
what I would submit to you is to think to yourself 
how could it be a mitigating factor if somebody 
waits, is able to get away with it for so long, and 
to get away with it for 50 years and then they come 
in here and say, well, now, that we were caught and 
now that we've changed, all of the conduct that 
they're complaining about occurred so long ago, so 
you don't have to -- you don't have to punish us 
because it was so long ago, it's not the same 
company.  
That doesn't make sense, because if you do 
what -- if you do that, all you would do would be 
encouraging other companies to say if we can get 
away with it long enough, we won't get punished 
because we can do what they did, wait to get 
caught, then we can change, and then we can say, 
hey, you don't have to punish us.  And that's not 
right, and that's why we're here. 
So I want to go through some of the 
instructions in phase one.  You know, there was a 
lot of talk about, you know, why did we bring 
Dr. Proctor here, what's Dr. Proctor doing here, 4827
what does he have to do with anything?  
Well, Dr. Proctor was here because we can't 
rely upon the findings for a ground for punitive 
damages.  You have to -- you have to base your 
award of punitive damages on the evidence you saw.  
So that's why we're not bringing any evidence now 
because you saw it already.  You saw the 
conspiracy, you saw their fraud, you saw the damage 
and the harm that they did and what they did to 
this family. 
So you can punish them.  You are able to 
consider the harm to others as reprehensibility, 
but you can punish them for the harm that they did 
to this family.  And what could somebody do to 
somebody else that could be worse?  There's really 
nothing.  
But I just wanted to reiterate the point, the 
next one, too, that you can't consider the 
findings, and that's why we brought you 
Dr. Proctor, so that you could understand.  It 
wouldn't mean anything to you right now if I just 
read to you a finding and said, oh, they were 
liable for conspiracy, you wouldn't even know. 
MS. WHITMORE:  Objection.
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Objection, Your Honor. 4828
THE COURT:  Sustained.  
MR. PAIGE:  So remember -- if you go back, I'm 
just going to show you a couple slides. 
MR. PHILIPSON:  Go back?  
MR. PAIGE:  No, the next one.
You know, this is -- you know why they did 
what they did, their documents tell us everything.  
You don't have to -- I don't have to argue, you 
don't have to guess, nobody has to speculate.  It's 
in black and white, they did it for money.  
And, you know, again, back in jury selection, 
I do remember people talked about corporations have 
a right to make money, and I don't think anybody 
here disputes that, nobody disputes that, but you 
have to do it the right way.  And when everybody 
else is going to work, working hard and doing 
things by the book, it's not right to do this.  
And that's why they needed to be punished and 
they needed to know, who ain't for more money, 
while people are dying is not -- not the way things 
are done. 
And they knew for a long time that they would 
be subject to these findings and that this day 
would come. 
Robert. 4829
And so it was a holding strategy.  And if you 
think about it, that's why punitive damages are 
warranted because if any other company looked at it 
and said, hey, we can do a whole new strategy, and 
we can fight off regulations, fight off getting 
caught, make a lot of money in the meantime, people 
are going to get hurt, and then we could say, well, 
don't punish us because it's 50 years ago, that's 
not right.  
And that's really -- the punishment -- there 
is going to be another instruction, the punishment 
has to fit what they did.  You know, it can't be 
too much, and we don't want anything too much.  We 
don't want -- you know, the last thing that our 
client wants is anything that's too much, that's 
not good.  
So we want an appropriate award for punitive 
damages so that they know that what they did is 
wrong and other companies know that holding 
strategies like this, while people are dying, is 
not right.  I think we all know that, and they need 
to know that. 
So this is an instruction, it says, "You now 
must decide the amount of punitive damages, if 
any."  And again, you may be asked not to assess 4830
anything.  They may say, you know, 21 million minus 
the comparative, I don't know what the math works 
out to, but they may say, hey, that's enough.  You 
know, we feel it.  People -- we feel it in 
Winston-Salem, or Richmond, Virginia, and they hear 
you, and that's punishment enough.  
That award was not for punishment.  We did not 
ask for any amount, we asked for fair, and you 
awarded fair and reasonable compensation.  You 
know, there is no restoration.  
When you do what they did, there is no law -- 
you know, people say, oh, plaintiffs come here for 
money, they come here for money.  There is no 
restoration for the harm that they did.  
There is nothing else that victims can do.  
That's what the law provides, and you awarded fair 
and reasonable compensation, not punishment.  So 
you can award additional amounts, that's what we're 
here for, for punishment and deterrence to others.  
And it says the purpose of punitive damages is 
not to further compensate, because you've already 
awarded full compensation.  You know, we asked for 
an amount, and you said that was too much, and 
that's fine, and you know, we respect that, 
obviously, but you figured that that was an amount 4831
to fully compensate this family.  
And that was compensation, which is different, 
and we spoke about that all the way back in jury 
selection, how there is a different amount for 
punishment, and so it would be an amount in 
addition to compensatory.  
So again, these are some of the people that 
you saw.  You saw a lot of these people, you know, 
it's an interesting -- if you ever had -- if you 
had the time to look at it, you'd -- some of them 
are just names on papers, but these are the people 
who are no longer there who the companies were 
really built on.  
These were profitable companies who made it 
very far, and the actions that they did and the 
profits these companies made and continue to make 
cannot be excused.  
Go on. 
And so you have to consider, this is another 
instruction, the extent and the degree of the 
misconduct.  And I would submit to you that you 
could not think of a more -- a higher degree of 
misconduct.  I mean, maybe you could.  
But this is pretty much on the scale of one to 
ten, if you would ask somebody what is the extent 4832
of the -- of this misconduct, how bad was it, what 
is the degree of what they did to people, it would 
be a ten -- 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Objection, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Move to strike. 
MR. FURR:  Ask the jury be instructed to 
disregard harm to other people. 
MR. PAIGE:  I'm not even finished with my 
sentence. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  I think that's how it came 
across.  
MR. PAIGE:  Well, I was -- 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Why don't you finish your 
sentence?  That's fine. 
MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  So, you know, the degree of 
their misconduct was bad, and it says the nature, 
extent, and degree of the misconduct by the 
defendant that caused the plaintiff's injury.  
So they were caught up in this conspiracy, the 
concealment.  And you could only punish for the 
harm.  So you decide the amount.  But you can 
consider the conspiracy, because you-all found that 
the conspiracy is what was -- is one of the things 
that resulted in the death of her husband. 4833
Go on. 
And it says -- okay.  So here it says, "In 
considering the amount to award against the 
defendant, you should consider the extent to which 
the defendants' conduct has changed from the 
conduct on which you base your determination that 
punitive damages may be warranted, and the extent 
to which the circumstances have changed.  
And that's why this FDA regulations and MSA 
regulations, you know, they think it's important to 
them.  We think it's important to us, because it 
shouldn't take an Act of Congress for somebody to 
change -- it shouldn't take an Act of Congress to 
force a corporation to act normal.  You know, it 
shouldn't take a lawsuit by 46 states to force 
corporations to act normal.  So when you think has 
the conduct changed, it really hasn't.  
You know, he's up -- Dr. Lipowicz is up there, 
and, you know, everything that they're doing, 
they're forced to do. 
The next one, please. 
You know, the -- so the mitigating damages, 
that's what they're going to -- the mitigating 
evidence, that's what they think.  
Go on. 4834
And so they're talking about how they paid 
over 19 years 74 billion.  Well, we know, 
Dr. Lipowicz admitted, it's 170 billion every year 
that our country is incurring in healthcare costs 
by their product -- by their product.  
So while they're profiting, while they're 
profiting, they're selling a legal product, they 
are allowed to.  This is a civil lawsuit, and so 
while they're profiting, the people who are injured 
are incurring $170 billion.  And he said, hey, 
we're still profitable, it's not affecting us.  
So that I submit to you should not be 
considered mitigation. 
And here, you know, they avoided FDA 
regulation for 40 years.  You know, they're talking 
in 1969.  This is the "who ain't got more money" 
document.  And so in 1969, they're talking about we 
don't want FDA regulations.  Don't give us FDA 
regulations.  That's why they were lying.  They 
didn't want anyone to know nicotine is a drug.  
So now they come in here and they say, well, 
we're paying all this money, you know, this money 
and that money, and now the FDA is doing research.  
Well, that's good research, and they should be 
paying for their research.  Why should the 4835
government pay their -- use their own money to 
research their product?  
We can't trust them to do their own research.  
When they did their own -- 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Objection. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Move to strike. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. PAIGE:  When they did their own research 
before, they were hiding it.  So sure.  So they pay 
money, and you do research into their product while 
they're profiting. 
Next. 
And then, you know, the letter to Obama, ten 
days before the act, it took eight years or nine 
years for an Act of Congress.  Ten days before, 
they write a letter.  Dr. Lipowicz still doesn't 
acknowledge that they ever marketed to children, 
still won't admit that. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Objection. 
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
MR. PAIGE:  And so you have to think to 
yourself, are they really changed, and if so, how 
much are they changed?  How different are they 
really?  4836
Is this one thing? 
MR. PHILIPSON:  This is a bunch. 
MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  So, you know, they spent 
billions of dollars.  
You can just go through it, Robert.  Okay.  
Yeah, so we went through this.  
And so this is another instruction to you.  
You should not award punitive damages if you 
conclude that monetary liability beyond 
compensatory damages is unnecessary.  And again, 
that's what I was talking about, and you know, I 
submit to you, the family -- I will tell you, the 
family very much appreciates your award.  I 
think -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, that's outside. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  Move to strike. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  Ask the jury to disregard. 
THE COURT:  Disregard. 
MR. FURR:  And make a motion. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  And I'll join. 
THE COURT:  I'll deny the motion, but let's 
move forward, please. 
MR. PAIGE:  We know that compensatory damages 4837
and punitive damages are not the same.  You have 
fully compensated the family.  The family 
understands that, they -- you know, we all -- both 
parties appreciate your time.  
We've told -- everybody has told you, we both 
thank you and appreciate you for your hard work and 
your award and your findings in the case, but 
punitive damages, they mean -- you'll -- you've 
seen Dr. Lipowicz, and you'll hear from the 
attorneys, and you've seen the evidence, and so we 
submit to you that they need to be punished, they 
need to know and they need to feel what they did is 
wrong. 
And so while you -- this is one of the 
instructions, while you are allowed to consider 
harms to others, you can only compensate or assess 
punitive damages for the harms caused to the 
plaintiff and caused solely by the misconduct that 
caused that harms.  
And again, you know, he was a wonderful 
father.  I know that you all know that.  His kids 
loved him, his wife loved him, and you know, you 
couldn't inflict any worse harm on somebody. 
So go on.  
And so the amount that you give cannot be 4838
unreasonably large, and that's what I was saying 
before.  We don't want an amount that's 
unreasonably large.  Nobody wants that.  You know, 
we're here.  
You guys worked hard, and we appreciate that, 
and it has to be in relation to the compensatory 
award.  So we know that you awarded -- that you 
felt 21 million was fair compensation.  
We would ask that you punish Philip Morris and 
you punish R.J. Reynolds each.  They are both 
co-conspirators for 50 years that resulted in the 
death of her husband, and we would ask for each of 
them, it would be 12,500,000 -- yeah, 12,500,000 
and 25 million, and we would submit that that's -- 
that's enough.  That's fair and reasonable punitive 
damages, and they will know.  And they will know 
that they have been punished, and thank you.  
Alex is going to talk a little bit, but thank 
you so much.  


MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  So you heard a lot about 
how things are now.  You heard about the new 4839
marketing restrictions.  You heard about how they 
disbanded the CTR and the TI in 1998.  You heard 
about how they have this website that tells, you 
know, people to go to public health agencies to get 
information about smoking and health.  You know, 
and that's all nice, and that's all good.  But you 
know what it is?  It's too little too late for this 
family.  
And you're here to decide the punishment for 
what they caused to this family.  So it's a little 
bit too little too late for them.  
And in order for it to be punishment, they 
have to feel it.  All right?  
Hearing is not enough.  All right?  They have 
to feel it.  
And in order for them to feel it, they have to 
understand that it's a significant amount of money 
or else it means nothing to them.  Nothing.  
And when we talk about the other factor, the 
other element, the other criteria of punitive 
damages, it's to deter other corporations.  And if 
your verdict is less than 25 million, what are you 
deterring other corporations?  They'll look at this 
verdict and say, look, these people conspired for 
50 years. 4840
MR. FURR:  Objection, that's speculative, 
that's outside. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  The evidence will show and 
the law that you are instructed to follow says that 
you have to consider deterrence to others.  And 
your verdict has to speak to that.  Because if your 
verdict doesn't speak to that, it is meaningless.  
One of the things they talked about was how 
they embraced this regulation in 2009, that they 
embraced it.  He told you we embraced it, you know, 
he wanted -- he went to Congress, he wrote to the 
president. 
You know, but let's look at what really 
happened there.  Because what really happened there 
is that they froze the way that you market 
cigarettes, the way that you advertise cigarettes, 
right?  So when Philip Morris went to Congress and 
did that, the only reason that they did that -- 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Objection, Your Honor, there is 
no evidence. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Judge, I could argue -- I 
could argue -- 
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) 4841
THE COURT:  What's your objection?  
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Here is the objection.  He's 
arguing that they did this solely because they 
could lock in their market share.    
There is no evidence whatsoever that that's 
the reason why Philip Morris did that.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  There is.  
THE COURT:  What -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I could argue that from the 
evidence, because he said that before the 
regulations went into effect, Marlboro, who was the 
number one brand of cigarette in America, in the 
world, by the way, they had the market share, and 
after the regulation, they were still number one.  
And Mr. -- 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  That's -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, let me finish.  
Let me finish.  Okay?  
So that -- that -- I could argue, I could 
argue that inference to the jury.  I'm allowed to 
do that.
And as you heard from Dr. Proctor, Dr. Proctor 
said that's the number one cigarette in the world.  
Okay.  It sells more than -- they are the number 
one market share, they have the number one market 4842
share.  So they had -- they had a strategic event.  
I can argue that from the evidence. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  He is so wrong on so many 
levels.  First off, he can't make that inference.  
He can't make the inference.  And second of all, 
the defendant in this case is Philip Morris USA.  
Marlboro may be a popular brand, but they only make 
it in the United States. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  That's all I said.  
MR. TEPIKIAN:  But you're saying in the world.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  No, to her, but I didn't 
say it to them. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  But here is -- but here is the 
other side, Your Honor.  There is no evidence 
whatsoever that the reason Philip Morris did this 
was to lock in the market share. 
THE COURT:  That's my concern. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  It's a completely inappropriate 
argue.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I can argue that.  
MR. TEPIKIAN:  There is no way, there's -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  That is not even close to 
the -- I could argue -- I could argue -- I could -- 
sorry.  I could argue that, I could argue the 
evidence, right.  And here is the evidence.  The 4843
reason that they did this -- 
THE COURT:  It's reasonable inferences from 
the evidence. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  You don't think it's 
reasonable that a tobacco company who for 40 years 
denied, denied the health effects of smoking and 
denied control by the FDA, the moment that they 
become number one and realize that they have a 
strategic advantage to doing this by freezing the 
market share at that level, that they'll -- that 
will mean they'll be number one forever, you don't 
think I can argue that? 
THE COURT:  I'd rather -- no. 
MS. WHITMORE:  The jury can draw inferences, 
the jury can draw inferences, you can't argue 
inferences. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  And you can't stack them one on 
top of the other. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  That's not stacking. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  That's what we're doing here. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  That's not stacking.  
MR. FURR:  There's been no opinion evidence it 
was in 1975 -- 
THE COURT:  Okay, all right.  I'm going to 
sustain the objection. 4844
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Move to strike. 
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and jury.) 
THE COURT:  Sustain the objection.  Last 
comment is stricken from the record. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  May I -- may I proceed?  
THE COURT:  Sure. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Listen, it's up to you to 
decide their reasons and rationales for doing what 
they did.  Whether they really had a pure heart 
when they went to Congress and said, I want you to 
regulate me, or maybe there was another reason. 
And you heard from Dr. Lipowicz who has a PhD.  
He's an executive with Philip Morris, he's been 
there since 1988, he knew back then, he knew back 
then that smoking caused cancer, and he kept quiet.  
And corporations operate through people. 
So I'm going to -- I know we want to get out 
of here.  Okay?  Your verdict has to be just.  And 
in order to ensure that it is just, the punishment, 
the punishment has to be just for what they did to 
this family.  And think about how your verdict can 
deter -- what you're doing today should and will 
deter other corporations from acting the way that 
they acted.  That's your job.  4845
Thank you. 


MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Well, federal regulation is 
not punishment.  I mean, that's how companies are 
regulated.  So when they say, well, it's punishment 
that we have to be regulated, well, there is a 
reason for that, but that's how companies get 
regulated in this country. 
The letter to President Obama has been argued 
to you that it was -- the purpose of that was to 
set a high standard.  I mean, really?  It -- they 
really wanted to set a high standard by sending 
this letter to Obama so that they could get 
regulated?  4903
The smoking epidemic is over.  Well, if that's 
true, then why are 8.5 Americans -- 8.5 million 
Americans still living with smoking-related 
diseases in this country?  Why are over 400 -- 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Objection, Your Honor.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  -- Americans still dying?  
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  If the epidemic is over, 
why are these people still suffering.  In the MSA, 
not a single dollar went to a single person. 
Can you put this up?  
MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  And you saw this 
demonstrative put up by Mr. Furr that said, "Are 
punitive damages needed in 2000 and" --  
MR. PHILIPSON:  Wait, I got it.  Hit the wrong 
button.  Sorry. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  You got it?  Okay.  
"Are punitive damages needed in 2016 to keep 
Reynolds from repeating past conduct?"  He said no.  
So the answer here is, they got caught, they got 
forced to change, and that's enough.  We got 
caught, so it's okay.  You shouldn't punish us 
because we got caught.  They forced us to change, 
that should be enough. 4904
But every single change was way too late for 
this family.  They had an opportunity, they had a 
choice they could have exercised decades ago that 
would have changed history for this family, and 
they chose not to do it.  
And how is it over?  How is it over if 40 
million Americans are still smoking?  How is it 
over that -- 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Objection. 
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I'll rephrase it.  Okay?  
It enabled them to hurt Thomas Purdo, and they 4907
profited, and they built a strong company at the 
expense of this family, and the message can't be 
that that's okay.  That can't be the message.  
And $693,000 to them is not punishment.  It's 
not.  That's nothing to them, nothing.  That can't 
be the punishment.  That -- that can't be the 
punishment in this case.  
Thank you, Your Honor. 
