MR. FURR: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, thank you.
MR. FURR: Counsel. Ms. Enochs.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. FURR: I'm going to surprise you to start out. I agree with two things that Mr. Paige said.
First, I agree that we should begin by thanking you. You've been very attentive and been very patient with us. You've been a great jury. It's been a pleasure to appear in front of you, so thank
you very much.
Second, Mr. Paige said something that I also completely agree with and that is you have to keep your eye on the ball. You have to keep on your eye on the ball as you evaluate the evidence in this case.
And what I mean by that is this. This is not a trial about tobacco company corporate conduct in general. This is not a trial about re-proving the Engle findings. A lot of those internal tobacco company documents say awful things, they say things that should never have been thought and things that should never have been written.
We didn't spend any time defending that historical conduct during the trial and we're not going to do it today, because it has very little to do with the questions that you are going to answer as a jury in this case.
Just as I told you from the beginning of opening statements, this is a case about one smoker and one smoker only. This is Linda Enochs's case about Thomas Purdo.
When you look at your verdict form a little bit more closely, you will see that Thomas Purdo's case -- name appears in every question in the
verdict form. That's why I say you have to keep your eye on the ball. If the evidence is not about Mr. Purdo, it's not going to help you very much when you go to answer those questions that are specific to him.
And this is, without question, Mrs. Enochs' case.
Here was her testimony.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Enochs played as follows:)
Q. I want to start with your decision to file this lawsuit. You didn't consult with anyone when you made the decision to file this case, did you?
A. That's correct.
Q. You did not consult with your children, Lauren and Zack, when you made the decision, did you?
A. That's correct.
Q. And, in fact, you didn't tell them about this lawsuit until the year 2010, did you?
A. That's correct.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Zack and Lauren were not involved in the filing of this lawsuit.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, there is
no legal forum for that. It's inappropriate.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. FURR: Zack and Lauren were not involved, this is Mrs. Enochs' case. And you now know,
Mr. Paige talked to you about how important the case is, this is a case for money.
This is a case where you've been asked to award her family $25 million. This is a case for money, nothing more, nothing less. That's what the claims in front of you are.
I want to go right back to jury selection and start with the legal principle that is very, very important for you to consider as you weigh the evidence and decide the issues in this case, and that's the burden of proof.
And Instruction Number 2, which the Court read you this morning, you saw that the Plaintiff in this case has the burden on each of the issues to prove her case. "If the greater weight of the evidence does not support plaintiff’s claims, your verdict will be for Defendants."
So an example of that is class membership. It is not up to the defendants to exclude Mr. Purdo from the class. He's not in the class unless they meet their burden to prove to you that he's met all
of the legal requirements to be a class member. So the plaintiffs have their burden of proof.
Another example would be it's not the defendants' burden to prove to you that Mr. Purdo had a primary colon cancer or a primary pancreatic cancer or any other type of cancer. It's the plaintiff's burden to prove to you that they've been able to exclude those other types of cancers and persuade you that it is a primary lung cancer.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, I don't have to exclude anything.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: That's inappropriate.
MR. FURR: It doesn't -MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: Plaintiff has the burden to prove her case with evidence about Mr. Purdo. She can't prove her case about Mr. Purdo with generic evidence. She can't prove her case with argument by the lawyers. She can't prove her case with guesswork, and she can't prove her case with sympathy.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Excuse me, can we approach, Judge?
THE COURT: Sure.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Take it down.
(The following proceedings were had before the Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT: Mr. Alvarez, Mr. Paige.
MR. PAIGE: Well, that's an untruthful statement. He says that we can't -THE COURT: Which one?
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: That we can't prove our case with generic evidence. I mean, we can prove our case with generic evidence. We can prove addiction through generic testimony. We can prove entitlement to punitive damages. Reprehensibility to others through generic testimony. That's -that's not true.
THE COURT: I think he meant the entire case. So as to Mrs. Enochs' case, that's -MR. PAIGE: That's not what he said. And it's -- what part of the case can't we use generic testimony?
THE COURT: No, no, he said can't prove the entire case solely without reference to Mrs. Enochs.
MR. TEPIKIAN: Yeah, at some point -THE COURT: I think that's how I understood
it.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: She can't prove her case, Mr. Purdo, Mr. Purdo, with generic -MR. PAIGE: I mean, that's what we do, we use generic testimony, we use argument. We do that. That's what we do.
THE COURT: But -- but I think there still needs to be some -- you know, it's Mrs. Purdo -MR. PAIGE: Well, he should say only with, he shouldn't say he can't prove it only with this.
THE COURT: Exclusively, just use the word "exclusively," that's fine.
MR. PAIGE: Yeah, he can use the word "exclusively."
THE COURT: Okay. All right. That's fine.
You can use the word "exclusively."
Okay. Thanks, Mr. Alvarez.
(The following proceedings were had in open court before the Court and the jury.)
MR. FURR: Put it back to where we were.
Mrs. Enochs cannot prove her case with generic evidence that she doesn't tie to Mr. Purdo.
MR. PAIGE: Your Honor, that's not what you just said.
THE COURT: Exclusively. That's okay. Let's
continue.
MR. FURR: It has to be tied to Mr. Purdo.
She can't prove her case with sympathy. And everyone in this courtroom recognizes Zack and Lauren lost their dad at a very young age. I have no doubt that everybody in this courtroom feels sympathy for them. But that's not the issue in the case.
In this case, it's the instruction the judge will give you when you all sit down today, you will be instructed to not decide this case on the basis of sympathy, but to instead decide this case based on the evidence before you and the appropriate law.
So while we all acknowledge their loss and how we feel sympathetic for them, it cannot be the basis for your decision in this case.
The Engle findings. The findings by themselves do not establish, this is number 7, do not establish that either defendant is liable to plaintiff, Ms. Linda Enochs in this case, nor do they establish whether Thomas Purdo was injured by either defendants' conduct or the degree, if any, to which either defendants' conduct was a legal cause of Thomas Purdo's injury and death. They prove he's a class member, they still don't prove
the case. They have to do it with evidence about Mr. Purdo.
Let me begin reviewing the evidence in this case. In this case, you heard from Dr. Proctor and Dr. Henningfield for five days. The first five days of trial. And just as I told you in opening statement, you learned nothing about Mr. Purdo during those five days.
They're generic experts.
Dr. Henningfield was plaintiff's generic addiction expert. Here's what he admitted to you on cross-examination.
(Excerpt from videotaped deposition of Dr. Henningfield played as follows:)
A. A lot of my testimony is -- applies to smokers in general and could be considered generic. I provided my information and testimony generically. And I don't have individual information for any individual.
For a given individual, I can't tell you, because I don't have any individual information. I don't have individual information for several thousand people that I understand are listed in this case or this group of cases.
(Excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.)
MR. FURR: Dr. Proctor, plaintiff's historian of science who talks about historical conduct, was also a generic expert that made no effort to tie his testimony to the plaintiff.
Cliff, can you play that for me? Thank you.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Dr. Proctor played as follows:)
A. I don't know anything about the individual plaintiff. I don't know anything about what he saw, what he read, what he relied on, anything about his biography.
Q. The testimony you gave in this courtroom is very similar to the testimony that you've given, what is it, approximately a hundred times now in Engle cases? A. There is certainly a lot of overlap, yes.
Q. And you give that testimony regardless of what the smoker in that case knew about the dangers of smoking; correct?
A. That's generally true, yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Dr. Proctor has made $4 million testifying in these cases, but he testifies generically.
And these type of generic evidence do not help
you answer the verdict questions about Mr. Purdo unless the plaintiffs can tie that evidence to Mr. Purdo. And they can't do that.
And I'm going to show you -- before I start through the verdict form, I'm going to show you just a few examples of how plaintiff's generic case simply does not fit what you now know about Mr. Purdo's case.
Dr. Proctor told you that there was a great deal of ignorance in the 1970s about the harms of smoking. And you heard again this morning from Mr. Paige that people in the '70s simply did not understand, and it wasn't fair to judge Mr. Purdo by what you know today because he didn't understand. But that's not what Mrs. Enochs told you.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Enochs played as follows:)
Q. Mr. Purdo first knew that smoking could be dangerous when they started saying more about the Surgeon General and he was on the news; correct?
A. Yes.
Q. You actually recall the first Surgeon General's warning that went on cigarette packs that said caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
health; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And did you hear Dr. Proctor's testimony that that label would have been on 1966 to 1979?
A. Yes.
Q. You discussed the Surgeon General's warning was on the cigarette packages with Mr. Purdo, didn't you?
A. Yes.
Q. He was already aware that there were warnings on the side of cigarette packages when you met him in 1969; right?
A. Yes.
Q. In your discussions with Mr. Purdo about smoking and health, he never expressed any doubt about the health risks of smoking, did he?
A. No.
Q. Isn't it true, ma'am, that he agreed with you at the time that he should quit for his health?
A. Yes.
Q. At this point of time in 1971, Mr. Purdo was aware that there could be health risks related to smoking; right?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network
stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: So a generic case, smokers didn't know in the 1970s. The case-specific evidence related to Mr. Purdo, he knew about the Surgeon General in the 1960s, he knew about the warnings. Mrs. Enochs discussed them with him. She talked with him about the dangers of smoking. And he never disputed any of that. Never disputed any of that and agreed that he should quit for health reasons.
The generic case doesn't fit Mr. Purdo.
I'm going to show you some more examples of that. A lot of discussion about how smoking was normalized, about how today you were told it was like chewing gum. Well, not at the Purdo household. Not in Mr. Purdo's family.
And from the -- you heard that before they even moved to Florida in the late '60s, his mother was telling him to quit. His father was telling him to quit, his sister was telling him to quit.
Mrs. Enochs began telling him to quit in the early -- as soon as they were married in 1970, and he never disputed any of that, and of course.
And we are going to look closely at his smoking history, but even before we have any
evidence that he was a regular pack-a-day smoker, from 1966 on, when he would have been 21 years old, every package of cigarette he bought carried a warning on the side of the package.
I want to look at another example of how plaintiff's generic case simply doesn't fit Mr. Purdo.
This slide on the left is a copy of a slide that Mr. Paige put up, both in opening and today, in his closing, where he identified a whole series of pieces of information about the dangers of smoking that he said were material and that were concealed from smokers, and had smokers known, they could have made different choices. That's the argument that was made to you.
But Mrs. Enochs told us that there is nothing that anyone could have told Mr. Purdo that would have made him quit sooner.
Here is her testimony.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Enochs played as follows:)
BY MR. FURR:
Q. You don't know of anything that anybody could have said to Mr. Purdo that would have caused him to quit earlier than 1981, do you?
A. No.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: And no additional information would have caused him to act differently before 1981. As you know, and we'll look at this later, in the 1970s, she was telling him that smoking could cause cancer and premature death, and he never disputed it, and he agreed that he needed to quit, but he decided he wanted to keep smoking because he wanted to smoke more than he wanted to quit.
It wasn't any lack of information that kept him smoking, it was his choices until he chose not to be a smoker any longer. And we'll remind ourselves what the circumstances of that decision-making were for him.
A lot of time was spent during this trial with Dr. Proctor talking about the doubt, confusion, and the controversy that was created by the tobacco company statements. People made statements on their behalf and the related entities.
And as I told you, I'm not here to defend anybody. But the question is, what does it matter for Mr. Purdo's case? Because here is what you know. Mr. Purdo never said that he was confused.
He never said he had any doubts about the dangers of smoking. He never disagreed with Mrs. Enochs when she would tell him that he needed to quit.
He simply -- he knew all the time, no matter what the tobacco companies were saying, he wasn't confused, he didn't have doubt, he knew he needed to quit. And he always agreed with Mrs. Purdo that cigarettes weren't safe.
Another part of the generic case presented to you was that addiction was a biological barrier to quitting, and that it deprived people of their freedom of choice. The case is not about smokers in general, it is about Mr. Purdo. And here is the case-specific evidence about that.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Enochs played as follows:)
Q. Mrs. Purdo, you agree that it was Mr. Purdo's choice to smoke, don't you?
A. Yes.
Q. You agree that for Mr. Purdo to quit smoking, to be successful in quitting, he would have had to have been committed to it; right?
A. Yes.
Q. With respect to the quit attempts prior to 1981, you believe that while Mr. Purdo wanted to quit
smoking, he wanted to continue smoking more, didn't he? A. I think those were the words I used, yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: It was argued that addiction kept people from quitting and that Mr. Purdo wanted to quit and tried hard to quit, but Mrs. Purdo told you that during that period of time, he wanted to continue smoking more than he wanted to quit.
Another issue on the generic side of the case had to do with youth marketing, about how everyone starts when they are teens because of youth marketing. But if you examine Mr. Purdo's brand history, it's inconsistent with that claim with respect to him.
Dr. Proctor told you that his main brand, the brand that -- the only brand that we know that he smoked regularly before the mid to late 1970s were Tareytons, and that Tareytons were never advertised as a youth brand.
His best friend, Mike Stefani, told you that he started smoking Tareytons out of convenience and continued smoking them because he liked the taste. Not because of any image he associated with Tareyton cigarettes, not because of safety, not
because he thought they were glamorous, not because athletes were advertising Tareytons. He chose that brand out of convenience, and then he liked the taste, and that's why he chose them.
You have to keep your eye on the ball, and no matter how bad some of that generic evidence is, the question before you is, has it been tied to Mr. Purdo in a way that is meaningful for the claims in this case, such that plaintiff can meet their burden of proof about Mr. Purdo.
Let's talk about the medical case. You've heard over and over that 50 percent of long-term, heavy smokers develop a smoking-related disease. And we're not disputing that claim.
But, and Dr. Villa told you that long-term heavy smokers are at a very high risk of developing smoking-related disease. But that's not Mr. Purdo.
Dr. Villa told you that Mr. Purdo's risk of lung cancer at age 51, after having quit at age 36, was very small, and that it was an extraordinary, rare case that someone would develop primary lung cancer with that type of smoking history.
The generic case about statistics in general and the dangers of smoking in general does not fit Mr. Purdo's smoking history and his quitting
history.
Because Mr. Purdo is not a generic smoker. Facts matter. The facts about Mr. Purdo matter. Because they are inconsistent with the generic case that you've been presented.
The case about one smoker, Mr. Purdo, critical facts in the case. He quit at age 36. A very important fact for how much risk he would have had at age 51. And he quit the first time he wanted to. A very important fact for whether he was addicted and whether addiction was a legal cause of his disease.
So let's turn to the evidence about Mr. Purdo. What do you learn from the evidence about Mr. Purdo, the case-specific evidence, not the generic evidence, but the evidence for the people who talked about Mr. Purdo?
First you learned that he did not smoke because of any youth targeting.
Second, you learned that he was a competitive athlete, a highly-informed lawyer, who smoked despite knowing it could cause cancer and premature death, that he smoked because he was addicted and couldn't quit. No. You learned he smoked because he wanted to smoke more than he wanted to quit.
That was Mrs. Enochs' testimony. We'll look at details, a critical admission in this case.
You learned that he quit at age 36 the moment he learned that Mrs. Enochs was pregnant and that he would be a father. He said, "I don't want to
die." In other words, he knew that he had been taking a chance of developing a serious disease and dying prematurely by smoking up to that point. He knew it. That's why he said that.
You'll learn that 15 years later at age 51, he was diagnosed with cancer when his risk of lung cancer from smoking was very, very close to that of a never-smoker.
In fact, Dr. Villa told you, depending on which way you look at it, it's statistically indistinguishable, but he believed it was probably elevated some amount, but he can't even identify how much.
And you learned that plaintiff can't even prove to you that Mr. Purdo had primary lung cancer and that that primary lung cancer was a cause of his death.
So I'm going to spend the rest of my time walking through the verdict form questions, because that's where the rubber meets the road in this
question, the way the law and evidence combine to help you answer these verdict form questions about Mr. Purdo.
The first one was "Was Thomas Purdo addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of a primary lung cancer that caused his death?"
One sentence packed full of meaning. It really creates three separate elements that the plaintiffs have to prove, and I've broken them out for you.
First, the plaintiffs have to prove medical causation. They have to -- Mrs. Enochs has to prove to you that Mr. Purdo died from a primary lung cancer that was caused by smoking.
Three elements right there. Had to cause his death, had to be a primary lung cancer, had to have been caused by smoking.
Second, she has to prove to you that Mr. Purdo was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. Third, even if she proves medical causation, and even if she proves addiction, she has a separate requirement under the law, she has to prove to you that nicotine addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Purdo's death.
You see I've shown the hurdle above. That's because, as I've said, the legal principle that runs throughout this verdict form is that Mrs. Enochs has the burden of proof. She has to prove these things to you. We don't have to disprove them.
You might remember Mr. Alvarez, when we were going through jury selection, saying if we sat down right now, who wins? Everybody recognized defense wins because you haven't proven anything yet. He has to prove the case to you.
Now, having broken this down in three component parts, you can see, to meet her burden of proof, there is a lot that has to be proven. And you heard the instructions this morning.
In order to decide a verdict form question, you-all have to agree. In other words, the six jurors that deliberate has to be unanimous on what the answer to that verdict form question should be.
So in order to decide that Mrs. Purdo has proven to you class membership, essentially all six of you will have had to answer yes to all three of those hurdles. And unless they have proven to you that there should be 18 yeses -MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, that's --
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. FURR: Unless they have proven to you that there should be 18 yeses, unanimous among you, for all three hurdles, they failed to carry their burden of proof, and as the instruction told you, your verdict should -- you cannot deliver a verdict in favor of the plaintiffs if they don't meet their burden of proof.
So no class membership without 18 yes votes.
I will remind you that you got an instruction during the trial as follows. You were told that the findings themselves can't be used to establish class membership, and unless class membership is proven, you must disregard the findings.
The Court recognized the findings can't be used to meet the plaintiff's burden on class membership.
So let's look at the first hurdle in class membership, medical causation, where I mentioned Mr. -- Mrs. Enochs has to prove to you three separate things. She has to prove to you primary lung cancer, lung cancer that started in the lung, caused by smoking, and that that was the legal cause of his death. And she failed on all three fronts.
The evidence demonstrates that she did not prove that Mr. Purdo had primary lung cancer. She did not prove that he had lung cancer caused by smoking. And she did not prove that lung cancer, primary lung cancer caused by smoking was the legal cause of his death.
So the plaintiff fails all three of the subparts of that very first hurdle about medical causation, and I'm going to look at that evidence with you now.
Let's start with Dr. Villa, because Dr. Villa was the plaintiff's medical expert, of course. And Dr. Villa told you what you needed to do to determine whether or not somebody's lung cancer was primary. And that he didn't do any of that.
Here was his testimony.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Luis Villa, M.D. played as follows:)
Q. Now, you told the jury this morning the -- the decision as to where the cancer began, the decision as to where a primary is is really a complex decision, isn't it?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. And you -- you told the jury that it's made by examining the patient; right?
A. Yes.
Q. Of course, you didn't have the opportunity to examine Mr. Purdo, did you?
A. I did not.
Q. It's -- you also list it as made by taking a history; right?
A. Yes.
Q. Of course, you did not have the opportunity to take a history again; right?
A. No. Correct.
Q. You also mentioned it's made by looking at x-rays; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And I guess that would be broad. It would also include other radiologic tests, CT scans and PET scans?
A. Yes, there are many technologies available in Florida.
Q. And, of course, you did not have an opportunity to look at the original films from any of the studies that were performed on Mr. Purdo; right?
A. That is correct.
Q. And you also said it's also made by looking at pathology; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And, of course, you did not have the opportunity to look at any of the original pathology materials taken from Mr. Purdo; right?
A. I did not.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Determining whether or not Mr. Purdo had primary lung cancer, that is lung cancer that started in his lung, is not some simple task that's satisfied by looking at what one clinician wrote down in the medical record and which was suddenly copied by other clinicians during his care and treatment.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, there is no evidence that they were copied, Judge.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. FURR: That's not the complex task that Dr. Villa just outlined for you. Dr. Villa identified five different steps that he would need to go through to complete the complex task of determining whether or not the cancer was primary, and he didn't do any of them. He didn't do any of them.
But we went a lot farther with Dr. Villa than that. We went even a little bit more basic and
asked him, how do you diagnose cancer, how do you diagnose whether someone has cancer, and he told us that his -- the term that he uses is that pathology is the gold standard for diagnosing cancer. In fact, pathology is the only way to diagnose cancer.
Here we have a claim that Mr. Purdo had a primary lung cancer, had a primary cancer that began in his lung, but his lung was never biopsied. There was never any pathology performed on his lung. There were never any cancer cells taken from his lung.
Dr. Peterson then explained to you further that the 3-centimeter mass that you keep seeing slides with respect to what a CT scan showed about a 3-centimeter mass in the right apex of Mr. Purdo's lung was never biopsied.
Dr. Villa admits that the cancer was never confirmed in his lung. And that it was simply a clinical diagnosis, in other words, a diagnosis made for treating Mr. Purdo, and there was never any pathologic confirmation of the diagnosis, and both doctors agreed there were never any cancer cells identified in Mr. Purdo's lungs.
So let's talk about that CT scan. Because that was what was pointed out to you. But
Dr. Villa told you this about diagnosing cancer with radiology.
Question: "And as you mentioned a moment ago, even when you see something suspicious on an x-ray or a CT scan, until there is pathologic confirmation of the cancer, you cannot make a diagnosis of cancer, can you?"
His answer was: "That is correct."
So the fact there was a CT scan doesn't get them over this hurdle. Dr. Villa explained, you need pathologic confirmation that that's cancer.
They don't have it, they can't meet their burden of proof.
Both pathologists in this case, Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson, agreed on a lot of very fundamental principles about pathology, including that autopsies are the gold standard for determining primary cancer.
It's the autopsy that allows you to perform the invasive examination of all the organs in the body, to resect -- to section them, put them under the microscope, examine them, determine is this a cancer, and is this a primary cancer.
We don't have an autopsy. We don't have an autopsy in this case. Again, plaintiffs can't meet
*+*+ I I
their burden of proof.
And this is a complex case. From Dr. Peterson, you learned that, by the end of Mr. Purdo's life, lesions that were suspected to be cancer were found in at least 16 different locations in Mr. Purdo's body. And I have labeled them here. Everywhere from the skin to the bone to the adrenals, to the pelvis, to the small bowel, to the liver mass, to the iliac crest, to the axilla, to the scapula, to the neck, to the paratracheal region, which was the term first used to describe the lesion in the middle of his body. It was later called apical in the CT scan, inconsistent descriptions of where that was, and we don't have any confirmation whether it was paratracheal in the lung because no biopsy, no autopsy.
So in the absence of biopsy -- a biopsy, in the absence of an autopsy, the analysis that you heard a lot about was to analyze the metastatic pattern of cancer in his body to try to determine whether or not that demonstrated that the cancer began in his lung.
And so you heard both Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson talk a lot about all the different metastases in his body where all the different
cancer was, suspected cancer locations, and what that told you about whether or not he had primary lung cancer.
Two different types of analyses emerged from that process. The first is that Mr. Purdo did not have the metastatic lesions that you would expect to see if the lung cancer was primary. Both pathologists agreed that the mediastinal or hilar adenopathy, in other words the mediastinum or lymph nodes between his lungs, the place in his chest, was the most commonplace for lung cancer to spread if it was a primary lung cancer, and both pathologists agreed that we don't have that type of evidence in this case.
Dr. Peterson explained to you that to see a scenario in which someone had a lesion in the lung and lesions in the adrenals -- actually, this was Dr. Villa, excuse me. He told you that just knowing that somebody had a lesion in the lung and a lesion in the adrenals meant it was a -- there was a 55 percent likelihood that the lung cancer -that the cancer in the lung was not a primary, not a primary. So from that side of things, he didn't have the types of metastases that you would expect to see with a lung primary.
On the other side of the coin, he had a number of metastases that you do not expect to see with a lung primary.
Dr. Peterson explained the small bowel -Dr. Villa agreed that the small bowel obstruction -- you know, there has been this discussion about was the small bowel obstruction caused by fecal impaction or by drugs that he was taking for pain. Dr. Villa, during his testimony, told you it was mechanical small bowel obstruction caused by a metastatic lesion on the small bowel that was pushing the small bowel down together and that's what caused the blockage. That's what Dr. Villa told you.
Here's the problem for proving plaintiff's case. Primary lung cancer does not metastasize to the surface of the small bowel. The primary cancers that metastasize to the surface of the small bowel are those that are primarily found in the abdomen.
Second, towards the end of his life, a bleeding mass was found in Mr. Purdo's stomach. Again, primary lung cancer does not metastasize to the stomach.
Towards the end of the his life, masses were
found in the mesentery and peritoneum. Again, primary lung cancer does not metastasize to those locations. And as Dr. Peterson told you, the overwhelming picture that you get was something called abdominal carcinomatosis, in other words, the predominant load of all the cancer was in his abdomen, and that's the pattern you see for cancer that starts in the abdomen.
In fact, you might remember -- oh, let's talk about this for a moment because -- so this issue -we've had an issue in the case about whether the fact that the mass seen in his lung was a solitary nodule, whether that means that that nodule must have been a primary lung cancer as opposed to a cancer that metastasized from somewhere else. And both pathologists agree that that cannot be relied upon to determine whether or not the nodule was primary.
Dr. Villa told you that cancer can metastasize to the lung as a single, solitary lesion and that single mass can be from an unknown primary.
Dr. Peterson told you that metastatic cancer of the lung can show up again, just like Dr. Villa, as a single tumor and that just because you don't see other nodules in the lung on radiology doesn't
even mean they're not there, they may be too small to detect. So the mere fact that the appearance in the lung was a single, solitary nodule is not enough to prove it was primary lung cancer.
Now, here was a demonstrative used with Dr. Peterson where he compared the usual metastatic pattern of cancer for cancer from the lung, for cancer from the colon, for cancer from the prostate. And they compared all those to Mr. Purdo's, the pattern of metastases seen in Mr. Purdo. And as Dr. Villa -- excuse me,
Dr. Peterson explained to you, it's obviously apparent just by looking at this that the patterns seen for colon and prostate are much more similar to the pattern that Mr. Purdo had than the pattern that you usually see in lung cancer.
Cancer of unknown primary. Dr. Peterson said very clearly that he was not giving you an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Mr. Purdo had a primary prostate cancer or a primary colon cancer or any other cancer that he could identify. He told you the information was insufficient and that the proper diagnosis would be cancer from an unknown primary.
We asked Dr. Villa some questions about cancer
from the unknown, this concept called cancer of unknown origin or from an unknown primary.
And here is what Dr. Villa told you. "So if we would go back to the 1990s," when Mr. Purdo was diagnosed, "using that 5 to 10 percent figure, that would mean that there were probably tens of thousands of people in the United States at that time that had a cancer of an unknown primary origin; correct?"
Answer: "Yeah, that's possible."
Question: "And that would be tens of thousands of people per year; right?"
Answer: "Yes."
So in the 1990s, when Mr. Purdo was being diagnosed because of limitations of some of the technology then compared to now, there were tens of thousands of cases of cancers of unknown primary in this country every year, and Mr. Purdo was one of them.
Dr. Peterson did tell you that if you combined the prostate -- the likelihood that the primary was in the prostate and colon together, that those two combined, it were more likely to have been the case than primary lung cancer.
The plaintiff simply did not meet their burden
to prove to you that they could prove it was lung cancer and not a primary from any of these other organs.
So let's talk a little bit further about this issue about whether plaintiffs can meet their burden of proof just by relying upon the medical records that say lung cancer. You've seen those medical records over and over and over about how so many of those records say lung cancer.
Here's what both of the pathologists explained to you about that issue.
Dr. Peterson, who had done close to 9,000 autopsies, told you that it was common in the daily practice as a forensic pathologist and in his practice as a medical examiner to determine a diagnosis that is different from the treating physician's because he had the advantage of doing a retrospective analysis when he had all of the information.
It's a little bit like an accident reconstruction. You might think you know what caused an accident, but that's why we do -- have accident reconstruction specialists, to verify crashes, because when you gather all the information together after the fact, that's when
you can piece it all together and understand with more certainty what actually happened.
Dr. Villa admitted on cross-examination that he's had patients who were being treated for primary lung cancer, just like Mr. Purdo, where, upon performing an autopsy, he found an unknown primary cancer that the clinicians had not previously identified.
So let me pull all this together for you as to why the plaintiffs have not been able to meet their burden to prove to you that Mr. Purdo had a primary lung cancer.
First, Mr. Purdo never looked like a lung cancer patient. He never had any lung cancer symptoms when he was diagnosed. Concededly, the clinicians told you that probably 50 percent of lung cancer patients don't have symptoms when they were diagnosed.
But the critical fact here is he never -- he never reported any lung cancer symptoms. The medical records contain no reference to lung cancer symptoms. Even when he had stage IV metastatic cancer deep into his illness, he never had the signs and symptoms that you expect a lung cancer patient to do. Of course, we never had a -- we
never had any biopsy. We never had an autopsy.
The metastatic spread is not consistent with primary lung cancer. As I said, no autopsy was done to establish the primary site. So in short, plaintiffs cannot meet their burden to prove that Mr. Purdo had lung cancer.
I skipped a slide for a minute, but I want to come back to this, because the response is always the medical records all say. But we know that there is no evidence in the record and no witness has been able to tell us what the basis was for Dr. Armas' handwritten conclusion that we see in one of the medical records that he had primary lung cancer.
We also know that Dr. Armas made that decision as a clinical diagnosis long before he had all the information available to us today that allowed Dr. Peterson to conduct his retrospective reconstruction of what went on with Mr. Purdo.
Let's go to the next issue, still in medical causation. The second part of the first hurdle on class membership is that if it was a primary lung cancer, they did not offer you the proof they need to prove that that lung cancer was caused by smoking. In fact, really, the only evidence you've
been given is that Mr. Purdo smoked. 85 percent of lung cancers are current smokers. That's all you've been told as to why they believe that Mr. Purdo's cancer was caused by lung cancer -caused by smoking. In fact, this issue was ignored in the closing argument today. There was no discussion.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. That's inappropriate.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: You've heard no discussion today of evidence with respect to why this lung cancer was caused by smoking.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection. He's attacking the way we prosecute our case.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: Here is what Dr. Villa told you about simply stopping with he was a smoker and 85 percent of smokers get lung cancer.
Dr. Villa told you that just because someone smokes and gets lung cancer does not mean that the smoking caused the lung cancer. He told us you need to know a lot more than that.
The critical factor in this case with respect to whether or not smoking can be tied to
Mr. Purdo's cancer was the age at which he quit and how long it was before he developed any cancer. Because quitting matters. All the doctors in this case agreed quitting matters. Here's what Dr. Villa told you. Your risk of developing cancer begins to decrease when you quit, and that's why people -- physicians tell their patients to quit.
They tell them to quit because when you stop smoking, the risk begins to go down.
Also, critical fact, as I've said, the younger someone quits, the more the risk goes down, and the longer someone stays quit and stays cancer free, the more the risk goes down.
The risk begins as soon as you quit. It's greater the longer you quit. And it's much greater the younger you quit.
In fact, you -- this is well known, smokers have been advised this for a long time, you actually saw this public service announcement from the 1960s or 1970. Lungs Nice and Clear from the American Cancer Society.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: The moment you stop, in most cases, the effects of smoking will begin to reverse themselves until your lungs are nice and clear
again.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. FURR: That's why stopping matters. And age matters, too. Dr. Villa told you the age at which you quit matters. Mr. Purdo quit at 36. He didn't develop cancer for 15 years. Dr. Villa, despite -- and he's a very experienced pathologist, seen thousands and thousands of cases, told you that this was extraordinarily rare and that he had never in his long and illustrious career ever seen a case like this. Never seen one.
Here is why age matters. Dr. Villa explained it, to use one of his words, very elegantly. He told us that the repair genes are very good at functioning at a young age and that the repair genes are stronger the younger you are when you quit, and at a younger age, the repair genes are more able and more likely to repair any mutations than if somebody stops at an older age.
And he told me on cross-examination that the younger a smoker quits, the more their risk declines. So we cross-examined Dr. Villa fairly extensively about this issue about how much age matters and what the risk -- Mr. Purdo's risks would have been after having quit at age 35, and he
made a number of remarkable admissions.
Here's the first one. He told you that there are no, none, studies of smoking-related lung cancer risk in smokers like Mr. Purdo who quit at age 35. The data simply don't exist. It hasn't been studied. And so from the beginning, plaintiffs were attempting to meet their burden of proof with a smoking history for which there are no studies.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. That's inappropriate.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: There are no -- may I approach? I don't really understand.
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. FURR: All right. As I was saying, there are no studies of smoking-related lung cancer in smokers like Mr. Purdo who quit at age 35. Those data don't exist, Dr. Villa told us. Here's what Dr. Villa did tell us about what we know. Again, age matters. A vast majority of lung cancers are diagnosed between the ages of 60 and 70.
And he told you that even if someone continues smoking, not someone who stopped like Mr. Purdo, but even if someone continues smoking throughout his 30s and throughout his 40s, that the risk of developing lung cancer barely begins to rise before age 50, even if they keep smoking, extraordinarily rare.
Here's an example. Here's a demonstrative that the plaintiffs used during their direct examination of Dr. Villa titled "Excess risk of death among males due to smoking, percent
probability of dying of lung cancer due to smoking."
They show -- shows someone who -- a former smoker who quit at age 35. And it shows an excess risk of 1.9. And Dr. Villa explained to you that that meant that a former smoker who quit at age 35 would be less than two times as likely to develop lung cancer as someone who had never smoked.
I said "Dr." -- on cross-examination, I said,
"Dr. Villa, that's not what this case is, though.
Mr. Purdo quit at age 51, at age 51." I said,
"What would the excess risk be at that age," because it's not on his table.
And he told us that the excess risk at age 51 was only 0.4 percent, 0.4 percent. In other words, the excess risk for someone with Mr. Purdo's smoking history of developing a smoking-related lung cancer at age 51 was less than one-half of 1 percent, less than one-half of 1 percent.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
That's -- percent and relative risk is something very different.
THE COURT: But that's from the evidence?
MR. FURR: Yes, it is.
THE COURT: You may proceed, Mr. Furr.
MR. FURR: That's why it's extraordinarily rare. Dr. Villa told you he's never seen it. He told you he's never heard any other doctor talking about lung cancer in a 51-year-old related to smoking that quit at age 35. And he told you there are no studies of lung cancer risk in people who quit at age 35.
But we didn't stop there. I cross-examined Dr. Villa. I admit it probably wasn't very exciting, but I cross-examined him about what the statistics do show about what happens to somebody's risk of developing a smoking-related disease after they quit. And here's a series of questions that he was asked and answers that he gave.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Dr. Villa played as follows:)
Q. Wouldn't you agree, sir, that if someone stops smoking at age 35, after having smoked between 10 to 20 years, their risk of developing lung cancer is very small?
A. It is.
Q. So using these facts, quitting at age 35 after having smoked for 10 to 20 years, the risk of developing lung cancer is very small; right?
A. That is correct.
Q. Wouldn't you agree, sir, that if someone stops smoking by age 35, their risk of developing lung cancer decreases between 90 and 95 percent?
A. I agree.
Q. Lung cancer in a 50-year-old who quit smoking at age 35 is, in your words, extraordinarily rare; correct?
A. Extraordinarily rare, that is correct.
Q. Now, sir, you can remember some of the cases during your career, can't you?
A. Yes.
Q. Would you agree that you're more likely to remember a case from your career if it was an extraordinarily rare case?
A. Yes.
Q. But notwithstanding that, you don't have any memory of having treated a patient who quit smoking at age 35 and developed a case of smoking-related lung cancer at age 51, do you?
A. I don't remember such a case, no.
Q. You don't remember hearing any other physician describe such a case, do you?
A. No, I don't.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: What did Plaintiff bring to you to prove that Mr. Purdo is this extraordinarily rare case that no one has ever seen before? Nothing. No evidence that Mr. Purdo's smoking is caused by lung cancer. Dr. Villa told you there's no test that can be done. There's no stain that can be done. It's an inference based on statistics. He told you that. They don't have the statistics in this case.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection. Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Move to strike.
THE COURT: The evidence. The evidence. Sustained.
MR. FURR: Oh. The evidence demonstrates there are no statistics that Dr. Villa had to rely upon to make that inference. The plaintiffs can't meet their burden of proof.
So let's approach this from another perspective, and that is the plaintiffs have asked you to put a great deal of weight on the medical records.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: You know, Judge, I'll -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: Let's approach this from another perspective. Let's ask whether the medical records say anything about the cause of Mr. Purdo's cancer. Here's what you know, that in 1997 -- excuse me,
1996,	when Mr. Purdo was diagnosed, in 1997, when he died, no one was talking about his cancer being related to smoking.
It simply wasn't on anybody's radar. Mrs.
Pur- -- Enochs told us that Mr. Purdo did not associate his cancer with smoking, that she didn't associate his cancer with smoking. There's not a single medical record, or we say there's no doctor anywhere in the world who wrote that his cancer was caused by smoking.
The medical records do not contain a single reference to the cancer he had being caused by smoking. That's because nobody was thinking about that because he had quit so long ago at such a young age he was at no meaningful risk of developing a smoking-related disease.
I want to look a little closer at Mrs. Enochs' testimony on this matter, and I want to look at what happened right in front of you of how she answered one way and then how we cross-examined her on this issue.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Enochs played as follows:)
Q. When Mr. Purdo died in 1997, you did not form the opinion that his smoking -- excuse me, that his cancer was caused by his smoking, did you?
A. Form the opinion -- I had the opinion at that time, from the time of his diagnosis.
Q. Well, let me ask it a different way to make sure I've got this correctly.
You did not form the belief that Mr. Purdo's cancer was caused by his smoking in 1997, at the time of his death, did you?
A. I've always believed that the cause of his death was from his smoking.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network
stopped.)
MR. FURR: Would you stop there, Cliff.
Okay. She testified that she believed that his cancer was caused by smoking at the time of his diagnosis and that she had always believed it. But then we cross-examined her with her prior sworn testimony from her deposition, and this is what you're going to -Okay, Cliff.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of
testimony of Linda Enochs resumed.)
Q. Let me ask you a different way to make sure I've got this correctly. You did not form the belief that Mr. Purdo's cancer was caused by his smoking in
1997,	at the time of his death, did you?
A. I've always believed that the cause of his death was from his smoking.
Q. Mrs. Enochs, please confirm that you were asked these questions and gave these answers:
Question: "Is there a particular smoking-related disease that you believe was caused by Mr. Purdo's smoking?"
Answer: "I believe he got lung cancer from
it."
Question: "And when did you form that
belief?"
Answer: "I don't know that there was a particular moment. Just as more information came out about the hazards of smoking and things that I think I started thinking along those lines."
Question: "So was it in 1997 that you made that determination, or was it later?"
Answer: "I'm sure it was later. 1997 was just crazy. Probably later. Probably, as I said, as more and more information came out."
Question: "So would it have been after 2000?"
Answer: "I don't know exactly. It could have
been."
Question: "Would it have been around" -"around the time that you filed this lawsuit in December of 2007?"
Answer: "I don't know. It could have been, yeah. I mean, as we -- as I said, it was a gradual process."
Did I read those questions and answers
correctly?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: So in her deposition she told us that her conclusion that his smoking was caused -that lung cancer was caused by smoking could have been after 2007, when she filed this lawsuit. But here in the courtroom, she testified that she always believed, from the day that he was diagnosed.
We're going to look close -- in a little while at an instruction that you have about the believability of witnesses, and it talks about the frankness or lack of frankness with which they've
testified before you and about how you can evaluate that testimony based on that instruction.
And as you consider this testimony and that instruction, one of the things you can ask yourself is why would she change her testimony? Why would you change your testimony, Mrs. Enochs.
Not only was Mr. Purdo at a -- only a very, very small risk from developing cancer from his smoking, there were other factors that could explain why he developed cancer at such a young age.
Here's what Dr. Villa told you. He told you that cancer can be caused solely by genetics, even in a smoker. He told you that cancer at a younger age is an indicator of genetics playing a role in someone's cancer. He told you that Mr. Purdo had the most common type of cancer that occurs in nonsmokers.
And we looked at the medical record with him, and he conceded that the medical records said that Mr. Purdo had an extensive family history of cancer.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection. This misstates the evidence.
MR. PAIGE: Your Honor --
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Can we approach?
THE COURT: Of course.
Anybody need a restroom break? We have a hand for a restroom break. Let's do that. Let me give a restroom break and address that. Take a five-minute recess, everyone. Make sure everyone can get a break.
MR. FURR: I guess we don't have to stand up here.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
[#DELETED RECESS#]
THE COURT: Welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. Everyone has got their caffeine and ready to go.
All right. Let's proceed. And I have the pleasure once again of turning it back over to Mr. Furr.
MR. FURR: Thank you, Your Honor.
All right. Ladies and gentlemen, this is the slide we were looking at when we broke about the evidence with respect to genetics and the role genetics can play in cancer.
I want to make sure that I explain this properly. Dr. Villa told us the top three things
on this slide. He told us that cancer can be caused solely by genetics, even in a smoker, and the younger age is an indicator of genetics playing a role in someone's cancer, and that Mr. Purdo had the most common type of cancer that occurs in nonsmokers. Dr. Villa told you all those things, and then the medical records have the references to the extensive family history of cancer.
That's the end of the discussion about whether plaintiffs have met their burden of proof that the cancer, if it was primary, caused -- was caused by smoking.
So now we go to the third part of the medical causation, which is whether the cancer, if it was primary and if it was caused by smoking, whether it medically caused his death, because the plaintiff did not meet their burden of proof to prove that Mr. Purdo died from a smoking-related lung cancer.
Here is what Dr. Peterson explained to you, that there was no dispute in the medical record or records that a mechanical small bowel obstruction was the immediate cause of death.
You might remember up there yesterday from the -- he used a demonstrative where he circled the portion of the small bowel that he explained was
the cause of death.
He told me that the location of that distal small bowel obstruction is consistent with colon cancer that would have been missed by sigmoidoscopy because the sigmoidoscopy only examined the first half of the colon. And he told you that primary lung cancer does not cause small bowel obstructions.
Dr. Villa explained to you that primary lung cancer doesn't metastasize to this part of the colon, which Dr. Villa told you that it was a metastasis compressing this part of the colon that caused the obstruction.
Both Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson agreed that small bowel obstruction is not a common cause of death for patients with primary lung cancer, it is a much more common cause of death for patients that have a primary abdominal cancer because they're more likely to metastasize to the small bowel.
Let's talk about death certificate and what that death certificate means and what it proves.
You have an Instruction Number 5 in your packet that says that the death certificate "does not constitute prima facie proof of the cause of death, nor does it create any" -- "nor does it
create conclusive proof of any facts related to the death. As it relates to the cause of death, it simply states the ultimate opinion of the attesting physician."
We cross-examined Dr. Villa about the use of death certificates, and he confirmed that they're simply the opinion of the treating physician, that there's a large known error rate, and Dr. Villa admitted that he would never use a death certificate as the basis for his expert medical opinion in the courtroom because the error rate was too high, and he said the death certificates are not particularly helpful in answering the questions in this case.
Dr. Peterson was cross-examined about some articles and about death certificates that were referenced in an expert report that he had filed in a federal case. Dr. Peterson did not say that death certificates accurate -- are accurate with respect to the actual cause of death of a patient 95 percent of the time.
Dr. Peterson explained in detail that all those studies did was determine whether or not the treating physician was consistent with respect to what he said in the medical records and what he
said in the death certificate. That's all it was.
It was simply an examination of whether or not people wrote the same thing in the medical records as they do in the death certificate, and was not a study of whether, following an analysis of the actual cause of someone's death, that that was consistent with what was in the death certificate.
So it's important to understand, that's all those studies were.
Well, we've talked about the fact we don't have an autopsy, we don't have a biopsy, but we also have a lot of missing medical records in this case.
Both Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson agreed that we're missing a lot of important medical records.
The notes, we have an incomplete set of medical notes. We have no radiology films. We have no radiology reports. Although we know there was some pathology done on the bone and neck, we don't have any of the tissue. We don't -- of course, we don't have a biopsy of the lung and the colonoscopy and the autopsy.
But we know that there were records created and pathology materials that existed that we no longer have. And we also know that Mrs. Enochs had
those materials in her possession.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. Can we go sidebar?
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. FURR: Look at the medical -- you might remember that the Purdos went to Sloan-Kettering to get a second opinion. And we have a medical record
from that visit, and here it is.
This is August 1997, the Purdos went to Sloan-Kettering. And the new patient data sheet, the medical record states that each new patient should bring the following to the clinic. Number one, pathology/cytology slides and reports. Number 2, x-ray films, CT/bone scan, chest x-ray, MRI, et cetera, and reports. Number 3, medical records, discharge summaries, operative reports, et cetera. And number 4, an insurance card.
You might remember that -- well, we'll look at what Mrs. Purdo's testimony was in just a moment, but this medical record also says that these materials were received at Sloan-Kettering the same day that the Purdos arrived to Sloan-Kettering.
And then we asked Mrs. Purdo about what happened to those medical records.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Enochs played as follows:)
Q. I want to talk with you briefly about some of the medical records related to Mr. Purdo's treatment.
You -- you and Mr. Purdo had in your possession some of the x-ray and CT scans that were done during his treatment; right?
A. We had an envelope that had x-rays in them. I
don't know what else was in there.
Q. Okay. You kept those records after Mr. Purdo's death; right?
A. Yes.
Q. But ultimately, you threw them away, didn't you?
A. Yes.
Q. You threw them away in around the year of 2012; right?
A. Yes.
Q. In addition to the records, you had another couple-inch thick envelope that included other types of medical documents; right?
A. If that's what was in there, yes.
Q. And subsequently, you also threw those away, didn't you?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: You saw what Sloan-Kettering asked Ms. Enochs to bring, CTs, x-rays, medical records, pathology materials. She had an envelope which she knew contained x-rays, but she told us that she didn't know what else was in the record. The Sloan-Kettering record reflects they received the
x-rays, CTs, and the pathology materials when they came to visit.
She filed this lawsuit in 2007. She threw these materials away in 2012. This was at a time when obviously she knew she had a lawsuit pending and what the claims in this lawsuit were. And she didn't throw them out inadvertently. She explained to you she threw them out because they reminded her of Mr. Purdo's disease, they were upsetting to her, and that she didn't want them around anymore.
So she destroyed evidence, important medical records of evidence of a nature that Sloan-Kettering required her to bring because that's the type of evidence they needed.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. There's no requirement that -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: And you heard this instruction this morning. Instruction Number 6, the adverse inference instruction. It says, "If you find that Plaintiff Linda Enochs lost or destroyed or otherwise caused certain medical records and diagnostic evidence to be unavailable, while it was within her possession, custody, or control; and those medical records or diagnostic evidence would
have been material in deciding disputed issues in this case; then you may, but are not required to, infer that this evidence would have been unfavorable to Plaintiff Linda Enochs."
She had it, it was material, Sloan-Kettering wanted it, she knew she had it, she destroyed it, you can infer that had we had access to all those records today, that they would have been unfavorable to her case.
To sum up the medical causation of the case. The gold standard for diagnosing cancer is pathology. We don't have pathology. The gold standard for identifying primary cancer is autopsy. We don't have an autopsy. The gold standard for ruling out colon cancer is a colonoscopy. We don't have a colonoscopy. The gold standard for determining cause of death is an autopsy. We don't have an autopsy.
Important medical records that the doctors at Sloan-Kettering wanted to see have been destroyed. The plaintiffs have not met their burden to prove to you that Mr. Purdo had primary lung cancer caused by smoking that was the cause of his death.
So when you get to this part of the verdict form, question number 1, although this is only the
first hurdle of three for class membership, you should put no here and, respectfully, as the instructions tell you, if you answer no, please proceed no further, sign and date this verdict form, return to the courtroom, the case is over.
But even if you determine that the plaintiff has met her burden of proof to all three subparts of that hurdle, all that does is get you to the second hurdle in class membership, which is whether she has proven, remember her burden of proof to prove to you, that Mr. Purdo was addicted to nicotine.
Here's what the evidence is. The evidence in this case is that 70 percent of smokers at age 35 are not addicted. 70 percent are not addicted.
I'm about to show you that evidence in just a moment as to where it came from.
Turning that around, if at age 35 Mr. Purdo had a 30 percent chance of being addicted, that would mean that 70 percent of smokers age 35 are not addicted.
And this evidence came into the case because Mr. Paige asked Mr. Lipowicz, the Philip Morris representative, who you saw a videotaped deposition of, this record came into the case because
Mr. Paige elicited this evidence.
Here is the testimony.
(Excerpt from videotaped deposition of Peter Lipowicz, PhD, played as follows:)
Q. So at age 35, we know that about 30 percent of smokers are nicotine dependent; correct?
A. Yes, from this graph, correct.
(Excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.)
MR. FURR: Mr. Paige brought this case into evidence. He asked this question of the doctor.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Excuse me, Judge. I have got to object. He can't continue to attack us the way we prosecuted -MR. FURR: I'm not attacking you.
THE COURT: That's okay.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: I'm asking you to instruct the jury that that's inappropriate.
THE COURT: Okay. That's good. I'll sustain. That's fine. Let's move forward.
MR. FURR: This evidence is in the case put in by plaintiffs. So you know that the starting point for your analysis of whether the plaintiffs have proven that Mr. Purdo was addicted is that 70 percent of smokers age 35 --
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection.
MR. FURR: -- are not addicted.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection. How can he say -- can we approach?
THE COURT: Sure, come on sidebar.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. FURR: Okay, may I proceed, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Yes, thank you.
MR. FURR: I don't want to lose the point.
The evidence is in this case is that 30 percent of smokers are addicted at age 35. In other words, 70 percent are not.
So now we're going to look at the evidence about Mr. Purdo. It's a critical issue in the case, addiction and causation are both issues in the case. Everyone has known that for a long time. But the only addiction expert called by the plaintiffs in this case provided zero testimony
about Mr. Purdo.
The plaintiffs did not bring to you an expert that told you that Mr. Purdo was addicted. They failed to meet their burden of proof.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection. That's not a requirement that I bring a case-specific expert.
THE COURT: Okay, no speaking objections.
I'll overrule the objection. Let's move forward.
MR. FURR: No expert in a case about addiction. No expert.
I want to talk about smoking history for a minute because it's going to come up in a variety of contexts.
Was Mr. Purdo someone who smoked for 23 years and smoked one-and-a-half packs to three packs a day? We know that's not the case. Mr. Purdo died at age 51. Mr. Purdo stopped smoking at age 36.
23 years. Going back in time, 23 years from age 36 would be 13 years old.
There is no evidence in this case that Mr. Purdo was smoking a pack and a half to two packs to three packs per day between the ages of 13 and 24. That evidence doesn't exist except one medical record that says he was a heavy smoker, that he smoked approximately that amount for 20
years. Another medical record says it was only ten years. So there is a little conflict between the medical records.
But you've heard, including you've heard three witnesses this morning, you've heard a number of witnesses that knew Mr. Purdo as a teenager. And the heaviest smoking history you ever got was a pack every three to four days from his friend Mike Stefani during his mid to late teenage years.
So you know that the medical record describing one and a half, one and a third to three packs per day for 20 -- you know that's wrong, inconsistent with the evidence before you.
Let's look closer to the evidence.
Dr. Henningfield, the addiction expert called by plaintiff, is not authorized in Florida or anywhere else to diagnose patients as addicted. He is a generic witness.
He did tell you that the gold standard for diagnosing addiction is found in the DSM, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. That was Dr. Henningfield's testimony.
And you know that plaintiff did not bring to you anyone or attempt during the examination of the plaintiff to demonstrate that Mr. Purdo was
addicted under the analysis contained in the DSM, the standard -- the test that Dr. Henningfield identifies as the gold standard for determining whether or not someone is addicted.
Don't have that evidence in this case.
Here is what Dr. Henningfield did tell you.
Not everyone who smokes becomes addicted.
(Excerpt from videotaped deposition of Jack E. Henningfield, PhD played as follows:)
Q. There are people who smoke and enjoy it; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And they want to keep on smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. They don't want to quit?
A. Correct.
(Excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.)
MR. FURR: Why did Mr. Purdo smoke? What is the case-specific evidence in this case as to why Mr. Purdo smoked?
Sometimes we said to you in opening statement a picture can speak a thousand words to you. You know from the fact witnesses that he enjoyed smoking, it relaxed him. He smoked to relieve
anxiety from work. He thought it would enhance his concentration, he smoked with alcohol.
In the picture, he is enjoying a beer with what appears to be a friend smoking. Nothing wrong with that. Not criticizing him for that. But that is very revealing about the context in which he was smoking.
And he smoked for reasons other than addiction.
And again, going back to the medical records that are being relied upon in this case so heavily, they contain absolutely no reference to Mr. Purdo ever having been addicted or dependent on nicotine.
No doctor ever diagnosed him as addictive or dependent on nicotine. No medical record describes Mr. Purdo as addicted. No expert in this case told you that Mr. Purdo was addicted. In fact, no one ever said that Mr. Purdo was addicted before 2007.
The only time anyone described him as addicted was after this lawsuit was filed in 2007.
Let's look at plaintiff's generic case about what an addicted smoker looks like and compare it to the facts we know about Mr. Purdo.
Dr. Henningfield, who testified generically, told you that addiction is a biological barrier to
quitting. Relapse occurs in a great majority of smokers who intend to quit smoking.
What we know, that once he decided that he wanted to quit, Mr. Purdo quit in 1981. The first time he said he wanted to, he quit cold turkey. He didn't crave. He wasn't irritable. The only thing he did was gain some weight. And we know that he never smoked again. He never relapsed.
Neither the way in which he smoked, nor the way in which he quit are consistent with the generic picture that has been painted for you of what an addicted smoker looks like.
Ladies and gentlemen, I suggest that this is yet a second reason. We already talked about medical causation. If the plaintiffs get past that, there is a second reason why the answer should be no on question number 1, and that's because plaintiffs can't prove if he was addicted. Even if they do, they have a third hurdle, they have to overcome the addiction causation requirement that they have to prove to be a class member.
Once again, plaintiff brought to you no expert that said addiction caused Mr. Purdo's death. No one testified that way.
I think that a -- let me suggest to you that a helpful perspective for evaluating whether Mr. Purdo was addicted and whether addiction was the cause of his cancer, if it was smoking related, is to look at what type of smoker he was.
I'm sorry, let me go here first.
In your addiction causation instruction, you will see the following. "Addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause of primary lung cancer and death if it directly and in natural and continual sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such primary lung cancer." In other words, in an uninterrupted sequence.
In this case, even if he was addicted, that addiction was interrupted by the choices Mr. Purdo -MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, that's inappropriate.
THE COURT: Sustained. Slightly rephrase.
MR. FURR: I need to approach on that one,
Your Honor.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. FURR: May I proceed, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Yes, of course, Mr. Furr.
MR. FURR: Okay. This instruction will -addiction is a legal cause if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence.
In this case, any role that addiction was playing in his smoking was broken by, superseded by the choices that he made. He enjoyed cigarettes.
He wanted to smoke, and when he wanted to quit,
despite knowing that smoking was dangerous, he was the sole proximate cause. The choices -- the decisions he made were the sole proximate cause of any injury that he suffered.
Here is the helpful way for -- I submit it's the helpful way to think about the type of smoker Mr. Purdo was. Was Mr. Purdo a smoker who wanted to smoke more than he wanted to quit and chose to continue smoking? Or was Mr. Purdo, did he meet the generic description that you saw from Dr. Henningfield? Was he an involuntary smoker who had difficulty quitting despite desperately wanting to do so?
That was the generic picture that Dr. Henningfield painted for you. And you can evaluate what type of smoker was Mr. Purdo.
Here is what we know. You were told that -excuse me. Let's look at this issue of whether smoking was as common as chewing gum in the '50s and '60s, because nobody appreciated the difference between smoking and chewing gum.
Here is what Dr. Proctor told you. That when that information came out in the 1950s about the dangers of smoking, that smokers were -- began fleeing for the exits, they were scared for their
health. They began quitting by the millions.
By 1965, 17 million people had quit since the early 1950s. By 1970, 30 million people had quit.
By 1974, 45 million had quit. Thousands and thousands every day. The heaviest quitting we've ever experienced in this country because people were afraid for their lives because of the information they received about smoking, and they were able to quit.
And here is why they were able to quit. Here is what Dr. Henningfield told you. Addiction doesn't prevent quitting. Nicotine addiction does not interfere with a smoker's ability to make an effort to quit. It doesn't prevent them from quitting permanently, it doesn't prevent even heavy smokers or heavily-addicted smokers from quitting. Any smoker can quit, Dr. Henningfield told you.
He told you that nicotine did not prevent 60 million smokers from quitting. And in this case, it didn't prevent Mr. Purdo from quitting, and he smoked as long as he did only because he wanted to smoke more than he wanted to quit.
In addition, if we look closer, what was going on in society compared to Mr. Purdo's actions?
In the 1960s -- by the 1960s, '69, 30.6
million people had quit. 1969 is the first year in which we actually have any observation of Mr. Purdo being a pack-a-day smoker. So he was becoming a pack-a-day smoker while millions of people were quitting out of fear for their lives from smoking, with no testimony that he tried to quit prior to that.
By 1970s, smokers kept quitting. 45 million had quit. As we'll see from Mrs. Enochs' testimony in just a moment, Mr. Purdo didn't want to quit.
He finally did quit in 1981, when he decided he wanted to. Quitting has never stopped.
So why was Mr. Purdo different than the 45 million smokers who quit before him? Why was he different than them?
Is there any evidence that the cigarettes he smoked were more addictive than other cigarettes? No. Is there any evidence that his brain was affected differently than the smoker who quit? No.
Is there any evidence that he was exposed to advertising different than the smokers who quit?
No.
Is there any evidence he had smoked for longer or smoked heavier than the smokers who quit? No and no. Is there any evidence he had started
smoking at an earlier age than the smokers who quit? No. Is there any evidence he was genetically prone to addiction? No.
There is one difference between Mr. Purdo and the 45 million smokers that quit, and that is he wanted to keep smoking more than he wanted to quit.
Prior to 1981, he never said I want to quit.
He never threw away his cigarettes or ashtrays. He never stopped smoking at work. Remember,
Mrs. Enochs told me that the pattern would be he would say he wanted to quit on a Friday and be back smoking again on Monday when he went to work.
He never asked anybody for help. And Mrs. Enochs, you know, was he someone who desperately wanted to quit? The evidence is no.
Mrs. Enochs told you that his efforts to quit were to satisfy what she was asking him to do.
Here is some of her testimony. In this clip, you might recall she told us that the quit attempts prior to 1981 were made to humor her.
Cliff, need some help, please.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network, testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. In fact, prior to 1981, you believed that the reasons he attempted to quit smoking was to humor you;
correct?
A. I think I used those words, yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: It's not some word I made up.
That's the word she used to distribute his quit attempt. And she told us that prior to that time, he simply wanted to smoke more than he wanted to quit.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. With respect to the quit attempts, prior to 1981, you believed that, while Mr. Purdo wanted to quit smoking, he wanted to continue smoking more, didn't you? A. I think those were the words I used, yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Again, not a description I made up. This was Mrs. Enochs' description. He simply wanted to continue smoking more than he wanted to quit.
What type of person was Mr. Purdo? It's a reasonable question for you as to whether he was, you know, a helpless, addictive prone person, easily influenced by advertising, or was he a
different type of person. Here is what Mrs. Enochs told us.
Mr. Purdo was someone who valued education, so much that in high school, he switched to a more rigorous high school. Most kids run the other way in high school to try to find an easier way to go to school, he ran towards a more rigorous education because he valued education.
He became a highly-skilled board certified lawyer, Ms. Enochs told us. He was intelligent, he was decisive, he was well-informed, he followed the news. He understood that the purpose of advertising was to sell products. He was not someone who was easily fooled.
THE CLERK: 30 minutes remaining, Counsel.
MR. FURR: Excuse me?
THE COURT: 30 minutes.
THE CLERK: 30 minutes.
MR. FURR: I may go a little over.
Although he wanted to quit more -- he wanted to continue smoking more than he wanted to quit.
There came a time when he changed his mind, he wanted to quit.
He told us that when we found out we were pregnant, he said I'm doing it, I want to quit, I
don't want to die, I'm going to quit smoking, this is it, I'm doing it. Here is what she told you.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. In fact, in 1981, when you became pregnant, you remember Mr. Purdo saying "I want to quit. I don't want to die. I am going to quit smoking. This is it,
I'm doing it." Right?
A. Yes.
Q. And at that point in time, he was the one who chose to quit smoking; right?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: When he chose to quit, he quit. When he wanted to quit, he did. But even then, up till then, he recognized he was taking a chance with his life by continuing to smoke.
Now, interestingly, ironically, I should say, when this question comes as to how long had Mr. Purdo known that smoking could cause premature death, you can look back in time at different points in his life, and we have some evidence as to when he knew that, because ironically, he had told his friend, Mike Stefani, the very same advice when
Mr. Stefani's wife got pregnant, he said you need to quit if you want to be around for that child.
Here is Mr. Stefani's sworn testimony?
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Michael L. Stefani played as follows:)
Q. In 1969 when your -- in 1969?
A. Yeah.
Q. When your wife was pregnant, that's the first time that it really hit home for you?
A. Yeah, that it was serious, that this is not something that -- that I should consider if I want to be around for this baby's -- oh, just reminded me, that's what Tom said.
I'm sorry. If I wanted to be around to see this baby grow up, I ought to quit smoking.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Midway through the course of that answer he remembers that was the advice that Mr. Purdo gave him, the same information that he decided to rely upon in 1981, when his wife became pregnant.
You've heard that Mrs. Enochs has admitted that Mr. Purdo was a partial -- was partially at fault for causing his own death. And here is
precisely what she said.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. When you agree that he was the partially at fault for causing his own injury related to his frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking as a partial cause of those injuries, you are recognizing that he could have tried more frequently and for longer to quit smoking, aren't you?
A. You could interpret it that way, I guess, yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: So what does that mean? What does that admission really mean? It means, number one, that he knew he would quit, because how would he be at fault for not quitting if he didn't know that he should quit?
Number two, it means that he could have quit smoking sooner. How are we at fault for not quitting if it was something he was unable to do.
It also means that he could have quit at a time that he would have avoided any smoking-related disease, otherwise, why would you admit he was partially at fault.
Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is that if
his cancer and death were caused by smoking, which you know what the evidence is, the only legal cause of those diseases was his choice to smoke and not quit despite knowing that he was putting himself at risk for cancer and premature death.
I submit, ladies and gentlemen, that is the third reason why you should answer question number 1 no, and that should be the end of the case.
Of course, my obligation is to talk with you about the rest of the verdict form. So that's what I'm going to do. I'm going to go to questions 3 and 4, which are the concealment and agreement to conceal questions that Mr. Paige described -discussed with you.
And I'm going to approach it this way. Again,
Mrs. Enochs had the burden of proof to prove reliance and legal causation. She has the burden to provide any evidence to link concealment and agreement to conceal with his death.
As Mr. Paige explained to you, she has to prove that but for his reliance on a statement by defendants concealing or omitting a material fact, not otherwise known or available, he would have acted differently, and he would have avoided his lung cancer and death.
I broke that out a little bit more because there is a lot of parts on that, but essentially to prove her claim on 3 and 4, this is what she has to prove.
Number 1, that he relied upon a statement. Number 2, that statement concealed a material fact. Number 3, that was a fact not otherwise known or available to him. And number 4, had he known that fact, he would have acted differently, i.e. quit sooner, and would have avoided any smoking-related disease.
First question for you is what statement did the plaintiffs prove to you that Mr. Purdo relied upon? The answer is none. There has been no statement submitted to you that he relied upon.
That's because Mr. Purdo knew that smoking could cause lung cancer and premature death, but he chose to smoke until he wanted to, when he wanted to, and he chose to quit when he wanted to quit in 1981.
It was common knowledge in our society going back to the '50s that smoking could cause cancer and death.
Let's look at what Dr. Proctor told you. He told you about the news stories in the '50s about how the dangers of smoking were scaring millions of
smokers into quitting. Dr. Proctor said they were fleeing from cigarettes, fearing for their lives.
Millions of smokers quit. This is in the 1950s.
He told you that the period between 1966 and 1970 was the heaviest period of quitting we have ever had in this country. After that first warning label went on, thousands and thousands of smokers were quitting every day out of fear for their lives from developing serious smoking-related disease and death.
Mike Stefani, Mr. Purdo's best friend, also told us a little bit about what was known about smoking in the 1969 period.
He told us that "In 1969, part of the reason you were concerned for your health was a fear for lung cancer?"
Answer: "That's correct."
Question: "Would you say it was common knowledge by 1969 that it was a risk that smoking could cause lung cancer?"
Answer: "Yes."
His best friend knew it in 1969 and, of course, we just saw that in 1969 that's when Mrs. Stefani became pregnant, and you heard that Mr. Purdo told Mr. Stefani you need to quit if you
want to be around for that child.
We know -- you saw this during Dr. Proctor's examination -- cross-examination. A famous scientist who worked on matters of smoking and health quoted in 1969 saying, "You could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they don't already know." 1969.
We know that that was the same year that we have any evidence of anyone observing Mr. Purdo actually becoming a regular pack-a-day smoker.
We've talked about all the information that Mr. Purdo got from various sources in the community, his parents, from television, advice to quit that he got from his family, but I want to look a little bit closer at what Mrs. Enochs told us about what Mr. Purdo knew and when he knew it.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. Mr. Purdo first knew that smoking could be dangerous when they started saying more about the Surgeon General and he was on the news; correct?
A. Yes.
Q. You actually recall the first Surgeon General's warning that went on cigarette packs that
said, "Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." Right?
A. Yes.
Q. And did you hear Dr. Proctor's testimony that that label would have been on from 1966 to 1970?
A. Yes.
Q. You discussed the Surgeon General's warning that was on cigarette packages with Mr. Purdo, didn't you?
A. Yes.
Q. He was already aware that there were warnings on the side of cigarette packages when you met him in 1969; right?
A. Yes.
Q. In your discussions with Mr. Purdo about smoking and health, he never expressed any doubt about the health risks of smoking, did he?
A. No.
Q. Isn't it true, Linda, he agreed with you at the time that he should quit for his health?
A. Yes.
Q. At this point of time in 1971, Mr. Purdo was aware that there could be health risks related to smoking; right?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Was information about the dangers of smoking known or available to Mr. Purdo in the '60s? Of course, Mrs. Enochs just told us he knew about the Surgeon General, he knew about the warnings, he knew it was dangerous, he never disputed it, he knew he should quit, but she told us with a little more specificity, he knew how serious a risk he was taking.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo played as follows:)
Q. You had read that cigarette smoking cause -cigarette smoking causes cancer; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And you understood that to be correct; didn't you?
A. Yes.
Q. And you read that cancer can cause premature death; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And you understood that to be correct; right?
A. Yes.
Q. So you read newspaper articles and you developed an understanding that smoking could cause
cancer and premature death; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And when you read those newspaper articles, you would tell Mr. Purdo what you'd read, wouldn't you?
A. Yes.
Q. You would say things to him like, "Hey, I read an article, the Surgeon General says you shouldn't be smoking." Right?
A. Yes.
Q. And when you did that, Mr. Purdo never expressed any doubts about the health risks of smoking, did he?
A. No.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Mr. Purdo accepted that smoking could cause cancer and premature death. What more did he need to know to make a choice about whether to continue smoking or not?
Let's look at the question of whether -- that notwithstanding his knowledge, that he kept smoking because of advertising with respect to low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes.
First, the same warning on full-flavor cigarettes was always on low-tar-and-nicotine
cigarettes. Now, Mrs. Purdo knew that low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes were a dangerous product.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. Ms. Enochs, you actually remember, don't you, that the same Surgeon General's warning about cigarettes, that is, that smoking is dangerous to health -- to your health, was also in the advertisements for the lower-tar-and-nicotine products?
A. Yes.
Q. And after Mr. Purdo switched to low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes, you continued to urge him to quit smoking, didn't you?
A. Yes.
Q. And that's because, despite the fact that he had switched to a low-tar-and-nicotine product, you understood that cigarettes with low tar and nicotine were dangerous, didn't you?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Mrs. Enochs knew that he was still smoking a dangerous product when he switched to low tar and nicotine and she told him so, and she also
told us that he knew he was still smoking a dangerous product.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. When he switched to low tar and filtered cigarettes, he realized that the lower tar and filtered cigarettes were still dangerous products, didn't he?
A. They were advertised as a safe cigarette.
Q. Would you please confirm that this question was asked and you gave this answer?
Question: "And you understood that a cigarette with lower tar or nicotine was still a dangerous product?"
Your answer was: "Yes."
Question: "And as far as you understood at that time, Mr. Purdo also realized that cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine were still dangerous products?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: I show you the whole testimony here live, testifying live for you, she denied that he was. We showed her her prior sworn testimony where she admitted that Mr. Purdo realized that low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes were a dangerous
product. So she knew, he knew, they were dangerous. She still told him he needed to quit.
He didn't dispute that.
Why did he switch, then, was he switched because he was influenced by advertising that was different than what he believed and what she believed? No. She told us why he switched to low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes. He did it to appease her.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. So I want to talk about how this switch to low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes came about. In fact, isn't it true that it was you that suggested to Mr. Purdo that he should switch to low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes?
A. I did speak to him about it, yes.
Q. You were the first one to suggest that between the two of you; right?
A. Yes, probably.
Q. You made suggestions to him that he should try something different; right?
A. Yes.
Q. And you suggested that he should switch to low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes; right?
A. Yes.
Q. Mr. Purdo's decision to switch to low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes was really made to appease you, wasn't it?
A. I think that was the word that I used, yes.
Q. Yes. So you agree with that?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: He made the switch to low-tar and nicotine to apiece her, but the clearest best proof that he knew he was still smoking a dangerous product is what he said when he quit smoking.
When he quit smoking, he was a smoking a low-tar product. And when he quit, he told her, "I want to quit. I don't want to die. I'm going to quit smoking. This is it, I'm doing it. I don't want to die." He knew he was still smoking a dangerous product.
Why did he keep smoking? Why did he keep smoking and not quit any sooner? Was it because information was concealed from him and he needed more information in order to be motivated? No.
Mrs. Enochs told us what he needed in order to want to quit smoking.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Purdo Enochs played as follows:)
Q. You don't know of anything that anybody could have said to Mr. Purdo that would have caused him to quit earlier than 1981, do you?
A. No.
Q. And, in fact, your view is that the only warnings that he could have gotten that would have caused him to quit before 1981 would be if you had gotten pregnant sooner?
A. Well, that would have been a miracle, so I don't -- yes.
Q. But that's the only warning that would have caused him to quit sooner, isn't it?
A. I guess, yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: He didn't keep smoking because of the lack of information. He knew everything he needed to know. He kept smoking because he didn't have a reason sufficient unto himself to make him give up doing something that he liked to do.
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit that if you get to questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form, your answer to both of those questions for both R.J.
Reynolds and Philip Morris should be no.
Comparative fault. If you get to this question, you're going to have an opportunity to allocate fault between the parties. And so I want to look on the verdict form. On the verdict form, question 5, you'll be given a chance to state the responsibility that you charge to the parties.
It's important, obviously you recognize it's important to read those instructions closely. They are chock full of guidance from the Court as to how you evaluate the evidence.
One of the things you will see with respect to allocating fault is that the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of Mr. Purdo's alleged primary lung cancer and death and that defendants cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of Mr. Purdo's alleged lung cancer and death.
In other words, it's not a general comparison of the choices one party made and choices another party made, the conduct of one party, the conduct of another. It's a comparison of the conduct that was the conduct that was a cause of his death.
So let's look at that. Here's what Mrs. Purdo -- excuse me, Mrs. Enochs told us about
who was responsible for the choices that Mr. Purdo made.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network of testimony of Linda Enochs played as follows:)
Q. Mrs. Purdo, you believe in personal responsibility, don't you?
A. Yes.
Q. You agree that whatever happens to you is a consequence of the choices you make; right?
A. To a certain extent, yes.
Q. That's actually something that you've taught the students at school; right?
A. Yes.
Q. Ms. Purdo, you believe that Mr. Purdo, though, bears partial fault for any injuries he got as a result of his smoking, don't you?
A. Yes.
(Video clip from Courtroom View Network stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR: Here were admissions Mrs. Enochs made to you on cross-examination. She agreed that Mr. Purdo was partially at fault for any smoking-related disease. She told you that he took responsibility for his own decisions. She told you Mr. Purdo never said someone else was responsible
for his decision to smoke. And she told you it was his choice to smoke.
What do we have on the other side of the ledger as to why he smoked? We have no evidence that he started smoking because of anything the defendants did or said to him. We have no evidence that anything the defendants did or said to him prevented him from quitting.
Mr. Purdo enjoyed smoking. He wanted to smoke more than he wanted to quit. When he found out she was pregnant, he felt differently, changed his mind, decided he wanted to quit, and he quit. It was his choice. He was the only one who could have changed the outcome.
If, in fact, his disease was smoking related and primary and caused by addiction, even if they prove all that, Mr. Purdo was the only person that could have changed the outcome.
THE CLERK: Ten minutes remaining, Counsel.
MR. FURR: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you that as the instruction permits you to do, if you get to this question on the verdict form, the proper answer here is 100 percent responsibility for Mr. Purdo.
Cigarettes don't light themselves and jump in your mouth. No one held a gun to Mr. Purdo's head.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
That's -- move to strike.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. FURR: It's an argument.
THE COURT: Overruled. It's argument.
MR. FURR: No one held a gun to Mr. Purdo's head and told him to smoke. It was his choice. No one told Mr. Purdo. That was his choice and his responsibility -- it's his responsibility for the choices that he made. That's what personal responsibility is all about.
In the United States we have the freedom to make choices about how we live as long we don't do anything illegal. But before the end of the day, we have to take responsibility for our actions.
I want to talk to you about damages. First of all, the instructions will tell you that in this claim where plaintiff is requesting $25 million, the instructions tell you that any damages that you will choose to award must be fair and just in light of the evidence.
On damages, Mrs. Enochs has the burden of proof just like she does on every other issue,
because she has to prove every dollar of damages to you. She has to prove every dollar. It doesn't start at a certain amount, it doesn't start at the amount suggested by plaintiffs to you, it starts at zero and she has to prove her damages to you.
It is important to understand what is not being requested in this case. She is not asking for any economic damages, nothing related to medical expenses or funeral expenses.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. It's not in the case, so I don't know why we're talking about it.
MR. FURR: I'm limiting the claim.
THE COURT: It's not in the case, so go ahead. You may proceed, Mr. Furr.
MR. FURR: There's no claim in this case that she should be awarded damages for any economic loss, not for lost wages, and not for financial support.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection. You just -- I thought you sustained my objection.
MR. FURR: No.
THE COURT: No, I said he can continue.
You can continue, Mr. Furr.
MR. FURR: There's no claim in the case for
economic loss. You don't have any of this evidence. You're not being asked to award money for any of these things. You're only being asked to award money for her pain and suffering.
It is important to understand you're not being asked to award money for Mr. Purdo's pain and suffering. I -- no one is questioning he would have had a painful process in that last year, that he would have suffered through that. No one is disputing that. But you're not being requested to award any money for that. You're only being requested to award pain and suffering for Mrs. Enochs and Lauren and Zack.
Just like every other issue in this case, you get to address -- you get to evaluate the believability of the testimony of every witness you heard in this case.
I told you about this believability of witness instructions. That's Number 19. You'll read that you can evaluate the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of this case. Of course, now you know what the interest is, you're being requested to award the family $25 million.
With respect to frankness, you will remember
that on a variety of occasions Mrs. Enochs just changed her testimony from her deposition to her courtroom testimony about 15 different times. She told you something different than she had testified to in her prior sworn testimony.
You're also to consider -- as you decide all the issues in this case, you're permitted to consider sort of the full picture of her life. And this was laid out for you. She began dating again in 2001. She was married to Mr. Rees in 2002. She divorced him in 2005, began dating Mr. Enochs. He moved into her home in 2007, and they've been happily married ever since.
I'm not going to suggest to you what the damages should be if you get there. I'll leave it to your good judgment and common sense to arrive at a number that is fair and just in light of the evidence using your common sense to evaluate the claim that $25 million should be awarded in this case based upon the facts and evidence that you know in this case about the underlying -- about Mr. Purdo's smoking.
The last issue. Punitive damages. You're going to be asked whether you think that on top of the $25 million that plaintiff is requesting,
whether they've proven that we should come back for another phase of this trial so they can ask you for more money on top of that for Mrs. Enochs.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. That's not what the punitive damage is for. It's not to ask for more money, it's to punish them.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: You're going to be asked to come back and award money in addition to the compensatory awa