MR. BAUMBERGER: Good morning, ladies and gentleman.
Well, the day's finally arrived. This is an important day for my client, clients. It's an important day for the defense and their clients.
Of course it's also an important day for you all, because of your deliberations today, you all can go home, so that's also an important part of the process.
Now, four weeks minus one day we started this, actually, I guess a couple days less than four weeks we started. And like in Phase I, you all
have remained hard working, very attentive, you've taken extensive notes, you've asked excellent questions of the witnesses that you felt needed questions and you've worked hard at your job as performing as jurors in the American jury system.
You are once again being asked to be the judge of the facts in this case, in the Phase II, just as you were in Phase I. You are once again being called upon to right wrongs, to do justice.
Once again, we acknowledge that all come before you who are equal and they are equal in the eyes of the law, whether they be rich or poor, rich, strong or powerful, famous or infamous, all of us stand before you in seeking your justice.
I've spoke about it briefly before and I'll speak about it again, people matter. People matter a great deal. They matter how they're treated by other people and other corporations. People matter is how they treat other people. What matters is how people also pass on their sense of values to their children.
People mattered in Phase I when the defendants tried to deny the obvious; an obvious case of lung cancer, a widely, widely known and deadly disease that kills 60, 70,000 people a year. And the
defendants, instead of acknowledging their responsibility that people matter, came in and presented evidence denying the obvious and trying to convince the jury that Margot Putney had a obscure cancer that many of the treating physicians had never seen and some had never heard of, all to prevent us from being here today.
The defense still are denying the obvious. They're denying in Phase II any responsibility. As you were told during jury selection, during the opening and closings in Phase I, the openings in Phase II, that the children, on behalf of their mother, Margot Putney, have acknowledged some small sense of responsibility, some part of responsibility for their mother's death. They've
acknowledged that.
The defendants have not acknowledged anything. Margot says that -- and her family says that she was negligent, that she shares responsibility on her negligence and products liability claim, as the judge will instruct you.
The defendants, in denying that they had any responsibility cannot deny that they were negligent, that they were negligent, that they were careless. They cannot deny that their cigarettes
were defective. They cannot deny that. That has been determined in another proceeding and the Court will instruct you that those determinations are binding upon you, so they cannot deny that.
The defendants cannot deny that they concealed, omitted information knowing what they did was false and misleading and that they failed to disclose material facts concerning the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking their cigarettes. That was determined in another proceeding, that finding is binding on you, but more importantly, it's binding on them.
The defendants cannot deny that they entered into an agreement, a conspiracy, really, to conceal or omit critical health information with the attention that smokers and the public would rely on their misrepresentations to their detriment.
They will not be allowed to deny their wrongdoing. But their position will sound like it was 50 years ago, to some extent anyway, maybe like Phase I. Yes, all this thing is out here, but we're not responsible. Yes, all this evidence is out here, but that didn't cause anything to Margot Putney. Yes, there was this talk of a conspiracy and withholding information, but that has no harm
to Margot Putney; just like smoking cigarettes did not cause lung cancer because their position was it was an obscure disease.
As they did 50 years ago -- when I say 50 years ago, is the 1950's, the '60s, the '70s, the 80's and the '90s. They have and they will do -make arguments, make suggestions to avoid responsibility.
Let's go back to the 1950s, to 1953, to be exact. What was the culture regarding smoking? We heard from Cousin Tom who lived it. Who can forget Cousin Tom? Who can forget a witness who looks at the judge and asks him does he have to give the date of April Fool's day, I mean, how can you forget that? And Cousin Tom came in and Cousin Tom gave his recollections of the 1950s.
Would you show in quick succession, please, Exhibit 49 A -- 498 A, 499 A -- yes, those right there.
This is the ad of athletes. And as was explained to you when these came in through Dr. Feingold, these ads were pervasive, tney were everywhere.
And if we go to the next one, please, whichever -- it doesn't make any difference what
order they re in.
Here's an ad of a celebrity, arguably, the biggest celebrity in the '50s, Bob Hope.
And the next one, please.
And here was an ad that was pervasive. This wasn't the only company and the only cigarette brand that put out the doctors healthy ads. We saw that when Dr. Hoff was here on the back of the Life magazines that she brought in from the 1950s, on the back page and the front page, full page ads; not as to the doctor, but as to their ads and the ones we saw before we get to the Christmas ad -the Christmas ad next.
This was the ad that we saw and one similar to it on the back of the Life magazine. This was for Old Golds. That one, if I recall, was for Chesterfields.
And then the next ad will be this ad.
All smokers inhaled. Now, why would an ad be out there that says all smokers inhale? To think about that for a second, we have to go back and understand what has been described here for the cigarettes, how the cigarette is an effective delivery system because it puts nicotine into the lungs, which is into the blood stream and we've had
testimony that it gets to the brain and receptors in milliseconds. This is an educational ad. This is an ad that's teaching people how to smoke.
Don't just...like on a pipe or something like that, you want to... to get that smoke deep into your lungs, that's a teaching ad; just as the doctors ad and ones like it are teaching ads.
Not only are you seeing the healthy lifestyle, but the tobacco companies are putting out ads that are telling people it's healthy to smoke, doctor recommend. I mean, we still hear doctor recommends. We hear doctor recommends toothpaste,
I think, there's all kind of doctor recommends on TV, why is it so often we see those ads? Because ads sell. And when the doctor recommends a product, why, that must be a good product.
And these ads weren't the only ads.
We also have ads like we'll see right now,
540, please, on TV.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: Yes, Lucky Strike means fine tobacco. So long, so firm, so fully packed, so free and easy on the draw.
VOICE: Lucky Strike presents Mark Wallow and the Lucky Strike Orchestra, the Hit Parade and the
singing star...
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: Can you go to the Desi Arnez and Lucille Ball ad quickly?
MR. PHILIPSON: 577, sir.
MR. BAUMBERGER: This is one of the most popular TV programs back in the '50s. This wasn't the only program. We've heard testimony that on Dragnet, Cousin Tom was talking about people smoking on Dragnet. I Love Lucy was a very, very, very important ad.
MR. PHILIPSON: 577.
MR. BAUMBERGER: 577, can you play that? Cartoons...
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: Lucy?
VOICE: Yes, dear?
VOICE: Give me a cigarette, will you, hon?
VOICE: Don't say cigarettes, say Philip Morris.
VOICE: Oh, is there any other kind?
VOICE: Not for you, there isn't. Nothing but the best...
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: Cartoons. We've heard from
Dr. Hoff what cartoons do, they sell, because that was one of the strategies that the anti-smoking people said in one of the articles she was talking about, to have cartoons.
Well, maybe they got the idea of cartoons from the tobacco company, because they sell. Ads sell. Ads sold and they still sell.
People in the '50s were smoking in their homes, their offices and public buildings. It was a way of life. That was Margot's world when she started to smoke in 1953 or 1954.
Would you go to board seven, please.
Then what happened in 1953? This was a culmination of the ongoing scientific community's discussions, suggestions, pronouncements and opinions that alt statistical studies -- all statistical studies were pointing to cigarettes causing lung cancers.
As we heard in Phase I, the tobacco industry doesn't like statistics. But when this came out, the tobacco companies reacted. And how did they react? Well, like any good organization or organizations, because this was the tobacco companies -- with the exception of Liggett -- they formed a committee, they formed a committee to
discuss.
Now, did they form a committee to evaluate?
Did they form a committee to say att this information out there is available to us so what can we do with it?
What one of the boards said at one point in time, one of the options, if this was harmful, we had the heard the statement they would go out of business. That was a choice the committee could make, a choice that the committee could make, would say, you know, there's some validity in these statistics, there's some validity in what's going on right now and att kinds of choices coutd come out from that.
They could advise the public of that. They could say, well, we need to look at it further.
They coutd stop producing cigarettes for a period of time while this information was evaluated.
MR. WEBB: Objection, Your Honor.
MS. KESSLER: Preemption.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. BAUMBERGER: But what did they do instead?
They set up a program to deceive the American people, they set up a program to deny, to contend not enough evidence was there. First off, it was
an outright denial.
Would you please put up on the board 307.
This is the Frank Statement. And in the Frank Statement they said we believe that our products that we make are not injurious to the health, and we have always -- have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public and the public health. I will review -please keep those in mind because we will review some of the evidence that's come in today as to how closely they cooperated and what they believe.
Would you please put up 3608.
That Frank Statement was dated January 1,
1954. But what did they know in 1953? It's page
14	of that document. This is Claude Teague. You all remember the discussion of Claude Teague? He's with RJR.
This was the gentleman who on direct examination said, well, he was an idea man, you know, these ideas never went very far, giving the idea that he was kind of unimportant. But when on cross-examination we found out that he was director of research and development at the time he retired. He worked with the company for 36 years. He was a loyal and dedicated employee.
But on page 14, what did he write to the company and tell them? He said the studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidence of cancer of the lung.
In other words, their products were harmful; not exactly what they said in January when they said our products are not harmful to the health.
So we can start with the Frank Statement, widely disseminated, widely, it was a huge buy for the time that it was bought in 1954.
And so, of course, we heard from Dr. Hoff saying, well, that's not a big deal, but it was a big deal, and it was false and it was misleading. And based on that meeting, the next 50 years were a course of conduct that the tobacco companies pursued until the MSA, Master Settlement Agreement, of the lawsuit that was filed by, I think it's 46 Attorneys General; that's 46 states suing the tobacco company when, as a result of that litigation, they finally came clean, they finally admitted that, yes, cigarette smoking is a hazard to the health.
And now we've gone from there to there is now -- we've heard from the stand -- there is no
safe cigarette, even if it's called Premiere and Eclipse.
But going back, if you go to board 16.
In 1950s, how did this progress? Well, in the 1950s, we had the American Tobacco Company writing to the Tobacco Institute -- ah, that's another thing, the committee set up front organizations
called the Tobacco Institute or the TIRC, the Tobacco Institute, the CTX or CTR, a number of different-named committees, whose purpose was to shield the industry. And we've seen, they provided spokespeople, so for in many occasions you wouldn't see the actual representative of the company, you would see the people who they -- with the exception of that number of years with Liggett -- that they represented the tobacco industry and they were the spokesperson for the tobacco industry, and they were paid for and they were -- the whole thing was funded by the tobacco industry.
And so what is the purpose to defend the tobacco industry against a tax from whatever source on the tobacco -- here's the word -- an alleged, an alleged health hazard, including efforts to impose labeling requirements on tobacco products based directly or indirectly on the charge that
tobacco is a hazard to the health.
Now, what kind of labeling were they opposing at that time? It was called warnings.
And now let's talk about what the tobacco industry knew and let's go to board 21. This is in 1961. This is Dr. H. Wakeham, he is prominent in Philip Morris, and he had this partial list of carcinogens and he notes on the bottom they're found in practically every cigarette.
Now, let's go to board 19. Now, we heard from Mr. -- maybe it's Dr. Figlar. He proudly told us on the board, one of his presentations, remember board one, that this was a gentleman who cooperated so much with the Surgeon General in the 1964 report? Well, what does he say in 1962, two years before it goes out?
I don't know if he's cooperating this time or not, but it's two years before this Attorney General's report comes out. And it says that the results of 34 different statistical studies shows that cigarette smoking increases the list of developing lung cancer.
It has been observed that cigarette smokers' lungs show profound cellular changes which are proportion to cigarette consumption. The more you
smoke, the worse it is for you. The heavier you imbibe, the more likely you are to get cancer.
It's common sense.
That's going to be something else the Court's going to tell you, that as you listen to me, maybe especially when you listen to me, use your common sense, but also use your common sense when you listen to everybody else. Use your common sense when you go back there and you look at the evidence. Your common sense is extremely important to this process of being an American juror.
So what's their conclusion about the evidence to date? The amount of evidence accumulated to date indicts cigarette smoke as a health hazard -to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. And the evidence challenging this is scant. Scant.
What's that old saying, what they knew and
when did they know it? And here is what did they know, when did they know it and what did they tett the public about it?
Now, let's go to the board number six.
And so we're comparing on this chart the Surgeon General's report in 1964, where Luther Terry says cigarette smoking is casually related to
lung cancer in men. The data for women, though less extensive, pointing the same direction. Unfortunately, we know today that sometimes women's health lags, but it was still there. And contrast that to 1962, where the evidence is overwhelming and contrary evidence is scant.
Now, is that an industry and a company that is being candid, that is being truthful, or is that an industry that's protecting its best pocket -- its rear pocket to protect its profits?
And let's go to board number five, we saw this clip with Howard Cullman who -- I think he was in two rotes right here, he both was president of the tobacco company and involved with one of the institutes that were set up.
And he says: I don't think the industry admits that there's any bad elements. Huh? We've seen from Mr. Teague, we've seen from Mr. Rodgman and now we're seeing from Mr. Cuttman something that is 180 degrees different. It's night and day.
And so, what was their further response? If we look at the bottom. Now, this is going back to the crux of the matter, the crux of tne matter.
From their own documents -- now, ptease understand that what you're seeing right here at
the bottom and what you've seen in these documents, these are not some independent expert coming in and opining, these are not some independent eye witness who says, well, you know, I was there, I think I know what the color of the light was, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. These are the internal documents of the company as to what they're saying and what they're thinking and what they're planning.
This is not greater weight of the evidence. There is ctear and convincing, ctear and convincing as to what they were doing. And the clear and convincing is confidential. That's what the document was titled when you see it.
We must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch to continue smoking.
You know, that's the crux of the matter. We, as human beings, want to believe what we want to believe. We all want to believe for the most part that our lifestyle's okay. We want to believe that what we're doing is the right thing, the heatthy thing.
And if you're an addict, it's even more important. You've heard tough love. Tough love is a program where you take an addict and you tough
love, you make it really tough, you don't enable somebody to do something. Here is a psychological crutch, with att of the ads, with the
pervasiveness, with all these statements that you have heard and you will hear again during closing. It's okay, it's all right. It hasn't been proven, not a problem, we'll tell you when we know something, trust us.
To continue. We're continuing in the '60s. Let's go to board 22. This is another report. Can you make that a little bit clearer maybe? Let's start over here on the right hand -- on the left-hand side, right there. Can you get the date? Shows 1966. Right there. All right.
This is special report. You know, I see special reports in the news all the time. Special report. We're coming to you with a special report. Well, this is a special report to the company and it is to market potential for a health cigarette. Yeah, they were right, they were talking about a health cigarette back then. That was part of the story. But now let's see the rest of the story about what tobacco industry was talking about in the '60s.
The rest of the story is they've reached the
following conclusions. The anti-cigarette -there's that word -- propaganda -- propaganda will probably be more effective in reducing the rate of smoker recruitment than in stimulating smokers to quit or switch.
Smoker recruitment. What does that mean? Getting people to smoke. I mean, we now know, without a doubt, that the people who started smoking in the '50s and continued smoking because they were addicted -- like Margot Putney -- started dying off in the '90s.
So if you're not recruiting new smokers, it's going to be self-attrition, you're going to go out of business. That's one way to put the cigarette companies out of business, just don't recruit new smokers. Everybody quits and they're not in business.
And so what is described as -- from Dr. Hoff and others -- as fact, that Margot Putney and other people should pay attention to, they're describing as propaganda. And they note that whenever there is a scare that stabilizes, it rapidly for a brief time, during each health scare, the market share rapidly increases for a brief period during each health scare and quickly stabilizes at a new and
higher plane of market penetration.
And in 1966, women, and particularly young women, would constitute the greatest potential market for a health cigarette. In 1966 Margot was still a young woman. Mere reduction in nicotine and TPM deliveries by conventional methods of filtration would not be a sufficient basis for launching a new cigarette. And to attempt it would be to court disaster.
But look at number 10. The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. Let me talk about that for a second. You recall testimony from Dr. Figlar that Winstons, back in the '50s, the filter that was so widely
publicized, didn't reduce the tar and nicotine with any significance from unfiltered Camels, yet it was being -- it's filtered.
What does the public think? It's filtered.
The filters doing something. What is the filter for? We got a filter for the water. It takes the stuff out of the water. It makes the water clean and good to drink. And so when you have the smoking public, you have a filter, what does a filter mean? Hey, man, I'm safe. It's okay.
Would you please put up on the board P 2078.
We discussed this with Dr. Figlar yesterday. And this again is from Claude Teague, that person who's not very important and was just, you know, an idea man. And here he's discussing that what they should do is put dye into the cigarettes so that the smoker will see some marks at the end of the filter so they will feel satisfaction and comfort that the filter is doing something. So they were going to put some dye in the cigarette so that when you got to the filter the smoker would say, hey, look at all that brown stuff, I mean, this is doing some good. Oh, of course, according to Dr. Figlar, this was not put into operation.
Let's go back to board 22.
And what was their advertising directed to here in number -- when you get down to the bottom, it appealed to women. But in talking about cigarettes that are health cigarettes, there is one admonition, one little clue, one little problem is because a cigarette not delivering nicotine cannot satisfy -- not the casual smoker, not the new smoker -- but the habituated smoker, and it will almost certainly fail.
Do you know what, we've seen that, we've seen that from Mr. Jupe who talked about Eclipse and
Premiere. They failed. And yet this week this gentleman came here to say what a great company we are and look at all the money we're spending for a healthier cigarette. Ain't we grand. But the dirty little secret is back in 1966 they knew it would fail. Sometimes there is nothing new under the sun.
Now, let's go to the 1970's and let's see if we can -- this is board number 17 -- we are -- the CTR and the industry -- meaning the tobacco industry -- have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth. Let's face it. Let's be honest with ourselves.
We are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. Don't come to me with the truth. Let's see what we can do to find somebody somewhere who will testify that Margot Putney had thyroid -excuse me -- that somebody will come in and say everybody's wrong about this cigarette causing cancer. That's what we're interested in. We re not interested in what the mainstream is. We want our point of view.
And go to board ten.
So let's contrast in 1970 on the right-hand
side that we're interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegations that cigarette smoking causes disease, and going back to the basics, to The Frank Statement, in 1954, which says:
We accept an interest in public health as a basic responsibility, paramount -- greater than, our overwhelming concern -- to every other consideration in our business. Has that been the evidence we've seen?
Now, let's show -- in 1971, let's play video clip 1696.
(Video clip was played.)
VOICE: From CBS Washington in color, Face the Nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with Joseph Cullman III, chairman and chief executive officer of Philip Morris, Incorporated and chairman of the executive committee of the Tobacco Institute.
VOICE: We have no proof that I know of to try to help people to stop smoking. We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Ana this industry can face the future with confidence
because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: Okay. That's 1971. That's a widely-watched program. They knew what the truth was. We've reviewed the truth in the internal documents. Is that evidence of a psychological crutch for somebody like Margot Putney to see and understand and believe on these widely-circulated things?
Let's go to what they knew in board 11. This is from Philip Morris Research Center in 1972 and this says: No one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine.
Most of the physiological responses to inhaled smoke -- going back to that ad, remember, inhale -had been shown to be nicotine-related.
The cigarette should be conceived, not as a product, but as a package. The product is nicotine.
And at the bottom: Think of nicotine as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine.
Think of Margot Putney in the 1980's smoking
her Mores cigarettes -- two packs a day that have very high nicotine content -- as dosing herself every 30 to 45 minutes because of the physiological requirements that her addiction to nicotine required. She was doing exactly, exactly -- and performing exactly what this industry knew in 1972.
To continue with what they know, go to board number 20.
We're now moving into the 1980's. And this is a program, again, from Philip Morris, and it's the
nicotine program. This program includes both behavioral effects as well as chemical investigation. My reason for this high priority is I believe the thing we sell most is nicotine.
Now, let me stop here for just one second. We've heard suggestions that people smoke because, you know, they want with their cup of coffee or with their drink or after dinner or to do something with their hands, and so they smoke because they like smoke. But do they like smoke so much they can go stick their head in a chimney, that they can stand behind a bus, is that how they get their smoke? No. They smoke because the thing we sell is nicotine. Think Eclipse, think Premiere, think the super low does not sell.
Now, what were they doing on the TV media in the 1980's? Will you play clip 1683, this is Anne Browder on October the 20th, 1983.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: We asked Philip Morris, RJR, Brown & Williamson, and Lorillard to appear on this program. None would. They told us to talk to the Tobacco Institute. The Institute said Anne Browder would speak for them.
VOICE: The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
VOICE: It may not be harmful, you're not convinced?
VOICE: It may be or it may not be, we don't
know.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PHILIPSON: One more piece.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: These pictures are from Superman 2. Marlboro from Philip Morris is shown at least 13 times. I asked the Tobacco Institute why Marlboros were shown so often in Superman 2.
VOICE: Do you think cigarette manufacturers had something to do with that?
VOICE: Yeah.
VOICE: Manufacturers don't make movies.
VOICE: What do you think, the moviemaker just showed Marlboro on his own?
VOICE: Perhaps the moviemaker was a Marlboro smoker.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: Now, what did we hear from Dr. Hoff concerning the marketing of the cigarette manufacturers in movies? She said, yeah, they did it. That's not exactly what Ms. Browder is suggesting there.
We talked about local news. Let's go to 1757.
This is Anne Browder again right here in Fort Lauderdale. Market penetration.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: First of all, we know cigarette smoking is bad for our health. Why does the Tobacco Institute continue to promote smoking?
VOICE: Well, the Tobacco Institute does not promote smoking. It promotes the right of an individual to make a decision to smoke and then
supports that individual in making that decision.
(Video clip paused.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: Stop right there for a second. Does that statement jive with their
marketing statements? Where they're seeking new markets to keep it going, and that women, especially young women, are a potentially really great market, is that a candid statement?
Will you please continue?
(Video clip resumed.)
VOICE: And I have to disagree with you in that we don't know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
Certainly I am not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people and some of the problems that they might have, but I don't think that there is a causal relationship established between cigarette smoking and any disease. If there were, Diane, I don't think there would be a cause without the effect or the effect without the cause. And we all know that that happens.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: I will let somebody else figure out the comment there, but what we're saying is not true by looking at the company documents.
Now, we also have nationwide, look at 1751.
THE CLERK: You have 30 minutes, counsel.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Pardon?
THE CLERK: You have 30 minutes.
THE COURT: Thirty minutes is what she said.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Have I -- I've taken 30 minutes?
THE CLERK: You're at the 45-minute mark.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Okay. Thank you.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: Earlier this week the RJR tobacco company took out this ad in a number of major newspapers and magazines calling for an open debate about smoking. In brief, the ad contends that medical studies would show that cigarette smoking causes disease are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary.
VOICE: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no.
VOICE: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: That's enough. That doesn't comport with what they're saying.
And then we go to -- we're not going to show it -- but the Surgeon General's report in 1988 concerning addiction, that cigarettes were
addictive, in their own documents show they were addictive. And here's what Dan Rather was told on 5-16-1988, Exhibit 1777. Would you play that?
This is the response to the Surgeon General.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: A new report from the Surgeon General
of the United States. The smoking war escalated today. A new report from the Surgeon General of the United States added a weapon for people who oppose smoking and their representatives in Congress. It also drew fire from the tobacco industry.
Medical correspondence Susan Spencer reports.
VOICE: Surgeon General Koop drew his smoking gun on the tobacco industry today, declaring what a lot of people who can't kick the habit already know, the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, very addictive.
VOICE: I would say it is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine. Our nation has mobilized enormous resources to wage a war on drugs, elicit drugs. We should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
VOICE: Antismoking groups said this report
puts their fight on new footing.
VOICE: Because a claim that smoking is addictive knocks out the tobacco industry's number one argument that smokers smoke because of their free will.
VOICE: Others said the official finding that smokers addicted may actually help them quit.
VOICE: People should be encouraged. Now we know what...
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: That's fine. And so what was their response? It's not addictive.
What did their own company documents show?
They were addictive.
And now let's show two clips very quickly, PT 1771 and PT 1772. Now, PT 1772 is the William Campbell, Philip Morris USA president and CEO.
These are testimonies before congressional investigations, U.S. Congress. And they raise their hands to take an oath, just like every single witness who was seen here from the stand. And so let's see what in 1994 he had to say.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: Mr. Campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge it has not
been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. This is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus, not by some, but all of the scientific community.
VOICE: Will you ever be convinced? And what evidence are you waiting for? And let's have the microphone passed over.
VOICE: Yes, I may be convinced. We don't know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: If you will then put up the board -- without playing the video -- very quickly on addiction, which will be board number 14.
You've seen this video before.
This is the heads of the tobacco companies who are testifying under oath before Congress. This is six years after the Surgeon General report came out about addiction and everybody says it's not addictive.
Why is this course of conduct? Why would they want to do this? Because the obvious thing is money. They'd have to go out of business if they
did that otherwise.
And now, I suspect -- let me switch to addiction -- that the defense is going to contend that Margot Putney was not addicted -- or excuse me -- they have admitted she's addicted, but she could quit, she could quit. But what did Dr. Feingold tell us? Dr. Feingold showed us a board that said that nicotine addiction is the same quality of addiction as heroin and cocaine and the effective quit rate is about 20 percent that can quit; that means 80 percent cannot quit.
And Dr. Feingold talked about the two things that was the best predictor in general about whether you could quit or not and the people who could not quit, the first cigarette in the morning, and it was the testimony Margot had it as soon as she got up; and the number of cigarettes that she smoked, and she smoked two packs a day. And those are the people that are the least likely to be able to quit no matter what the therapy is.
And then in her age group, he said there was one other great predictor, didn't he? And he said the best predictor of all for people in their '50s, especially women, is when you have been diagnosed with a tobacco-related illness, when you bottom
out. And that's what Margot Putney did in the first week or so of February in 1994 when she was told that she had this terrible disease called lung cancer.
What is the contrary evidence? The contrary evidence, there was not an addictionologist called by the defense. There was not another eminent -and I suggest that Dr. Glassman has written more on addiction -- nicotine addiction than any other person in the country. They didn't bring in any other highly-qualified expert, as a matter of fact, they didn't even bring in somebody who was just a so-so expert. They didn't even bring in an expert at all.
And so if the argument is she could quit, all she had to do was have motivation. And Dr. Glassman had something to say about motivation. He said motivation would be something where you would maybe try to quit, but it was an extremely poor predictor of those who could quit. And the heavier you were addicted, the less likely you are to be able to quit because you're dosing yourself so much.
If you put up board number 15.
In 1955, we saw this clip from Clarence C.
Little. Clarence C. Little was the distinguished scientist who was hired by the TIRC who came in and
said a number of things about -- tobacco things, but not one single thing that he admit that tobacco caused health disease. And so when you're in an industry that knew, knew what they knew in 1953, and a young girl, about 15 -- I think she's about
15	at this point in time, Cousin Tom told us -starts smoking and becomes addicted, how do you measure that fault? How do you measure that fault?
Maybe the suggestion of the children is correct, some small measure, some small measure.
And what was the testimony, plus or minus five percent for her actions as an addict on their product which addicted her versus their knowledge. And please, don't forget that the treatments by therapy didn't exist in the '50s and '60s and were just very scattered in the '70s.
And remember Dr. Glassman said in 1980 he was one of the first quit clinics and you had to go to a doctor to think that something's wrong with you, maybe in 1984 to be able to get Nicorette gum; in '92, to get the Patch, and neither one of them went on the market until '96. Margot was dead.
And so if you're healthy, why go to the
doctor? She went once a year, to her gynecologist. Makes sense, common sense, I'm healthy, why do I go to the doctor? I go to the doctor and say, Doc,
I'm feeling grand today, this week, give me a checkup. People don't do that, especially at her age.
And so, how do you compare the fault? Legal cause. They're going to deny that none of the actions that these defendants did for which they have already been found guilty had anything to do with anything. But what did Dr. Feingold say?
That 40 years of smoking each day, each cigarette contributed to the development of her small cell cancer.
And this would include when she smoked Winstons, that's RJR, from '53; 54 to '68, plus or minus; Liggett, which is Lark, '68 to 1977, '78; Philip Morris, Merit, '77, '78, to '82, '83, and Benson & Hedges, which is also Philip Morris, kind of whenever; and then RJR from '82 or '83 to '94, when she was diagnosed with cancer.
He testified that her 40 years of 80-pack years, how the smoke starts at -- the carcinogens start at a microscopic level starts developing that caused her cancer.
The defendants still misleads the public today. Rather than trumpeting Premiere and Eclipse, how "wow" that is, Dr. Figlar talking about going to the smokeless product, but what were they really saying?
Let's put up on the board number eight.
This goes back to 1969 with Philip Morris.
And this is a memo: Who ain't for more money?
Well, who ain't for more money? There's nothing bad for being for more money. But maybe there's something bad about failing to be honest and candid to tell the public what's truly going on.
Maybe when you come in and you say all this
money that you spent on Premiere and Eclipse and really give us credit when the dividends for last year for Philip Morris -MS. KESSLER: Your Honor, objection, misleading.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAUMBERGER: -- that was stipulated to is 3.575 billion. Folks, at $5.25 a pack, that's a lot of cigarettes. As a matter of fact, that's a lot of cigarettes that are not Premiere and Eclipse.
And when RJ Reynolds most recent audited
fiscal statement said their shareholder equity is 7.77 billion, that's a lot of cigarettes.
And so the smokeless, what did he say, was only 20 percent? I forget what he said. And when asked by a juror, did they intend to, in effect, phase out -- as I interpreted the question -- phase out cigarette smoking and go to smokeless products, he basically said, well, we're hoping to go in that same direction and we don't think we'll ever get there; and if we don't keep selling our products, some other company will, so I guess that means we'll keep on selling. That's a lot of cigarettes.
The smallest company, Liggett, net income for that 2009 was 89.4 billion -- million. Let me go back -- 89.4 million, which is considerably less than Philip Morris and RJR, but it's still a lot of money.
The Court is going to charge you that you may consider punitive damages in this case. And the Court will charge you that if you find by clear and convincing evidence the conduct causing damage to Margot Putney was so gross and flagrant to show a reckless disregard for the safety of Margot Putney, for the conduct causing damage to Margot Putney was such an entire lack of care that a high-ranking
official of the defendant must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences to Margot Putney, or the conduct causing damage to Margot Putney showed such an entire lack of care that a high-ranking official of the defendant must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of Margot Putney, or the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of Margot Putney as to be equivalent to intentional violations of rights.
There is no question that the conduct of the defendants was intentional. There is no question that the choices, the choices that the defendant made on each step of the way, for Margot Putney's entire life, to conceal, to avoid sharing the information they had with the intent to deceive the public so they could sell their product was intentional and it was gross, flagrant, showed an entire lack of care by high company officials, because they couldn't have done it without that.
We saw the high company officials testifying before Congress, that showed a lack of care, reckless indifference to the rights of Margot Putney.
THE CLERK: You're at one hour, counsel.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you, Your -
Your Honor...
They put out a product. The only product that I would suggest that's on the market that, if it's used as intended, smoking, inhaling the smoke into your lungs has the capacity to kill you, and they didn't come clean. They did what they could to entice the public.
And we've heard from her children that -about the ads, well, both children, Cousin Tom, the ads back in the '50s that enticed and mislead them to come have cigarettes. We've seen the testimony from one of the sons who says in the '70s she switched from Larks to Merit because Merit was a lower tar and nicotine.
And we know, don't we, that there is no safe cigarette and maybe in truth and in fact there's not even a safer cigarette.
And so we've heard from her daughter about how everybody knew there was a controversy. This controversy that was created by the tobacco industry provide a psychological crutch; that this was the controversy that was out there for the public, including Margot Putney, to buy into if you're an addict, and I suggest that the evidence is clear and convincing.
I want to turn now for damages. And this is my opportunity to discuss with you how, in my opinion, how justice is achieved. You know, the need for justice is as old as mankind. I mean, we know in ancient times from the good book that justice was an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Justice was achieved in a harsh, harsh way.
Today we don't do that. Today, if you will, we have a new standard that we apply, and that is money damages. In considering the new way of damages, the way that justice is dispensed is awarding money damages to fully compensate the person who has suffered a loss, not partially compensate, not a tenth, not even 90 percent, but fully compensate.
You know, I remember a presidential inaugural address, this is the time when the U.S. president takes his what -- oath, oath of office. And he spoke these words to the nation, to challenge the nation: What is required of you, oh, man, but to do justice, love mercy and to walk humbly with your God. I respectfully suggest that Sharon, Glenn and Guy, these children of Margot Putney deserve justice because people matter.
I intentionally did not have Margot (sic)
Putney read the letter. In effect, sort of a blessing, as you will hear the letter, and I'm going to read it to you. This is April 1, 1995. This is Margot's birthday, her last birthday. This was about six weeks before she died.
And Margot writes in this letter that's in evidence will say, Sharon -- but Sharon testified that each child got this. I want to thank you all for being here for my birthday. I really am very
happy you re all here. I have great kids and grandkids. I sincerely expect to be here for my next birthday. I know I'm going to do my best and with God's help, I'll make it.
However, there are some things I'd like all of you to hear and understand. I know I've been doing a lot of thinking and I'd like you to understand my thinking while I'm thinking right.
Now, remember, when she's writing this letter, she has cancer that has metastasized to her brain. She is already having problems on one side of her body. So while she's thinking right.
And listen to the blessings that she gives.
Glenn, I've always loved you and am real proud of the things you've accomplished so far. You've got a nice wife and two beautiful children. I love
them. You're a real worker and did a nice job on your home, it's lovely. I'm sure you will do more good things.
Isn't it interesting that she talks about doing a nice job on her home, when she would go up there and help her son do carpentry work and other types of work because she was a handywoman, not a handyman, but a handywoman.
Guy -- this is the son that had the terrible accident -- I've always had a special love for you. I guess you know that it's all up to you. You can have a good life if you just have a goal. Think positive and work hard and I'm sure you'll do alright.
Sharon, you've always been my dependable love. I never could have done as well or made as much of a home life for the kids without you.
Now, listen to this next phrase from the evidence.
My marriage was not too good for a home life.
This is from the lady -- the mother -- who was the backbone and kept the family together.
You have been such a faithful friend and daughter and I love you and want to thank you for all you've done and will continue to do. It's nice
to know I can depend upon you and I want to know I appreciate it.
While I'm still thinking right -- that phrase again -- I want to tell you about my will. I realize there is no law that I must do anything for anyone, but I'd like to be as good as I can be to each of you and I wish it were more.
My reason for this is to now have a clear understanding with no hard feelings or fighting over things in the future. If you have something to say, please tell me now.
You know, this is a lady who is aware that she's on her death bed. And what is she thinking about? It's the well-being of her children and how they're going to handle it when she's no longer there.
If it's necessary -- if it's necessary for me to live with someone, and it appears that I must at the present time, I would get along best with Sharon. Also she has offered to be with me and
take care of my four cats.
See, she even loves her cats.
And that I love and want to be well-taken care of. Sharon will be giving up a lot and I realize that I'm not easy to live with, in addition there's
other things she will be giving up. We may be together for a long time or a short time, who knows. The results will be the same.
And you'll see where that is underlined.
I'll enjoy my life with Sharon, my daughter and best friend. Plus we don't have to phone each other four or five times a day. Remember, I love all of you.
Then she goes on to say that she's leaving the house to Sharon because of the extra burden Sharon's going to have to bear and instructs Sharon to take out a loan for $50,000 and give 25,000 to each son. And that was done. And all the kids were good with that.
We told you at the very beginning and we asked your permission, could -- we had the burden of coming forward to prove our case and some of the testimony might be hard to see and hear. And would you be able to do it and would you be able to receive the testimony and evaluate it without allowing sympathy to come into play. And each and every one of you said you could do that.
Sharon, Glenn and Guy are not here for sympathy. Sympathy has been called that inadequate feeling that is embarrassing at best and is
inadequate to make things right. There has been plenty of sympathy in the last 15 years for those three nice people. They're not here for sympathy now. But we heard from them.
We heard from her employer who said the best employee he ever had. He talked about how trustworthy -- this is the only employee that Mr. Schmalz ever allowed other than a family member to have check-writing authority of his company, pretty high compliment; that she was trustworthy, she was loyal, she was reliable, she was honest, she was hard working. He would trust her with anything. These are the values that Margot has taught her children.
We brought you Cousin Tom who talked about what she did for -- and you also heard it from Guy to get Guy through his problems and what she had to do -- this is a lady, this is a lady who had strength and strength of character. And I think you could see that in her children when they were up there. With the new matriarch, of course Sharon is now the new matriarch of the family, I think that's now obvious from seeing them all on the stands.
And so, as in ancient times, when a patriarch
or matriarch would give their blessings to their children, that's what that letter did. And what the blessings were included what they wanted for their children and the values that they passed on.
She was steadfast, and she's taught her
children to be stedfast. She brought them through. She was a homebody. She went to work, she came home, watched TV and went to bed. She was a high-liver, and in the middle of the week when she would meet her daughter at the food court. And then on Friday and Saturday night, Friday, she'd stay home, she'd work around the house on Saturday and stay home and do the same thing on Sunday.
But what she did, she was a loving, enabling person who passed values onto her kids, and that's one of the greatest things you can have and that's what they've lost.
You know, there is no end to being a parent. Kids go from babies to toddlers to children to young adults to adults and they still call up and they say mama, what's going on, mama, I -- whatever it may be -- I need help with my kids. Mama -- my grandchildren are -- your grandchildren are going to graduate from grammar school or junior high or senior high, do you want to come?
And we know what Margot Putney would have done. She would have said yes because she loved her grandchildren and, of course, Guy didn't get married until after Margot had passed.
THE CLERK: One hour 15 minutes, counsel.
MR. BAUMBERGER: This is a case about values. This is a case about people matter. This is a case about the loss of an enabling, loving mother.
These are the damages. These are what Sharon,
Glenn and Guy have lived with for 15 years.
Sharon would -- excuse me -- Margot would be about 72 today, which doesn't seem so old, at least doesn't seem so old to me. And so how much longer would she have had on this earth without having this terrible disease? Eight years, ten years? So I think we can say, at least for 20 years, 20 years, these three nice, decent people have lost the love and enabling attention of their mothers -of their mother.
And so what would be a fair, reasonable and adequate award for each of the three of them? Each of the three of them? I'm going to suggest the figure of five million dollars for each child.
Now, that is a figure that you may feel is too low, and you have the prerogative to award more.
It is a figure that you may feel is too high, and you have the prerogative to award less.
One cautionary note, because you will hear charges for comparative fault and percentages of fault, and it will be on the jury verdict form, and when you get to the comparative fault, there will be percentages. Do not reduce any of the percentages, because if you do award any comparative fault, as Margot has acknowledged, after the award is made tne Judge will enter it.
And in addition to the intangible damages, there's also the damages for the medical bills, which are 83,996 and the funeral of 2,692.
I want to talk about punitive damages for a moment. I've shared with you the basis for punitive damages. I respectfully suggest in this
case that it cries out for punitive damages. It is for you to decide. I do not have a figure for you to suggest the punitive damages, but you will be asked to take into account the following thing:
The financial resources of each of the defendants, of each defendant you chose to award punitive damages against; the nature and extent of misconduct, and I've already detailed it, I will not go back into more; and the harm caused to the
plaintiff, and that's easy, she's dead.
Do not financially destroy the defendants, that's not appropriate. But a message needs to be sent, a message needs to be sent that we cannot conduct business like this, a message needs to be sent to other businesses and to the tobacco industry themselves, that you don't distort the truth, you don't manipulate the press. You don't deceive your customers. You don't try and induce new people to come smoking -- to start smoking and become addicted, all the time denying that it causes cancer or its addiction.
So a message needs to be sent for conduct for 50 years, a message needs to be sent as to, if you believe that, you know, I don't know what you want to think about the future, but as to whether or not they have changed their stripes or not, that's for you to decide, but a message needs to be sent in a way that people will know that in or out of the courtroom you don't distort the truth and you cannot harm others because in the final analysis people matter.
Thank you very, very much for your close attention. Kindly give opposing counsel the same close attention you ve given me. Thank you very
much.



MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you, Your Honor.
This is the last opportunity that I will have to speak with you. This is the last opportunity that any lawyer will have to speak to you all. The burden that we have borne for our clients is soon to be transferred to you.
To, as I've said before, do justice and reach a
correct decision.
I think, as I've said from the very beginning of speaking with you, that a particular concern to me is, do people matter? And what is the price of being candid and honoring your oath? Or is there a price if you don't honor your oath?
And what should the arguments be for the tobacco company -- companies? Should it be like it was 50 years ago? Should it be today? Remember that all of the conduct that affected Margot Putney started in 1953 or '54 and it ended in her death in 1995. That's before the tobacco industry came clean, before they supposedly changed their stripes.
Another counsel has alluded to one of the apparent criticisms for the delay of the lawsuit. Judge Streitfeld told you that at the end of Phase I, or maybe it was beginning of Phase I, that to find for the Plaintiff you had to find for the Plaintiff to determine whether or not she was a member of the class. And then here you will hear instructions that another lawsuit, that previous lawsuit, has findings that are binding on you because she's a member
of the class. This lawsuit for Margot Putney could not proceed until that determination had been made.
MR. WEBB: Objection, Your Honor, that's improper argument.
THE COURT: Folks, step into the jury room, please.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. BAUMBERGER: Now, we are told by the Defendants that the trial has totally been
devoid of any evidence of reliance. Well, is that so?
Walk with me back to the early '50s when cousin Tom, who apparently is a liar, because they criticized things that he had to say and they proudly said, we impeached him. Which let me talk about impeachment. You know, nitpicking, nothing substantial, trying to make somebody look bad. Every single witness that the Plaintiff has put on, they've nitpicked, they've quarrelled with and done nothing substantial with.
Anyway, cousin Tom talked about the ads.
They were pervasive on TV and in magazines. You couldn't escape them he testified. They were there for everybody and everybody saw them. The kids did see them. And they motivated the kids to want to smoke. Well, that is one bit of
evidence.
We've seen the evidence over the years until 1971 of all the ads on TV and then all the print ads. By the way, the print ads didn't end until about 2000, all over the place. Pervasive.
We've seen about the filters, as to why they have filters and why they have low tar. It is a
marketing concept. And, yes, reliance.
Here's an ad that talks about low tar. And what's the evidence in this case from Guy Putney? That his mother switched to Merit because it was low tar. Now, common sense means you're following the marketing. You are responding to what's out there in the pervasive public.
And, you know, that's not all. That's not all at all, to I guess be redundant.
There is going to be two separate charges, and I'll only read one, The issue for your determination is whether Margot Putney reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement by, listing the three Defendants, that concealed or omitted the material information or whether such reliance was legal cause of her death.
And we have the same thing on another charge that is also requires reliance.
Well, what other evidence do we have of reliance? What other evidence do we have of reliance?
We have the evidence from the Plaintiff's own mouth? No. From the Defendant's own mouth?
Yes. Questions that I asked? No. Questions that the jury asked? No. Excuse me, that the defense counsel asked? No. A question that the jury asked? Yes.
When Dr. Figlar was on the stand, one of the jurors asked him about More cigarettes and was this marketed towards women, to women, this long, slender, black cigarette. And he said, yes. Responding to ads? Responding to what's out there? The answer is absolutely yes. She's a smoker. She's responding to that.
And I'm not going to go through again all of the efforts they went through from 1953 until the MSA agreement in 1999 where they finally admitted, finally admitted, they took away that psychological crutch, that psychological crutch that -- if you'll put up board number 5.
This is back in 1964. By all of the disinformation, by all of the failing to -- it's not whether something is in an obscure medical or scientific journal. I'm not sure that anybody in this room goes to bed at night and cuddles up with some obscure scientific journal for their light reading. I doubt very seriously that Margot Putney did that.
And so what they're saying on the report is that the restraint and unity of the industry has been very effective in this period. We must
provide answers which give smokers a psychological crutch.
So now, remember those questions I was asking the different folks about the base. Who is the industry appealing to in all these pronouncements that we've seen from Anne Browder, from all these different folks? Who are they appealing to? Are they appealing to the anti-smoking crowd? No.
Are they appealing to the people who are neither here nor there, nor one side or the other? Possibly.
But who are they really directed at?
They're directed at, if you'll turn to board number 22, they are directed at the people who are smokers and who they're targeting to become new smokers, such as the illustration of filtration. And down here in number 12 they're talking about advertising should be directed to both sections, but in such a way to have greater appeal to women. Merit cigarettes, More cigarettes. What did she smoke?
You know, common sense cannot be left at the door of the jury room when you go in there. You know, folks, there has not been one shred of evidence, not one word of testimony, that Margot Putney ever, ever even one time read the warnings on the cigarette pack or the cigarette carton. You haven't heard it. And for me to dispute that wouldn't make sense. It's there, just like all the noise is there. Your common sense must go back there. If you are an interested party and there's stuff out there that's appealing to you as an interested party, common sense says that you're aware and you're responding to the ad, especially if you're an addict and you have limited your choices so much.
So, folks, I would suggest very strongly that the reliance is there. The reliance is very clear and it's pervasive, and Margot Putney responded to it and it impaired -- it allowed her to start smoking. It impaired her ability to try the motivation to quit. And by the way, let me talk about Dr. Glassman for just one second.
I think you noticed all the different quotes
question and answer that you've seen up on the board that defense counsel was putting up there about this question and answer. Well, maybe you didn't notice, but I did, that when Dr. Glassman was being talked about up there, there was no question and answer. Because what counsel -now, if there's a dispute, it's up to you. And so I'm going to say one thing, they said another, but you all have to make that decision as to who's representing or misrepresenting.
But Dr. Glassman clearly said motivation is important to try and make the determination to try and quit, but it's not a good predictor at all as to whether or not -- whether you will or
will not be able to quit. That predictor is how severely addicted you are. And the more severely you're addicted, you're not going to quit. And that's what the evidence is in this case.
There's another thing on reliance too. They questioned -- they put on the question and answer for Sharon Putney. Remember that? The question is: "You grew up in the '70s and '80s and into the '90s. Can you tell the jury whether or not you were aware about a debate
between whether cigarettes were harmful or not?"
Let me tell you what the answer was not.
The answer was not, Well, I knew there was a debate out there. I would be hearing things on both sides. Was it good to smoke? Was it bad to smoke? But nothing was ever proven. You never heard the "I" word. They're talking about in context about her mother and things that her mother knew.
Remember, the word "you" can mean you or the word "you" can mean a number of people. But the last I learned, when I say "you," I am not referring to myself, because the quote was? "Well, you knew there was a debate out there.
You would be hearing things on both sides. Was it good to smoke? Was it bad to smoke? But nothing was ever proven."
She, Sharon, is referring to, I respectfully suggest, that that is common knowledge, not only because you're talking in context of the family, not only common knowledge out there, but it was common knowledge when you're talking about her mother. Common sense cannot be left at the door.
You know, everybody is a liar. I went
through and I counted, Glassman, Feingold, cousin Tom, Sharon, Glenn, I'm not sure about Guy. Have I missed anybody?
But that's not the real point. The real point is, I think where I'm getting to, that why are we sliming Margot Putney on a matter that is of no importance in this lawsuit, whether or not she drank alcohol or not? It is a nonissue.
She was not addicted to it. That's undisputed. It didn't cause her any health problems, that's undisputed. And contrary to what counsel said, there's no evidence in there whether she had -if that recording is right or wrong -- on how long it was that she supposedly drank.
The credible evidence for a mistake starts with Mr. Schmalz. And what he said and how he described Margot does not, I repeat does not, jive with somebody who is drinking a six pack or so every night. It just doesn't shake up.
And Sharon was asked and in a very, I thought, candid response says, there has to be a mistake. You know, mistakes are made. Mistakes are made by the tobacco companies. And they made mistakes for 50 years that it took another lawsuit, the MSA, to get those mistakes out in
the public.
But they supposedly are bringing up alcohol because this homebody is a risk taker. I mean, there's no conflict in the evidence. She went to work in the morning. She came home from work at night. She did her house. She did her dishes. She cooked her meals. She painted.
She tended. This is a homebody. This is a lady whose best Christmas present was a power drill? Folks, I ain't about to give my wife a power drill for Christmas and expect a big smile. But apparently they got a big smile, the family got a big smile out of Margot Putney.
This is a risk taker? The answer is no.
It's absurd. So you have to ask yourself, why is the Defendants so eager to inject this into the record? To maybe distract and deflect your attention away from the real issue, which is them.
Let me put one of their boards up on the table. Before I put the boards up on the table, they talked about there's nothing in the record linking the Defendants. Well, I luckily have Dr. -- with the disease.
Well, on Dr. Feingold, he testified during
his first day of trial at some length. Remember we had that chart that he hand drew up there, and I asked him about how long it took cancer to develop. And he went into a medical explanation. Cancers take a long time to develop. So from the time a certain substance enters the body and affects the cells inside the body until the time a cancer develops is a period of time called a latency. And in cancers that usually is much longer than infection.
And during that time period, he said in another thing, it's not just one cigarette or one interaction from the smoke, one particular cigarette or one particular brand that causes the trouble, it's multiple steps. So the current concept of carcinogenous -- if I pronounced it right -- means cancer. The beginning we know is a multiple-step event. And when one is addicted to one brand and changes brand and continues smoking, it's not just that brand.
"Does the fact that they changed the brand affect the fact they were addicted?
No, it doesn't.
Does changing the brands affect the process
you just described or the DNA to continuing to produce the cellular changes that would result in cancer?
The answer is, The DNA doesn't know or care who manufactured the cigarette that produced the cancer. And he said that within reasonable medical probability, again, common sense, undisputed, cigarettes cause cancer and it takes a long time. And she smoked for 40 years.
Leave your common sense behind or take it with
you into the jury room.
Philip Morris puts great store on the fact that they were only smoked for four or five years. You'll note that I have changed that a little bit and I have written conspiracy at the top. Because, you see, that's the small detail that was omitted. Philip Morris was there in '53. Philip Morris spokespeople spoke the entire time. There was a conspiracy going on, and when one person is part of the conspiracy, everybody is part of the conspiracy.
And so this conspiracy went on from the mid '50s until the MSA settlement mandated that they be dismantled somewhere around the year 2000.
And so Philip Morris was in up to its ears,
into its ears, up to its ears, in this process for deceiving, just as RJR was and to a more limited extent was Liggett. Liggett was not as involved. That is a true statement.
And so it doesn't make any difference if the representations were made in the 1950s, because Philip Morris was involved in The Frank Statement. When you take a look at The Frank Statement, you'll see them in the bottom. They attended that meeting. We have seen video clip after video clip of the people who are associated with Philip Morris. Oh, by the way, Margot switched to Merit.
You know, unfortunately, the children, Sharon, Guy, and Glenn, are sitting in this courtroom where they had to hear them being slimed just like their mother because they bought cigarettes -- and, you know, Guy was asked about that, and I think it was a juror question to him, it was somebody's question anyway, why he did it. And he answered, candidly, that he, but I'm sure it also meant everybody, would do anything for their mother. For you see, they loved their mother. Margot took care of them. And so they did that.
And so now indirectly they're trying to blame the children. You know, there's an old saying, when somebody points the finger at you, you say, don't look at me, don't look at you, let's look at Fred behind the tree. Don't look where the blame really is. Let's start pointing around and we'll see blame everywhere. And meanwhile, we're not looking at where the blame really lies, which is the tobacco industry.
I want to talk about punitive damages for a second. Well, first I want to talk about comparative fault.
They blame Margot for a lot of things, for starting when they started it, for not quitting when they put the ads out and gave them psychological crutches.
We heard from Anne Browder who said, if you recall, we support people in their desire to smoke. We support people in their desire to smoke when she -- I don't know if it was the national news program or down here when she said
that. I guess they support the people in their desire to smoke, especially if they're motivated by the psychological crutch, unless you come into a lawsuit where we don't support their
desire to smoke. We're going to criticize them for smoking. We're going to criticize them for buying our product. We're going to criticize them for being part of the people who cause our profits to soar.
Now, let me read about punitive -- well, first let me read about -- no, let me read about the punitive damages first.
The representation was made that the purpose of punitive damage is to deter conduct. Let me read the charge to you. The charge is, "If you decide to award punitive damages, the award should be no greater than the amount that you find necessary to punish a Defendant for the harm caused to Margot and her survivors and to deter that Defendant and others from engaging in such misconduct in the future."
Kind of skipped over that little bit about punish for their misconduct. That is a crucial element in punitive damages. And for RJR, who's worth 7.7 billion, to suggest that the amount on punitive damages is $500,000, I think that is substantially less than a tap, much less a slap on the wrist. But as I've said before, that has to be your decision, your informed decision as
you discuss it, as to what will be the appropriate amount of damages.
They are still fighting the past.
Everything that we've seen for the last 50 years is going on in this courtroom. Our product didn't cause the disease. Oh, we stipulate, we stipulate that there's an addiction here, but, you know, it really, it's all her fault. She didn't quit. You just kind of skip over the fact that the addiction is a serious thing like cocaine and heroin and it's not so easy to skip over.
They're still defending the undefensible. They're still -- can we put up that 771 or 772, that congressional hearing?
(Video clip was played.)
VOICE: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it. And just yes or no. Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive,
yes.
VOICE: Mr. Johnson.
THE WITNESS: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxication -VOICE: We'll take that as a no. And,
again, time is short, if you can just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive -(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BAUMBERGER: We've seen enough.
Under oath in 1994, a month after Margot was diagnosed with cancer, under oath the people with the most superior knowledge of all -- and we've seen the previous clip with the gentleman who denied that cigarettes cause cancer.
They're still denying it then.
And now all they've done is change their shape of their denial. They're not denying it in toto. It's just always -- there's a denial if it happens to apply to the person in the courtroom, that person Margot Putney. They're still making the same denials. They're still not standing up and saying, you know, you're right, we have to be accountable. That's why punitive damages are warranted, because Margot
Putney to her detriment relied on their representations and their misrepresentations.
She started smoking, she continued to smoke, and she died because of their product. And they are still denying it.
THE CLERK: Counsel, you have 10 minutes.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you.
I want to briefly talk about Liggett. I guess there's that submission they put in over there that you all can have fun with back in the jury room. And, yes, Dr. Feingold said that that was a spin document.
Now, why is that believable? Do you remember how proud RJR was of when Dr. Figlar was here by putting up on that board that a Mr. Rodgman was credited by the Surgeon General for assisting him and being part of that Surgeon General's Report? And then when we read the internal documents, I doubt very seriously that Mr. Rodgman was telling the Surgeon General, at least by the public statements, oh, yeah, yeah, cigarettes cause cancer. We know it causes lung cancer. He failed to disclose those findings that he made in 1962, that they had found that there was scant evidence to support the thesis
that cigarettes did not cause cancer.
And so one has to believe that the great cooperation that counsel was referring to about the officers of Liggett -- excuse me, the officers of RJR, might be suspect at best and may be stronger words in reality.
Once again, let me read you what the Court is going to charge you on compensatory damages. In addition to the economic loss, the Court is not going to say guidance. The Court is going to tell you as follows: "That you shall consider additional elements of damage for which there is no exact standard." I've already told you that. I've already suggested that 5 million dollars a child is an appropriate award. That you all may totally disagree with and think it should be more or think it should be less,
because this is in your province. You are the judges of the facts. I'm not. I'm an advocate. I represent the Putneys. But the job and the responsibility will be yours.
But the Court will tell you that for these additional elements of damage for which there is no exact standard for fixing the compensation to be awarded, any such award shall be fair and
just in light of the evidence regarding the following elements: The loss by Sharon, Glenn, and Guy of parental companionship.
Have we heard about parental companionship?
I suggest we have.
Have we heard about instruction? I suggest we have. We have instructions in the letter. Instructions that reached beyond death. We have
?uidance. And there's guidance in lifetime and or after she passed away.
THE CLERK: Five minutes, Counselor.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you.
And for their mental pain and suffering as a result of her injury or death. And you're to state these separately in your award for the -I'm looking for them. Yeah, here it is right here.
And you're to state it separately for each survivor. It is right here. The estate will be the medical bills and the funeral bills, but then each survivor is entitled to their own determination for you to go through and to determine the amount of money past, as I said, it's 15 years and then there will be future.
To go through here, I suggest that as far as
negligence that can't be clearer. That's been determined.
Products liability can't be clearer. It's been determined.
The reliance I suggest cannot be clearer. We've talked about it. As much as they try and say no, it's not, common sense tells you it is. The testimony from their own representatives and their own ads and what her actions were when she went from one brand to another is yes.
Did she reasonably rely to her detriment on the statements? The answer is yes.
And then you enter the percentages. And once again, I suggest, that each Defendant, either by their own actions or as part of a conspiracy, is involved. And as a conspiracy the one conspirator is the same as all conspirators. And so that is for you to take a look at and for you to decide. And I respectfully suggest that when you get to Sharon [sic] Putney, the family has accepted responsibility, that you should find something for Sharon [sic] Putney, but certainly not anywhere near the amount of responsibility for these three Defendants.
Too bad that they didn't -- that the presidents of these corporations did not have
who taug
p.m.)
p.m.)
Margot Putney as a mother who taught her children to be able to accept responsibility and admit responsibility.
Now -THE COURT: You need to conclude, sir.
MR. BAUMBERGER: The last thing is people matter. And for the amount of money that they said for compensatory damages cannot be any clearer that people do not matter. This is a serious matter, serious damages, and needs serious consideration.
I thank you so much for your attention. And the judge will now speak to you and then you'll be on your deliberations. And thank you all very much.
