MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Ladies and gentleman of the jury, seems like a long time ago, maybe when I reflect, it was a long time ago when we first met, so to speak, during jury selection when we started this trial. And we all are appreciative that you all have taken your time away from your family, from your jobs, really from your lives to come and sit and judge this case. You've worked hard to fulfill your role as jurors because you've been very attentive. You've taken notes. You've paid attention. You've asked extremely good questions of the witnesses.
THE COURT: And you've been on time every day. The best. The best.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Which is -- all of this is important because the role of the jury in the American justice system is a very powerful role.
You have the power to decide disputes, to right wrongs, to settle controversies. You decide what is right. You actually dispense justice. There's no other country in this world in civil cases that have the power and the role that the American jury system has.
The reason why this system is so important is because people matter, all people, from all walks of life. The rich, the poor, the powerful, the weak, just everybody comes equally before you.
Now, how does the jury use its power? How do they use their power to decide cases? To obtain justice? It's simple. Follow the law. Follow the law and follow the evidence. Use your common sense to come to your conclusions, to follow your oath as jurors.
Oaths are important. You all took an oath as jurors. We've had witnesses take oaths. And you're going to end up by giving what is called a verdict, which means to speak the truth. And that's what oaths are supposed to do, that we all are supposed to speak the truth. And so
: is your role , to decide what the truth is. What is the law that His Honor is going to
give you? He will give you the law at the end of the arguments. We know what that is because we've met with the Court and he's advised all the parties as to what he's going to give and the law that he is going to apply to this case. So he will tell you what the law is, and you will tell the Court and all of us what the facts are.
And so that is your role.
And what is your role in this case?
If we can have up the jury verdict.
And what is your role in this case? And your job is -- if you go to that paragraph number 1. And your job is to do the following. It's a simple question. Does the greater weight of the evidence show that Margot Putney's death was caused by small cell cancer that started in her lung?
And that is a yes and no question.
He will tell you in the jury instructions -If you put the jury instructions up.
VIDEO TECHNICIAN: I don't have the jury instructions.
MR. BAUMBERGER: He will tell you in the jury instructions that in reaching your verdict,
and this is an important part of the instructions, you must think about and weigh the testimony and any documents, photographs, or other materials that have been received in evidence. You also may consider any facts that were admitted to or agreed to by the lawyers.
And your job, as I said, is to determine what the facts are and you must -- may use reason and common sense to reach those conclusions. Good old-fashioned common sense is part of what our law and what the juries are instructed to do. And good old common sense, it's been the experience, I suspect, of everyone in this courtroom that that is what juries bring to this system.
You may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, but you should not guess about things that were not covered here. And you must always apply the law.
This part of the case is Phase I. If we are fortunate enough to get to Phase II, you will receive the rest of the story. That will be the part where if we get there, you can allocate fault based on the conduct of the cigarette companies and the conduct of Margot Putney of
which she has admitted some small portion of fault.
In Phase II you will find out what the cigarette companies knew.
MR. WEBB: Your Honor, I'm going to object to talking about Phase II. There's no evidence -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAUMBERGER: 'You will find out a lot of matters and issues if we get there, which are not appropriate to have brought before you in Phase I.
If we get to Phase II, we will have a frank and open discussion about -MR. WEBB: Your Honor -THE COURT: We're here about Phase I, sir. Let's talk about Phase I.
MR. BAUMBERGER: One of you asked a very good question. Why did she, meaning Margot Putney, continue smoking between -- did she continue smoking between the time she first had her symptoms in December or January of 1994 and up to the time that she was diagnosed? That will not be Phase I. That will be Phase II.
And that will be important information to
consider when we get there.
Now, one of the things that I told you is what the admissions the parties have made.
Would you put up cigarette company defendants have admitted.
While we're waiting, I'll read it to you.
The cigarette company defendants have admitted, number one, that Margot Putney was addicted to cigarettes, nicotine in the cigarettes." So that will not be an issue here in this Phase I.
Number two, they've admitted that cigarettes do cause cancer. And they have admitted that small cell cancer of the lung is caused by smoking.
Ana so with those admissions, your job is to weigh the evidence, use reason and common sense, apply the law, and determine what the facts are concerning lung cancer or thyroid cancer.
Now, what is our burden in proving this case?
Can you put the verdict form back up?
The verdict form reads: "Does the greater weight of the evidence show that Margot Putney's death was caused by small cell cancer that started in her lung?"
By the greater weight of the evidence. If you all may recall during jury selection where I asked everyone if they knew the difference between a criminal case where the burden isn't beyond and to the exclusion of a reasonable doubt or the greater weight of the evidence, which is 50 percent and a little bit more just to tilt the scales. That is our burden. Our burden is not to prove this case beyond a reasonable doubt. Our burden is not to exclude every potential possibility as to what caused her small cell cancer, small cell cancer of the lung. Our burden is to show by the greater weight of the evidence, and I respectfully submit that we have done far more than that in going to the greater weight of the evidence.
Can I have the greater weight of the evidence board?
What is the greater weight of the evidence?
And right here let me start off -- I guess I should say, let me end where we started off, and that's this board right here. This was the end of Margot Putney's life. This is what Dr. Faig, her competent treating physician who had cared for her longer than any other physician during
her illness, and he entered at that point in time that she died because of metastatic small cell cancer of the lung.
We told you that on opening. We told you during opening we would bring the physicians before you, and we did.
Now, if this was an automobile accident, we would be talking about eyewitnesses. Who was in a position to see the color of the light? Who was there? Who was at the scene? Who had the most knowledge? Who had the best ability to be discern the facts, to take the time to look at the facts as to whether the light was red or green and who was in the best position to know? Was that a person who if the light over this was looking over this way and testifies that the light was green, or is this somebody who was looking right at the light? And that's what these five physicians are. All of them were looking right at the light.
And as we started in the beginning, what did we bring to you? We brought you -Can we blow this up a little bit more?
We brought you Dr. Mitchell. Dr. Mitchell was the board-certified head and neck surgeon.
And Dr. Mitchell testified that he was hands-on. He testified that when the patient came in and he saw the mass, he immediately wondered if this was a mass that came from somewhere in the neck or somewhere in the mediastinum. And so he ordered chest X-rays, chest X-rays that showed masses in the chest in the hilar region, in the mediastinum, and it showed a mass in the supraclavicular area that went up to the thyroid but did not show a mass on the thyroid.
So where did Dr. Mitchell send his patient, the patient who he had taken time to talk to, to evaluate, and who had the responsibility to care for her and do the very best he could? He sent her to Dr. Revilla, a chest surgeon.
And Dr. Revilla testified that this was -he just looked at the X-rays, he took the history of smoking. And what did he have to say about that? He said, right then and there, I knew presumptively that this was lung cancer.
No mass in the thyroid, mass in the hilum, this is lung cancer.
He sent her for a needle aspiration biopsy. And we've now found out from Dr. Andrews that a needle aspiration biopsy on a mass that's
palpable in the supraclavicular area is a perfectly acceptable way to make the diagnosis.
Well, it wasn't -- it was only suspicious.
It wasn't conclusive.
So according to Dr. Revilla and Dr. Mitchell and others, they went for the next least invasive study, which was an incisional biopsy where they went in and they took above the clavicle, and they took the biopsy right then. And that showed small cell cancer.
And what did the small cell cancer show?
Can we put up the pathology report?
The pathology report said most likely small cell cancer. We brought him to you,
Dr. Aronsohn. And what was his testimony? This is small cell cancer of the lung. This is not thyroid cancer. He's board certified. He knows what he's doing. He gave and wrote a description that most everyone said is a textbook description of small cell cancer, the small cell cancer that accounts for one of the major causes of lung cancer. It causes something like -- Dr. Andrews said, 30 to 35 percent of all lung cancers is small cell cancer. And that amounts to something like 50
to 60,000 a year, because he said there was 220, as low as 180 to 220.
So right then and there Dr. Aronsohn said this is small cell cancer of the lung, and he then sent back to Dr. Mitchell -- if we could go back to your board -- or actually, let's put up the hospital chart -- went back to Dr. Mitchell, who did the biopsy, who looked at the thyroid -let me stop right here.
When we talk about an eyewitness, there's only one eyewitness in this case concerning the thyroid, only one, and that's Dr. Mitchell, who was caring for his patient, who was there. He looked and he knew. And when he described in his operation that he had these separate masses, the supraclavicular mass, the mediastinal mass, they were two separate masses, and that he didn't have any trouble taking the supraclavicular mass away from the thyroid or from the mediastinum. And he described it, if you recall, as being contiguous or adjacent, it wasn't growing in. And Dr. Mitchell specifically said that there was no evidence that the thyroid -- that a mass had grown out of the thyroid or that there was any infiltration
by the mass into the thyroid. He's the eyewitness.
He also said for this to be thyroid cancer it was -- what did he use -- 1 percent, or less than 1 percent, infinitesimal. Somebody said infinitesimal when you don't have a mass on the thyroid and no abnormality is seen during the procedure at the very point, at the very place where the mass is coming up.
If you put up, I guess, the superior vena cava compression, please.
If you blow this area up right here.
So at the very point where you had the mass contiguous or confluent to the thyroid, this is where common sense comes in. What common sense
will tell you, that when you had a cancer that goes here and here and here (indicating) and that kills her some year, just a year and a couple months later from when these X-rays were done that you're not going to have anything in the thyroid? I mean, this is the magic mystery tour. There's thyroid cancer, but we can't see it? It's not visible on the CT scan. And there's really only one person who says that, only one person, and that's Dr. Wartofsky, which
we'll come back to later.
In any event, if you'll put up Dr. Revilla's record now.
Dr. Revilla said this mediastinal mass means it is lung cancer. It's not thyroid cancer.
And when it gets to be oat cell, I mean, the diagnosis is made, because this is common. He also said this is a very common presentation.
And so we have Dr. Mitchell, Dr. Aronsohn, and Dr. Revilla who have all said that this is small cell cancer of the lung.
And then we'll go to Dr. Monson.
We showed you here what he meant by this was primary right hilum. He was talking about lung cancer. And he's the -- remember, this is the doctor who has radiology training. He trained in radiology and then went into oncology. So he has the ability to read X-rays and also is an oncologist to treat it as a radiologist with radiation.
And what did Dr. Monson say? He said, this is small cell cancer of the lung. I saw the mass in the lung, and this is small cell cancer. And by the way, I did not radiate the thyroid.
And he came right here and told you that.
And so we now have all of the five eyewitnesses who came and told you that this is lung cancer. This is not thyroid cancer. And you know what, it makes sense. If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it's probably a duck. And that's exactly what they had to say.
And so, going back to the greater weight of the evidence board. When we take a look at the greater weight of the evidence, we have the five eyewitnesses who have come in and told you what they saw, what they did, and what their conclusions were in 1994 and 1995 and here in 2010, after reviewing their records and being subjected to both direct examination and severe cross-examination, their opinion strongly remains the same.
Let me go through some particular facts. If you put up primary site of cancer diagnosed for Margot, this board. I want to walk through this board.
I walked through all the witnesses with this, even Dr. Andrews when we finished up with Dr. Andrews. And when we are determining whether it is lung cancer as opposed to thyroid cancer, what is the first and most -- well, it's
one of the first considerations, when a patient comes in, you take a history of the patient as to what the past medical history is. And the significant history in this case is two packs a day for 40 years, and I think as Dr. Wartofsky said, that is 80 pack years. That's why the defense admitted addiction in this case, 80 pack years is someone who is heavily addicted on nicotine.
And so what are the predisposing factors for lung cancer? Overwhelming that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. Then when you get to the fact that it is small cell cancer of the lung, 90 percent, 90 percent of all small cell cancers in the body, in the body, are caused by -- are lung cancers which are caused by smoking.
And thyroid cancers of the small cell variety, very small, plus or minus 1 percent of all the cancers that are small cell.
Who said that was important, a strong smoking history? Dr. Mitchell, who had it in his history on page 4 and 26.
You have that to review the records.
He's got the smoking of two packs a day.
And if you go to page 26, he has it again, two
packs a day.
Dr. Revilla, which is page 9, describes her as being a heavy smoker.
And Dr. Monson on page 19 also has two-packs-a-day smoker.
Now, thyroid cancer also has predisposing features. It is family history. It's genetics. Goiter is part of the testimony. And on page 26 and Dr. Monson on page 19 -- Dr. Monson is 19 or 119? It may be 119.
Either one, either page, 26 or 119.
Go down to the bottom, past medical history, none.
And so the records do contain evidence that the doctors inquired about past medical history, and it was none.
Now, we've heard a lot about the presenting clinical features: The lump in the neck, the shortness of breath, the hoarseness, the sore throat, the something sticking in the throat.
All of the different presentations from the sluggishness, from the employer, Mr. Schmalz, all of these presentations, every single physician who testified, they may not have all used the words, but they were not nonspecific,
because every single physician who testified in this courtroom from the very first one,
Dr. Faig, to the very last one, Dr. Andrews, all testified that those presenting symptoms could be thyroid or it could be lung.
And as you went through the five treaters and you went through the two experts,
Dr. Califano and Dr. Villa for the plaintiff, they all felt that that was more likely lung cancer, but they conceded it could be thyroid cancer. Dr. Andrews thought that it was more
likely thyroid cancer. And I think that s what Dr. -- I mean, Dr. Wartofsky said it was more likely thyroid cancer. And I think that's where Dr. Andrews ended up by coming down, but they both conceded it also could be lung cancer. And so that's why those are nonspecific. That's something to take into account when you get the predisposing factors as to where do you go next.
And so the trouble breathing and speaking, difficulty swallowing, felt like something sticking in her throat, the sensation of sore throats could be one or could be the other.
And so what is the next step? And Dr. Andrews, if you recall today we went through
with him on that one question and answer what his next step is. Well, the next step is either you have the X-rays or you get the X-rays and you evaluate the X-rays. And that's what was done in this case.
And if you put up the X-rays. Do you have them on the board three or just one at a time?
There were X-rays that were taken on 2-2-94. We started with the chest X-ray. And if you recall, Dr. Revilla -- we have a Dr. Villa and a Dr. Revilla. And so when Dr. Revilla testified, you remember him, he was the not too tall but somewhat feisty gentleman, the thoracic surgeon who is a lung expert, this is what he does. He said, bang, I looked at these X-rays. This is lung cancer. I have the presenting predisposition for the history, I have these complaints, and it's lung cancer.
And why does he say that? Because he said looking at this X-ray right here that to him this is classical presentation for lung cancer.
And then we go to the CT of the chest. And if you blow that up.
Huge mediastinal mass and/or adenopathy and right hilar mass and/or adenopathy with
compression of the superior vena cava.
You know, for six days we've been debating as to whether a mass presenting in the hilum is small cell lung cancer or not. We've had the cross-examination. What is the hilum? Is the hilum part of the lung? Some people say yes. Some people say it's a plane. Some people say it's a doorway where the bronchus goes into the lung. And we've had that debate back and forth that there was no cancer in the lung on cross-examination. Remember all those cross-examinations, you never saw a mass in the lung? Well, I said it was hilum. Well, did you see, L-U-N-G, in that report? No.
But what did Dr. Andrews say today? Just what the rest of the treating physicians and Dr. Villa and Dr. Califano said, small cell cancer of the lung presents -If you'll throw that board up on the superior vena cava.
THE CLERK: 30 minutes, Counsel.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you.
Presents right here in the hilum. And he ended up by agreeing with Dr. Faig, Dr. Revilla, that the common metastasis pattern is from the
hilum to the mediastinum to the supraclavicular nodes.
And so I think by the time we got at the last witness as to whether a cancer in the hilum is lung cancer or not, I respectfully suggest that that has been put to rest, not only by the greater weight of the evidence, but the overwhelming weight of the evidence.
There's been debates as to, What is the bronchus? Is that part of the lung? And the bronchus starts from the carina, which is there and comes down here and down here through and into the lung itself. And all those are bronchial tubes.
And Dr. Andrews today agreed with the five treating physicians, Dr. Villa and Dr. Califano, the thyroid surgeon from Johns Hopkins University that, yes, indeed, that's where small cell cancers of the lung arise and that these are all common presentations.
Supraclavicular mass for biopsy. Wow, have we seen boards. I mean, we've seen boards where no bronchoscopy was done. We've seen boards where there was no additional histological studies. We've seen boards where no autopsy was
done. That's rather fatal to the patient. But, boy, have we seen boards.
And the attack that because we didn't have all of these other studies, they went through one by one the five treating physicians: We don't have enough evidence. We don't have this. We don't have tnat. Did we need another exam? Did we not need another exam? The five treating physicians and Dr. Villa and Dr. Califano were both attacked because they didn't have all the evidence. And what did we find out from Dr. Andrews today? That Dr. Andrews testified that in the evaluation of the patients it's perfectly acceptable to make the diagnosis and act on it by a fine needle aspiration of a mass in the clavicle area.
And we went further, because that aspiration was not sufficient to make the diagnosis, they actually made -- Dr. Mitchell actually made the incision and took out the mass itself, which was biopsied.
And see, when the biopsy was done, going back to how primary state of cancer is diagnosed for Margot Putney, we now have another piece of the puzzle. We now have another dot to connect.
We've got the smoking history. We have the presenting symptomatology. We have the radiographic studies. And now we have small cell cancer. 50,000 plus of those cancers a year occur, while for all the small cell cancers you're talking in, what, 1,000? 2,000? Some very small number, especially in
comparison.
I mean, mass in the hilum, no mass in the thyroid, common sense. Can you imagine the malpractice case that would be here if these doctors diagnosed in this case a thyroid cancer without a mass in the thyroid and that they mistreated this patient because they treated them for lung cancer as opposed to treating them for thyroid cancer? Can you imagine that? Can you imagine how far that would get? Do you imagine how reasonable a jury -- how a reasonable jury would react to that type of a case, that these five doctors committed medical malpractice because they failed to diagnose thyroid cancer?
And so at this point in time, after the pathology, the diagnosis is made. And why do they do the pathology? The diagnosis was really
made when they had the present -- the history, the presentation, the way it looked on CT scans. They have to do the pathology. They have to take the past specimen to find out what kind of cancer it is. Because you don't treat all cancers the same way. Some cancers you treat one way, and small cell you treat another. But that's not the only docs that we have.
We now go to the response of treatment. And in the response to treatment, what do we find?
We find that with radiation and chemotherapy, small cell cancers, and maybe this is why it's so insidious, I mean, Dr. Andrews kind of alluded to it today in agreement with the other doctors that went before, this is a really aggressive cancer. I mean, it's really aggressive.
And you can see the progression in the lungs from when she went on 2-2 and when you had the 2-18 X-ray that was the collapse of the right upper lobe with the atelectasis. I mean, that's 10 days, 12 days, and there was progression in that short period of time. This is an aggressive, fast-growing cancer. And the problem with this cancer is it's out of the box.
And even though you may not find it someplace else, it's metastasized and enlarged some other place.
And the good news is, or maybe the bad news is that it responds outstandingly well to treatment. And with Dr. Faig and with Dr. Villa we walked through the records that we showed that when chemotherapy started, the mass started to shrink and then disappeared and after radiation. It disappeared, and everything for a few short months appeared to be swell. And then there was metastasis to the brain.
And so the response to treatment, what do we have in response to treatment? With small cell cancer of the lungs, it responds exceptionally well to treatment. And thyroid cancer? If thyroid cancer, according to Dr. Califano, who, by the way, is the cancer -- thyroid cancer
expert -- he s written on it. He s published on it. He's lectured on it. He's even written on lung cancer -- because of its appearance in the mediastinum, which is the adjacent to the neck -- at Johns Hopkins yet. Dr. Wartofsky wouldn't give him kudos about being one of the best medical schools, medical institutions, and
cancer institutions in the country, but that's, in fact, what it is.
And so what did he say? He said with thyroid cancer it doesn't respond very well to treatment. You may get some resolution, but you don't get complete resolution. And here there was complete resolution of the tumor in the chest and the tumor, they took out the tumor in the neck, but Dr. Monson also radiated that.
And what did they say about the pattern of reoccurrence? According to Dr. Faig, according to Dr. Califano, one of the most likely sites for this really nasty, ugly cancer to reappear is where? The brain. And in December of 1994 what did the CT scans reveal about Margot Putney? She had cancer of the brain.
Dr. Califano said something else, too.
Can we put up the if Margot Putney actually had thyroid cancer?
And will you blow this area up right there first.
These are the lymph nodes that start in the hilum, which is here, and they go up the mediastinum and go into the supraclavicular area, which is in this area right here. And
these are the lymph nodes, the passage that small cell cancer goes, all five treating physicians, Dr. Villa, and Dr. Califano agreed to, and Dr. Andrews agreed to today is the metastasis for small cell cancer.
Dr. Wartofsky, kind of as a lung soldier out there, says that thyroid cancer metastasizes down.
Well, we heard testimony, not only from Dr. Califano's board, and Dr. Califano said, first thyroid cancer metastasizes down here and it metastasizes down here, and especially on these aggressive cancers it blows out the thyroid. This is an aggressive cancer. The testimony is it's going to kill you in a year, just like small cell cancer of the lung, so it blows out the thyroid. And when it starts to metastasize first to the side, then down here and then it goes up what they call the cervical chain and it metastasizes up there, and then it may metastasize down into another area.
Now, how does thyroid cancer metastasize to the lung? Dr. Wartofsky says it comes down here and it goes to the hilum.
Dr. Califano says, no, it doesn't. It goes
right in this area in the upper mediastinum and it comes down below the collarbone. But he also said when it goes to the lung, it goes in a
cannonball shape like this where you have a number of different nodules that are around in the lung and in the bone of the lung.
Now, who testified to that? Dr. Villa did. He's a pathologist. He was our pathologist oncologist. He said that that's the way it metastasized. Dr. Revilla, the thoracic surgeon, testified that in his practice when he's had to deal with patients that's had thyroid cancer that metastasized to the lung, it metastasizes just like this. And I don't think that Dr. Andrews expressed an opinion to that.
The cigarette companies have brought in two experts, 15 and 16 years after the fact, to look at the records, not at the patient. They didn't have the ability to look at the X-rays and CT scans, which Dr. Revilla and Dr. Monson did.
They didn't have the ability to look at the path slides like Dr. Aronsohn did. But coming from 15 years away -- and Dr. Andrews hadn't even gone into training yet. He had just got his M.D. degree. He was starting in training.
They're coming in to opine, that means give an opinion or state a theory, that five treating physicians got it wrong. And you know who was unabashed about that? Dr. Wartofsky. I mean, unabashed. These guys did wrong. That's what he said. And so tne people who didn't have the firsthand knowledge, who didn't have -- and let me go to -- will you put up on the -- I guess you can't. I have to read it to you.
The Court will instruct you about witnesses. And listen to the law which Judge Streitfeld will give you. Let me speak briefly about witnesses.
"In evaluating the believability of any witness and the weight that you will give the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, the intelligence of the witness." Let me stop right here.
I think we've seen seven doctors for the plaintiff and two doctors for the defense, and all of them, every single one of them, are very, very bright people. So, I mean, how you're going to judge that one is brighter than the
other, that's up to you. I certainly have no thoughts on that. Because I think they're all equally bright.
But then we go to the "any interest that the witness may have in the outcome of the case."
And let's stop right here for a second.
This is really, really important. 15 years ago, 16 years ago when the five treaters, the five eyewitnesses had the ability for hands-on care and treatment, reading the records, reading the X-rays, looking at everything firsthand where they had no interest whatsoever except one, to do their job as competent, careful treating physicians, to do their best to try to
save this lady's life, which they weren't able to save, they had no interest. And they were subjected to having to come down 15 years later and review their records and say, we were right then, and we are right now.
Now, what is the interest in Dr. Andrews and Dr. Wartofsky?
Dr. Wartofsky is going to make over $30,000 in this case. He's been selected by the big cigarette companies to come down and to review a case and testify.
And Dr. Andrews, this wasn't his first voyage into cigarette companies. This wasn't his first toe in the water, so to speak. He's got 15 or so other cases, and he's already given, I think we counted 10 or 11 depositions and/or trial testimonies. And he's for $30,000, and he still has other cases and counting. So what interest does he have?
And he's never come into court and testified on behalf of the smoker. He always comes in to testify against (sic) the tobacco company, that whatever the disease the plaintiff is claiming at that time, even though it may be a tobacco-related disease, magically, just like in this case, small cell cancer of the lung magically, without any tumor or mass in the thyroid, is suddenly not lung cancer.
THE CLERK: 50 minutes, Counsel.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you.
Now, "The means and opportunity the witness had to know the facts about which the witness testified." I've already covered that.
"The ability of the witnesses to remember the matters about which the witnesses testified." Now, there again, you know, I think
there's something about taking notes in one's own hand. If you really want to put something in the brain, write it down in your own hand, dictate it, and then go back and look at it.
And that brings some recollections back. You may not be able to put a face, you may not be able to give a -- from your memory, a time or day, but when you look at your own records, that gives you the ability to remember. The five treaters had it. I don't think the defense experts had it.
And then we get to "the reasonableness of the testimony of the witnesses considered in the light of all the evidence and," hear this last, "in light of your own experience and common sense."
Once again, what is common sense in this case? The common sense is the five treaters, the five eyewitnesses, got it right. In order for the tobacco companies, the cigarette companies to win this case, they must convince you that all five treaters, not one, not two, but five eyewitnesses got it wrong. And they're the Monday-morning quarterbacks who were not on the field, who were not on the sidelines, who
probably weren't even sitting in the stands, but were sitting back home watching the game who are now going to start opining on the coach's position and how this player didn't do this and didn't do that and they should have done that. It's a wonderful place to be as a Monday-morning quarterback.
And so for them to prevail, all five are wrong.
Why did we bring Dr. Califano and Dr. Villa in? Because we knew that there was an attack coming on the five treaters, so we brought in two distinguished physicians who were in the same specialty of most of the -- well, there wasn't a radiation oncologist and there wasn't a thoracic surgeon, but between Dr. Villa and Dr. Califano we covered a head and neck surgery and we covered oncology. We covered pretty much soup to nuts. So that's Dr. Faig and that's Dr. Mitchell and Dr. Aronsohn, to get a second opinion.
And what was their second opinion? Their second opinion was that five treaters got it right. And their further opinion was Dr. Wartofsky and Dr. Andrews got it wrong.
Let me talk for a minute -- do you have a board on Dr. Andrews?
Let me just say this for a second. You all have been taking tremendous notes. We've all watched that. We've all seen that. And so obviously a number of the things that I'm sharing with you is from my notes and from my review. And so -- certainly from Dr. Andrews.
He just testified this morning.
So if at any time your notes and your recollections differ from mine, or as far as that goes, from defense counsel, I would respectfully suggest that your job as jurors is to rely on your own recollections and your own thoughts as you discuss this.
But I thought that Dr. Andrews was rather interesting today. He came with a point of view, I think in the end, I think in the end his testimony boiled down to he had never seen a cancer metastasize for the lung that went into the musculature, and of course that was distinctly different testimony from Dr. Mitchell, Dr. Aronsohn, as well as Dr. Califano, and there may be others, and that he thought that more likely than not the
presentation was different, but he also conceded that it could be small cell cancer of the lung.
But he finally conceded what we've been fighting for this whole time, that cigarette smoking causes approximately 90 percent of lung cancers, that 85 percent or more, the other testimony was 90 percent or more, of all small cell cancers is caused by smoking cigarettes. And he never had a small cell lung cancer patient that did not smoke. And he
agrees with 220,000 cases. He agrees that 30 to 35 percent of all lung cancers are small cell. That's a huge percentage. That's somewhere -I'm not so good in math, but I think some of you all can figure it out -- between 50, 60, 70,000 a year.
That small cell cancer most often presents in the hilum. As I said, we've been fighting that all week long. And metastasis to the mediastinum and up to the supraclavicular lobe and that follows the known lymph chain.
And he agrees that small cell lung cancer can present, he said it's unusual, some of the other doctors say unusual, but they agree with this aggressive rapidly metastasizing cancer one
of the first things that the patient knows is you've got something in your neck where you're having some problems with swallowing, you're having -- and all the physicians say that this presentation, when I say the physicians, the five treaters, plus Califano and Villa all say that this presentation can occur with small cell cancer.
And Dr. Andrews agrees.
He also agrees that lung cancer may metastasize very fast, so fast the patient may not be aware the cancer is there.
And he also agrees about the aspiration of a lymph node.
Our burden -- if you put the verdict form back up there, please.
Our burden is to come forward with the greater weight of the evidence to prove our case. That is our burden.
I suggest that as we ask the doctors, is this a simple case or a complex case? They said this is simple. This is not a fantasy or make-believe situation. This is not extreme gymnastics or mental gymnastics. This is common sense, everyday stuff that the health care
providers of this country do every single day. They follow known patterns. They work their way through known patterns, known presentations, known radiographic presentations, pathological presentations, to devise a course of treatment, and that's what they do. And that's what they did. This is about real doctors doing their job. And I submit they did it very well.
And so, once again, going back to motivation, what was their motivation? Was to treat their patients.
Now, what is the motivation of cigarette companies? What motivation do they have?
Isn't it interesting that thyroid cancer is not a smoking-related disease. This wasn't cancer of the bladder that was unknown small cell or some other organ of the body, because those are smoking-related diseases.
They managed to find the one organ in the body, or one of the few organs in the body, where you can potentially have a small cell or something
can be mixed up with small cell that it will never be smoking related, and that means they go home. They go home free. They're off the hook.
So if they can come in and they can confound
and they can confuse, they'll go home and not be responsible for their actions. And their actions, which will be further shown and discussed if we get to Phase II.
Justice is following the law. Justice is following and evaluating the credible evidence. Justice is looking at who has an interest in the outcome of the case. Justice is, who has the best opportunity to see and evaluate what the situation is?
Justice, I respectfully submit, in this case on the verdict form is to check yes that the greater weight of the evidence, that's where we start, the greater weight of the evidence, and I submit it's the overwhelming weight of the evidence in this case, is that Margot Putney had small cell cancer of the lung that started in her lung that metastasized to her brain, and on May 12th, 199 -- May 12, 1995 she died, as recorded by Dr. Faig, of metastatic small cell cancer of the lung.
The oath is to speak the truth. Dr. Faig on this official document in 1995 spoke the truth then, and he and his fellow physicians came into this courtroom and spoke the truth today.
THE CLERK: One hour, Counsel.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you.
Ladies and gentleman, I thank you very much for your very kind attention and close attention. And would you please give opposing counsel the same courtesies that you've given me. I will have the opportunity to speak to you again in a while. And so it's now Mr. Webb's turn to address you all. Thank you all very much.
THE COURT: We'll take a 10-minute break. We'll recess until 2:30.
(Jury exits courtroom 2:23 p.m.)
(A recess was taken from 2:23 p.m to 2:33
THE BAILIFF: Court is back in session.
THE COURT: You may proceed, sir.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Ladies and gentleman of the jury, I hardly know where to begin, but I think I'll try by beginning like this. After hearing
what defense counsel said during [sic] opening arguments and watching his voice, I really have a hard time believing that I've been sitting in the same courtroom with him and listening to the same evidence that has come from the stand in the last six days.
I'm not much at quoting poetry, especially if the poet is called Shakespeare, and so I always butcher everything, but the great Bard
once said, "What a tangled web we weave when it is our intent to deceive."
Counsel was saying that we had a theory.
Who really has a theory here? What is the theory? What is the evidence? And let's start off with -- and he's talking about pieces of paper. And there's pieces of paper here, that's true. There's pieces of paper. And anybody who's ever worked in a hospital knows that there's contemporaneous records that are made. They're contemporaneous. And when you go back and you look, you're able to reconstruct, remember, recall, determine what you've done.
I promise you 15 years ago I would never be able to remember what the last errand was that my wife sent me to the store to get, but if
there happened to be a little record that said on April the 1st of 1995 Chucky was sent to the store to get coffee beans, da, da, da, da, da, da.
THE COURT: Mark your notes there what he just called himself.
MR. BAUMBERGER: I do what I'm told, at least sometimes, with the Court and my wife.
I can look at that piece of paper that was contemporaneous note and I'll know what I got.
I won't have any recollection, but I'll know what I got. And that's what these records are.
And so let me show you some of the contemporaneous records. MP 25. A record that was made by Dr. Mitchell on February the 14th of 1994. And what does it say? Small cell carcinoma of lung with right neck metastasis.
Is he making this up? What am I missing? I'm missing something. That's what he said in '94. That's what he said on the stand.
Dr. Mitchell said on the stand -- I'm now reading from his transcript, after what I've seen come through here, I think I will read from the transcript.
"And so at that point in time what was your
conclusion concerning your patient?
"She had small cell carcinoma of the lung that had metastasized to the right neck."
That's what he said in '94. That's what he said in 2010.
And he also -- I asked him, "Did you see a tumor growing out of his thyroid?"
He answered: "No," that there was no thyroid cancer. There was lung cancer.
Now if we go to MP 9, Dr. Revilla.
And what does Dr. Revilla say in 1995?
Heavy smoker, mediastinal mass, associated mass in her right neck. And he said that meant in his opinion had lung cancer.
So what did he testify here in 2010?
Reading from the transcript, "Within reasonable medical probability was the primary tumor which caused the mass in the supraclavicular area?
"Answer: Lung cancer."
And then later on on the transcript, "When I
saw the patient, this patient did not present as a thyroid cancer. And looking at this report," and he's referring to the CT, "I don't see anything that says this thyroid gland had exploded. I mean, for so much tumor this
patient had, looking at this report, I don't see any abnormality of the actual thyroid gland."
'94, 2010.
Dr. Monson, "During your care and treatment did you ever come to the conclusion what was the cause of her lung cancer?
"Cigarette smoking.
"As you sit here today, the fact that there was not a tumor reported in the thyroid, can you tell me, the jury whether or not that rules out a thyroid cancer?
"In my mind it does."
1994, 2010. Radiation oncologist.
Dr. Aronsohn, "When you connected the dot of a supraclavicular mass and small cell carcinoma, where did that lead you?
"Most likely primary site, lung."
Dr. Faig, "The CT scan supports lung cancer. You put those together, they support lung cancer. And it supports lung cancer, not thyroid cancer."
1994, 2010.
Let's put up the illustration -- well, let me continue to go through. For Dr. Aronsohn put up 33. What he recorded in 1994 -- what he
recorded, primary site, lung.
Put up 124 where they're doing the dosage, primary, right hilum.
Put up the death certificate. I don't know the number on that. Metastatic small cell cancer of the lung.
How many of you ever heard the saying of making up a story out of a whole cloth?
Probably nobody. Because I've been around South Florida for a long time. Well, let me tell you about making up a story out of whole cloth. And whole is spelled [sic] H-O-L-E.
And so when you're making up a story out of whole cloth, where you're trying to make a dress out of whole cloth, that means you've got cloth with a hole in it. It means you're trying to make up something out of nothing. And I respectfully suggest that that is what the tobacco companies, the cigarette companies' position is in this case.
Because in this case what they have done, they have parsed, they have diced, they have sliced, they have dodged, they have weaved, they take something here, and they take that over there and put it on here. You know there was
something in Sesame Street when my kids were young, they had these three blind mice, maybe you all have seen this, where the three blind mice went around, and somebody would touch something and they felt like it was a pilar.
Somebody else touched something and felt like it was a fan. And somebody else touched something that felt like a snake. And they were blind.
And when you saw the picture, it was an elephant. The snake was the trunk. The pilar was the leg. And the fan was the tail.
And so you're trying to take something here and something there and disconnect off everything, deconstruct to confuse, to mislead. It was hard to believe, but I've recorded this where counsel has actually made the statement to ask you to not follow the law. He said on several occasions that we -- our burden was to exclude thyroid cancer.
Can we put up the verdict form, please?
Here is what the judge will charge you.
"The Plaintiff must prove her claim by the greater weight of the evidence. I will now define some of the terms you will use in deciding this case. The greater weight of the
evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in this case."
Contrary to what the cigarette company lawyer was representing, our burden is not to exclude anything. Our burden is to prove by the -- if you'll put up the greater weight of the evidence, that's 50 percent and a little bit more. And as I have suggested, I don't think this is a close contest. I don't think that there's a doubt in -- there should not be a doubt that this is overwhelming that this is a case in which there was small cell cancer of the lung.
Dr. Wartofsky, the person who came from a thousand miles away and 15 years too late to opine, to create a story out of whole cloth, to talk about a mysterious, exclusive, evasive thyroid cancer that I suggest exists only in his mind. It doesn't exist in the facts of this case.
Let me talk about sympathy for just a second. The Putney family is not here for sympathy. They're here for justice. Maybe you've noticed the Putney family has been
outside the courtroom. They have not been inside the courtroom. And there's two reasons for that. This Phase I is a very difficult phase. This involves the medical treatment in the course and in the demise of their mother.
Why put them through that?
But there's another reason. Why have Sharon or Guy or Glenn in the courtroom to give any type of idea that they're here and they're in this courtroom seeking to court sympathy? That is not what the situation is. They are here outside this courtroom, and they are seeking and hoping for justice. And that's what -- all we can ask from you, and that's all that you can give.
Let me go to the superior vena cava
compression.
THE CLERK: 15 minutes, Counsel.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Thank you.
The bronchial tree starts right here at the carina. The bronchial tree comes from the carina to the hilum. And maybe defense counsel missed the testimony, but the bronchial tree and tubes go straight through the hilum into the lung itself. And the testimony could not be
clearer, even from Dr. Andrews, that small cell cancers arise in the hilum, the hilar area. And they're bronchogenic cancers caused by smoking, which you take a puff here, it goes down the trachea, it goes into the carina, and then it goes through the bronchial tree, the bronchial tubes outside the lung into the bronchial tubes inside the lung.
And Dr. Andrews conceded very clearly that he considers the bronchus, the main-stem bronchus as part of the lung; hence, the term lung cancer.
So the slide they put up about no cancer inside the lung is misleading at best and does not comport with the testimony.
All the tests that they want to order, the unnecessary tests, the tests that cost money and put patients at risk when Dr. Andrews himself said, as did Dr. Mitchell, Dr. Califano,
Dr. Villa, and Dr. Revilla, that all you needed was the incisional biopsy when the aspiration biopsy could not be confirmed. That's all you needed. You didn't need anything else. You didn't need any of these other tests.
Counsel put up a board about the delay in
filing the lawsuit. The delay in filing this suit is not for Phase I. It will become abundantly clear if we get to Phase II why the Putney's suit was not filed before it was.
There will not be any mystery over that. That will be explained 100 percent completely. And so as just common folks who, like the tobacco industry, when the suit was filed and we tried to obtain records, the record retention policy was gone. But fortunately, we had enough records where the doctors could go back and review their contemporaneous notes and opinions. And even though they couldn't put a face to Margot Putney, they could come in and give detailed descriptions and explanations as to what happened in her case.
Their case apparently seems to ride and fall on four pieces of paper. We suggest that the case is far more than that. You have the entire chart to take a look at. And you connect the dots just like the doctors did and just how their common-sense testimony did. And I respectfully submit that you will come to the same conclusion that each of the five treaters, that each of the Plaintiffs' experts, Califano,
id expert; Villa, lung expert, pathologist
and oncologist. And ~by the way, Dr. Califano is not only a head and neck surgeon, he's also involved in oncology and has written cancer articles. They all come to the same conclusion.
The case is now in your hands, because my remarks, I'm finished. Opposing counsel is through. He's finished. The Court will charge you and you will go out to fulfill your oath as jurors, deliberate, and reach a true verdict.
And when you come back in, Guy, Glenn, and Sharon will be here to await your verdict.
Thank you all once again for the attention you've given, not only myself, but opposing counsel.