MR. WEBB: Thank you, Your Honor.
morning, folks, how are you?
As you know, I'm now being given the opportunity to give a closing argument on behalf of my client, Philip Morris, and I'm going to do that right now.
One preliminary matter, I would like to at least have the indulgence of thanking you for being jurors in this case. You've gone far beyond your civic duty. I won't belabor it. You've been here four weeks. I know how closely -- I've watched how closely you've watched this evidence, you paid attention to it, you said you could be fair, and no one can you ask you for more than that.
What I'm going to do now as best I can is I want to talk about the actual issues that are on the verdict form in this case. And I think that you, as jurors, have sworn that you will address those issues and you will analyze what the actual evidence is that was presented on those issues.
Mr. Baumberger didn't do a lot of that, and I am going to do that because I want you to understand what the actual issues are that are on the verdict form. And then I'm going to run
through what I believe the actual evidence is on each of these issues so you can evaluate it and then you can make judgments at the end of the case.
I only get to speak to you once and then Reynolds will get a chance to speak to you, Liggett will get a chance to speak with you, and then Mr. Baumberger gets to go a second time. So I'm going to try to be careful and try to hit all the issues and do the best I can to tell you what I believe the actual evidence is on each of the issues.
Now, I put on the screen that as far as what it is we're actually trying to do in this case, is we're trying to determine who is responsible for Margot Putney's smoking-related decisions. We need to look at the evidence, who's responsible for her decision to start smoking in the mid-1950s, who's responsible for Margot Putney's decision to continue to smoke cigarettes for 40 years without making a serious attempt to quit smoking, which everyone agrees happened here, who is responsible for that?
Because, for example, the plaintiffs seem to contend that her smoking decisions were somehow influenced by something that my client said or did
back in the 1950s or in the '60s or the '70s. They have a theory that somehow my client said or did something that she relied upon and that that's why she started to smoke or that's why she continued to smoke. And I'm going to walk through that evidence with you because there is no evidence that Margot Putney made any smoking-related decisions based on what my client did.
But this issue, this issue I have on the screen right now, who's responsible for her smoking-related decisions? Every one of the issues on the verdict form -- you'll see them as I go
through them -- every issue ties in to how you decide and answer that question right there.
One thing counsel several times in his opening statement I thought was trying to tell you, well, because we're still -- we can stop manufacturing cigarettes and then she wouldn't have gotten sick.
You're going to be told and you're going to see the evidence, cigarettes are completely legal products in all states. And you're going to see from the Judge's instructions, the tobacco companies have no liability in this case, just because the tobacco companies manufactured cigarettes or just because Margot Putney chose to
smoke brands of cigarettes manufactured by those companies.
We are only liable, and the issue you're going to have to address, is that if we engaged in wrongful conduct or made false or misleading statements that actually influenced Margot Putney as she made decisions, that's where you're going to have to address it. This is, for example, the instruction that you'll get from the Court, the law.
The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is lawful activity, therefore, I instruct you the defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes.
This case is not about manufacturing cigarettes. This case is not about advertising cigarettes.
This case is about whether or not Margot Putney made smoking-related decisions based on something my client or the other tobacco companies said or did. And we're going to talk about that.
The Court has told you about these previous court findings, that my client and others were found to be negligent, et cetera, which you've been told about. Tnere's no question those findings did
occur in another case, in which -- another case in which the evidence that Mr. Baumberger talked to you about for the first hour, and those findings -those are not being disputed by the tobacco companies.
But the reason we're here is because there has to be another court case because that court case did not involve Margot Putney. That case did not involve any of the facts regarding Margot Putney.
This case is about Margot Putney and the specific facts that relate to her. That's why you've been sitting here for four weeks. And so you, it's only you as jurors in this case, have actually heard the facts that relate to Margot Putney and you're the ones that are going to decide whether or not my client, for example, did she actually rely or make some decisions to smoke or to continue to smoke because of something my client said or did, and we're going to walk through the evidence on that issue.
Yes, they do have the burden of proof. And you're going to go through the verdict form and you will find that they are the ones that had the
obligation to come forward and prove to you that Margot Putney actually started smoking because of
something my client said or did, or she continued to smoke because of something my client said or did and she relied upon it in making those decisions.
And that's what we're here for, so let me walk through the evidence, if I might, right now.
Here's what I think you'll see from the actual evidence. I'm going to walk through actual testimony. I'm going to try to present the testimony that actually occurred in the case.
There is no evidence that Margot Putney ever saw, read or heard any statements or anything said by my company that anyone has testified caused her to start smoking or caused her to continue to smoke and not quit.
There is no evidence that she actually made a smoking-related decision based on some reasonable reliance on any wrongful conduct, any negligence, or any false or misleading statements by the tobacco companies that caused her injury. I mean, there is no evidence of that whatsoever, and so I want to walk through the testimony.
What is the actual testimony from witnesses that came before you under oath over the last several weeks and presented testimony? What is the actual evidence whether she actually heard or saw
any statement by my client or the other companies?
Let's start with Sharon Putney, the plaintiff, in this case. This was her trial testimony, it was presented to you. I asked the most broad question I could.
Am I correct -- she -- referring to her mother -- never told you that she ever relied on anything she heard or read from any entity connected with the tobacco company?
Answer: No, not that I remember.
I gave Sharon Putney a chance to try to present to you testimony that her mother relied on something that my client did, and she said no, she did not have that evidence.
Guy Putney, same thing: She never told you that she relied upon anything the companies were saying because she, in fact, warned you not to believe everything you read, right?
Answer: Correct.
This is Dr. Feingold. This is the witness that supposedly was offering all these ads into evidence, explaining to you about all of our bad conduct over the years. And I will come back and talk about Dr. Feingold. But on this issue, about whether there's any evidence. After he did all of
that for hours, I got up and said one question I'd like to ask you.
On the issue about -- if she ever saw any of those ads or commercials or public statements, all those statements that they played from TV and all the statements. I said, you don't have any information as to whether she did or did not, is that correct?
That s true.
Right now, there is not a single witness's testimony that stated that Margot Putney relied upon anything that my client said or did or that the other companies said or did on which she based smoking-related decisions. And as far as, let's just take this Frank Statement that they keep putting up on the screen. That's fine.
Frank Statement was back in the early 1950s, you seen it, it's in evidence, you can read it, so I asked the direct question with Sharon Putney.
And your mother never told you that she had ever heard of the Frank Statement to cigarette smokers?
Answer: No.
And your mother never told you that she ever relied upon a document called the Frank Statement,
did she?
Answer: No. No.
And there was not any other document or statement that my client or these other companies that they put on the screen that any witness has testified. We can't get in a courtroom. We can't speculate. You're going to have to rely upon sworn testimony that came before you and then you make judgments on whether they produced that kind of evidence.
This is an issue that Mr. Baumberger ignored completely during his presentation this morning.
In fact, I put up on one screen -- do you remember all these organizations that you've heard so much about? You got the tobacco companies, the three on trial, then you've got this organization called TIRC, that's the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, CTR replaced it, Tobacco Institute, these are all organizations that Dr. Feingold said, oh, these are organizations that are making statements out there, that the cigarette companies are making statements that they're denying or saying that it hasn't been proven yet.
There's not a single witness that has provided any testimony that Margot Putney ever relied on or
anything said or done by any of the defendants on trial as she made her decisions whether to smoke cigarettes or whether to continue smoking, not a single witness testified.
Let's talk about cigarette advertising because you saw so much of it. And I'm going to come back and talk about Mr. Monahan in a moment, that was Cousin Tom. But I -- as far as all the ads that he talked about, has anyone said that she actually relied on any cigarette advertising that you saw in this courtroom?
No.
This is Tom Monahan's testimony.
Did I ever have any conversations with Margot Putney about cigarette advertising? No. That's correct. Okay.
And did Margot Putney ever say that commercials influenced her to smoke in any way?
His answer is no.
That's the sworn testimony from Cousin Tom in this case. So all those advertisements you've seen in this courtroom -- I asked Dr. Feingold, he's the one that presented all these ads, I said, Doctor, I have one question. Is it correct that you showed the jury those ads, but the truth is you can't say
if Margot Putney ever actually saw any of those ads, is that correct?
Yes, I did not ask her and I do not know.
That's the sworn testimony that you have on this critical issue that you have to decide in this case.
What about her decision to start smoking? Is there any evidence that back in the mid-1950s that she started smoking because of something that she saw from a tobacco company or some false statement or some negligent conduct?
Mr. Monahan, and she never described to you the first time she smoked a cigarette, did she?
Answer: I probably wasn't born.
I'm coming back to his testimony in a moment.
And she never told you why she decided to start smoking, correct?
Answer: She did not.
There is not a witness that's testified.
He's the only one who said he knew her back at the time and he spent time with her and he admits that he cannot tell you that she ever decided to start smoking because of anything said by a tobacco company.
This is Sharon Putney. So I then ask her:
Now, ma'am, am I correct that your mother never actually told you why she decided to smoke cigarettes in the first place, is that correct?
Answer: No, she didn't.
And your mother, you don't remember your mother ever telling you that she started smoking cigarettes based on any advertising by the tobacco companies; you don't remember that, do you?
Answer: No.
That's Sharon Putney's testimony under oath in this courtroom.
Now, let's talk about Tom Monahan. Sometimes there's so many witnesses it's hard to remember each one, but I do have some comments to make about Mr. Monahan's testimony.
Mr. Monahan, who's obviously very close to the Putney family, he's got a -- you're going to be told by the Court, you get to judge the credibility of witnesses, I don't. You're going to be told, for example, you get to consider whether someone may have an interest in the outcome of this case and might that cause them to slant their testimony. And I just ask you to judge what happened with Mr. Tom Monahan, Cousin Tom, who was a very likable gentleman, and no one would deny that.
But he gave a sworn deposition before, three months before he came into this courtroom. And in that sworn deposition he told under oath that he could only remember two TV shows he watched as a
kid back at the time he watched TV with Margot, and he could not remember any conversations with her about cigarette advertising.
After his deposition he met with lawyers for the plaintiffs who showed them some pictures of cigarette ads and talked to him about TV shows. He came to trial, took that witness stand right there and he described in detail, in great detail, 16 TV shows, ads and celebrities that he sworn to you he remembered when he was seven years old.
He told you in detail, he now remembers 16 TV shows and cigarette advertisements or celebrity endorsements that now when he's thinking back on it he now remembers and he -- apparently, some of them he saw with Margot Putney, although he was very vague about that.
So there was a question asked by one of you -I have no way to know which one and we never should know -- but you asked a question, and I'm going to show it to you. Because it would be odd that someone could walk into a courtroom 50 years later
and think back to sometime in front of TV at a beach house and now miraculously remember in detail what I put on the screen.
In his deposition, just three months ago under oath all he could say is that he remembered vaguely there was a Howdy Doody show and a Lawrence Welk show and he could not remember any conversations with Margot about cigarette advertising.
Then he got in here to this courtroom and he sat there on the witness stand and he started detailing all of these TV shows and then over on the right he detailed nine ads or endorsements of cigarettes. He went through and they showed him Joe DiMaggio and Roger Morris and all of a sudden Cousin Tom remembers all of this, because he knew that there was nobody testifying that would satisfy their requirement to prove that Margot Putney actually relied upon or made any smoking decisions based on advertisements or anything else.
So Cousin Tom miraculously now details all of this information which three months earlier under oath he had no recollection of that's what happened. And so one of you asked this question, because maybe it seemed odd that someone seven years old now 50 years later, so question:
You said you remembered commercials about smoking when you were seven and Margot was about 14 or 15. Can you recall any other commercials during that time that were not about smoking?
Why would it be that he only remembered smoking commercials? It couldn't be because he was trying to help the family here, is it?
And his answer was: I do not.
I watched him on the stand and turn to you and said I can't remember a single commercial about anything, Alka-Seltzer -- I mean, we all have jingles that run through our head we saw as kids.
He can't remember a single commercial, except cigarettes, that's all he ever remembered.
And I respectfully suggest to you that you
have a right to evaluate and judge the credibility of that testimony as jurors.
Although, at the end of the day, it doesn't matter because then, even he told you, this is it, right here, under oath: Margot Putney ever say that commercials influenced her to smoke in any way? That's his sworn testimony. Even he admits -- by the way, if Margot Putney happened to see commercials, that's not -- doesn't prove anything at all.
There's got to be evidence that she reasonably relied upon them and made some decision because of commercials. Even Cousin Tom closes the door on any evidence they have on this issue.
And I put up a Merit ad because they offer in -- when Mrs. Putney switched to my client's cigarettes because they were lower in tar and -and this is the ads that my client -- my client had ads in magazines that looked just like this. And you're going to be told by the Court -- well, I will come to that in a minute.
So all my client says -- this is in the late '70s, early '80s -- that we've said to people, smoker puzzle solved by Merit taste, research establishes low tar Merit is proven taste-alternative to high tar smoking.
And you've heard the testimony, there's no question, that these cigarettes that are lower in tar are better for people. So she, if she -- by the way, there's no evidence at all that she even saw this, but what would be possibly misleading about this? What is there about this that's false? What is there about this that's bad or wrong?
Because we're advertising our cigarettes and we're advertising that we have a lower tar
cigarette and it has a taste that you can come to adjust to if you're willing to try it? There's nothing wrong about that, nothing at all.
And again the Court's going to instruct you, defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. There's no liability. Actually, there is not a single witness that said she saw those two magazine ads, no one, so you have to guess. And if she did see them, what would be wrong with it?
I heard counsel -- what is it that they're relying upon? Well, I heard counsel just now in his opening statement say, well, Sharon Putney said that she remembers -- well, this is her testimony. Sharon Putney testified that when she grew up back in the '70s and 80's, were you aware about a debate about whether cigarettes were harmful or not harmful?
Well, you know, there was a debate out there. You'd be hearing things on both sides, was it good to smoke, was it bad, but nothing was ever proven. That's not Margot Putney. That's Sharon testifying.
Sharon testified under oath that her mother never told her ever that she relied upon anything
ever said or done by a tobacco company. So what Sharon Putney thinks is not evidence that proves some kind of reliance by Margot Putney, none whatsoever.
Next question I'm going to address. So the evidence is overwhelming. They have the burden of proof to come in here and they have to prove -- and I'm going to get to the verdict form -- legal cause, that our conduct, negligence or whatever, is what effected her smoking decisions and was the legal cause of her injury.
And you talk about it as jurors, we can't make it up. Counsel's got to show you real testimony. There is none. And certainly none to satisfy a burden of proof.
But another question that's fair for you to ask as jurors, if somehow Margot Putney was relying upon all of our statements out there and she didn't know -- she got mislead somehow and therefore she didn't know anything about the health risks of smoking and therefore she continued to smoke because she didn't think there's a problem with smoking, is that evidence been supported by anything in this courtroom? I want to talk about it. Because the evidence is Margot Putney was well
aware of the risk of smoking.
First of all, she received warnings for 28 years. They want to minimize these warnings.
These warnings were on packages of cigarettes from 1966 until Margot Putney's diagnosis and death in the mid-1990s; 28 years, every package of cigarettes had a very clear, stark warning. There is no way that anyone, respectfully, that anyone can suggest to you that somehow she never ever realized what she was being told right on the package of cigarettes: Cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health, then Surgeon General's determined it's dangerous to your health, Surgeon General's warning, smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, et cetera, et cetera. 20,000 warnings.
So there's no way they can tell you that she did not understand the risk of smoking. There's no way they could convince you that somehow she was relying on something else and thought that the warnings didn't matter or didn't count. There's no evidence of that whatsoever.
But you also have personal warnings. You have evidence. Sometimes things get personalized. And you heard testimony from Guy Putney that Mrs.
Putney's father was a very heavy smoker and he passed away in 1981 and he had lung cancer and the family connected the lung cancer to smoking, and Guy Putney said yes.
And he said that that included his brother, Glenn, his sister, Sharon, he said I'm talking about your mother and your brother and your sister. Sometimes when people -- knowing that your father smoked cigarettes for years, knowing that he died of lung cancer, might that be a wake up call that you should quit smoking? And she didn't.
Margot Putney received personal warnings from family members, from her husband. This is Tom Monahan's testimony. He -- he's referring to Mrs. Putney's ex-husband -- he told everyone he met to quit smoking, answer.
And that was because smoking was bad for you, correct?
Because it caused cancer. Mrs. Putney's ex-husband constantly was telling his wife she -you should quit, these things will cause cancer.
And he preached it, according to Mr. Monahan, from every mountaintop he could find.
Other family members, Guy Putney, testified he referred to cigarettes as coffin sticks -- or
cancer sticks, I'm sorry, cancer sticks. And Margot Putney's husband referred to them as coffin nails. Those are graphic ways of telling somebody smoking will harm you.
Glenn Putney testified in the mid to late 1970's he told his mother smoking was harmful and she should quit. In the early to mid-'80s, he thought it had been proven that smoking could cause cancer, and he told his mother this. In fact, his mother told him in the early 1970's she was quitting smoking because she was worried about her health.
So anyone -- somehow, if -- you know, I'm going to suggest that she somehow was completely misled by tobacco companies and had no idea that smoking could harm you is not supported by any evidence whatsoever. But maybe the best evidence is she obviously knew smoking can harm you because she told her own kids same thing most of us tell our kids.
Glenn Putney said his mother told him not to smoke, it's a bad habit and it's not good for you.
Guy Putney, same type of testimony, cigarettes were bad for him.
Mrs. Putney knew the dangers of smoking and
was fully aware of it and Liza Kessler will talk about what was in the public media about the same thing: You could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know.
So let's talk about the next issue. No evidence that she replied upon anything said by the tobacco companies or done by the tobacco companies. She had full knowledge of the health risks of smoking. Did she make any serious attempts to quit smoking during the 40 years of smoking prior to her diagnosis? And the answer is no and the evidence is unrefuted.
I put on one screen, this is a summary of what you've heard on this issue about whether she quit. Margot Putney's own children told you here under oath that they believe their mother should have tried harder to quit smoking and she didn't.
That's her own children.
Margot Putney never made a serious effort to quit smoking during her 40 years. And I'll walk
through Dr. Glassman s testimony aoout that.
No witness testified -- but there's not a single witness that's testified that there's
anything said or done by the tobacco companies that caused her to not quit, to say I'm not going to quit, I'm going to continue, not a single piece of evidence.
She was a capable and determined woman. She had gone through a difficult time with a difficult divorce, kept her family together. Her son admits that she could make hard decisions. And Margot Putney, if she had quit smoking over those years, the evidence is very clear, she would have greatly reduced her risk of getting lung cancer.
But the plaintiffs in this case cannot blame the tobacco companies for their mother's lung cancer if the mother never really tried to quit over those 40 years. Here's what -- just so you know, here's what the evidence is about quitting smoking.
People quit all the time. Dr. Glassman who's their expert, their expert, he told you there are 40 to 50 million former smokers in the U.S. There are more people today in the U.S. that quit smoking than are smoking today. He told you addiction is not an excuse. Addictive smokers can quit smoking. They do everyday. He told you even severely addicted smokers can quit smoking. They do
everyday.
And he told you that motivation is a very powerful determinate of success in an attempt to quit smoking because if you don't stop unless you try. That's their expert. I think common sense probably tells that to you anyway based on your experiences in life.
The 1988 Surgeon General's report said approximately 90 percent of former smokers report they quit smoking cold turkey without any treatment whatsoever. That's what the facts are. That's what the evidence is in this case.
And we have Guy Putney testifying on the issue of trying to get your mother to quit during all those years and she didn't quit, am I correct, you simply came to the conclusion that your mother could have tried much, much harder to quit?
Answer: Yes.
Question: And did you come to the conclusion to believe that she could have been much more definite on quitting?
Answer: Yes.
I'm talking about during the years that you tried to encourage your mother to quit and she didn't, was it your belief if she tried harder she
could have quit?
I want to say yes.
That was his testimony.
Sharon Putney. Am I correct, you actually agree that your mother could have tried harder to quit; you agree with that, don't you?
Answer: I wanted her to try harder. I think
she could have tried harder.
That's Sharon Putney's testimony.
This is the evidence that's come in from her children. She never quit smoking for as much as a day, ever once, that's her children.
She never threw out the cigarettes, the lighter, the ashtray, the accoutrements. She never developed a plan to quit. She never used any help, like a nicotine Patch or gum. She never used the buddy system. There's evidence on one occasion she talked to a next door neighbor about quitting together and helping each other and they didn't follow through. That was the testimony.
Never sought a prescription, never used it, never attended a smoking clinic.
This is what Sharon Putney said. And sometimes she would make New Year's resolutions to quit smoking?
Answer: Yes, she would, but then it wouldn't last even a half a day. She just couldn't. I don't know why.
Guy Putney. She wouldn't smoke on New Year's Eve, but by the morning she would be smoking again, correct?
Yes.
There's no evidence that she ever quit for as much as a half a day.
And this is Dr. Glassman. Dr. Glassman's opinion is that her chances of quitting were very, very low, that's what he told you. Ana so I want to talk about Dr. Glassman for a moment because something very unusual happened during Dr. Glassman's testimony, because he admitted that severely addicted people quit all the time.
But now he comes into the courtroom and says, oh, Margot Putney, she had a hard time and, by the way, she probably would have had a hard time, but people do it everyday and she did it eventually.
But something happened with Dr. Glassman that I want to remind you of because it was unusual.
Dr. Glassman gave a sworn testimony one month before he came and took that witness stand, one month before. And then he started giving testimony
at this trial that was completely different than what he said a month ago. And I put it on one screen. I will try to quickly walk through it.
There's seven different things he told you but then he admitted he said differently of one month earlier, and you saw it happen seven times before your eyes in this courtroom.
He testified at trial Guy Putney tried to get his mother to quit smoking.
One month earlier he said none of the Putney children tried to help their mother quit smoking.
How could he change his mind on that in one month?
Testimony at trial: Mrs. Putney used nicotine gum. One month earlier he said Mrs. Putney's gum could have been regular gum or nicotine gum, but I assumed it was regular gum.
Next he said: Mrs. Putney did not quit cold
turkey. That s what he told you under oath.
One month ago he said she did quit cold turkey.
Next: Mrs. Putney experienced withdrawal symptoms after quitting smoking in 1994.
A month ago: Mrs. Putney symptoms could have been related to her cancer.
Next one: In the courtroom he told you Mrs. Putney tried to quit smoking before 1994 but failed.
In his deposition a month earlier: There's very limited objective evidence that Mrs. Putney tried to quit smoking before 1994, completely different testimony in one month's time.
In the courtroom he said: The level of nicotine dependence best predicts whether a quit attempt will succeed.
A month ago: Motivation is a powerful predictor of whether a quit attempt will succeed.
In this courtroom he said Mrs. Putney was motivated to quit smoking. That's what he told you.
One month earlier he said under oath: There's not enough information to make that determination in this case.
That's their witness. That's their testimony, and that's what happened, and you get to judge the credibility of that testimony.
But here's what he did say, because he -- it was odd that a man -- a witness would do that, and so here's what he tried to blame it on, the court reporter. Do you remember that? He tried to blame
it on the court reporter. He tried to say his deposition was messed up by the court reporter.
Question: Dr. Glassman, just so I understand, you believe the court reporter that was typing down your answers, much like the lady sitting here in front of you, did a poor job at your deposition?
Answer: Yes, I really do. Answer.
Did you bring that to anyone's attention,
Dr. Glassman, before today?
Ah, this answer was -- he says: Well, I sent this sheet back in with a number of corrections,
I'm sure you've seen them.
Of course, you have a right to correct your deposition if you think there's something wrong, you get a chance to correct it. And he sent his sheet back in, but he hadn't corrected any of those.
None of those seven did he correct. None of
them.
And so then we asked him, he says I sent back a sheet with a number of corrections, I'm sure you've seen them and, of course, we have.
And then the question is: I'm sorry, did you correct the testimony that we've just read?
He said: I don't think so, I got tired.
That was his testimony: I got tired.
So I did correct the testimony that I've changed in this courtroom today. That was what he
told you under oath in this courtroom, so you make a judgment about that.
But this is what he said. He admitted the basic facts. This is what he said. He admits she never stopped for as much -- Mrs. Putney never stopped for as much as 24 hours, never asked her children to help, never asked a doctor, never threw away her cigarettes, never used the Patch. He admitted there's a big difference between saying you're going to do something and actually doing it, yeah, that's an important difference.
And so, question: You're not absolutely -this is Dr. Glassman -- you're not absolutely sure that Mrs. Putney had even one serious quit attempt in her entire smoking history, are you?
Answer: I have a lot of uncertainty about whether she ever stopped for 24 hours in any of the depositions I read.
Their own witness on cross-examination admitted she never made a serious attempt to quit smoking in 40 years. That's their expert.
Glenn Putney testified that he could not
recall anyone in the family suggesting that their mother tried the Patch, attempted to stop smoking or help the doctor.
Dr. Glassman admitted that based on his review of the depositions Sharon and Glenn Putney never really tried to help their mother quit smoking or suggested that she try any quit-smoking aids or see a doctor.
But it's much worse than that. Because instead of helping her quit -- do you remember this testimony? They actually, the family members, the ones that have filed the lawsuit and that are asking you, I think it was now 15 million dollars, they developed a little scheme to break some rules and get extra free cigarettes for their mother.
Guy Putney testified about the family members getting free cigarettes for their mother through promotions at car races and he explained that there are rules, you're only supposed to be able to have one coupon per address. So what they did is that Sharon and Guy and David Hulette, all of them together, they used different addresses so they could get extra free cigarettes to give to their mother. That's the testimony they presented. This is Guy's testimony on this point.
Instead of helping her quit, they went out and got her free cigarettes so they could -- as far as trying to help someone quit, going out and getting and running kind of a whatever you want to call it, this little scheme to get a lot of -- so you could send the cigarettes to different homes and then give them to your mother, and so we asked him about it. He said, yeah, we'd actually fill out the multiple addresses.
Question: And you would actually fill out with multiple addresses so you could get more free cigarettes for your mom, right?
We'd do one for each address.
So when you say each address, what do you
mean?
Margot Putney, Guy Putney, Sharon Putney,
David Hulette. That's his sworn testimony.
And you would use sort of all the family members addresses so you could get more cigarettes for your money, right?
Correct.
Question: Even though you thought it was bad for your mom, you still got her cigarettes?
And the answer is she was my mother.
Of course, I understand. But when they come
into a courtroom and tell you that they want 15 million dollars to become very much multi-millionaires, at least, I just respectfully ask you to talk about that testimony that was presented by Guy Putney.
Sharon Putney, by the way, says it didn't happen. That was her testimony. Do you remember? She contradicts her brothers.
Do you have any recollection of being involved with your two brothers and filling out forms so they can be sent in and get coupons.
I don't remember filling them out, no.
So that was Sharon Putney's testimony during the course of the trial.
And as far as whether Mrs. Putney quit smoking, she did. And the plaintiff wants to say, well, she was diagnosed with cancer so that doesn't count.
Well, I would respectfully ask you to talk about it because what you heard from all the witnesses is people make decisions and choices and people quit smoking everyday and some people don't quit smoking and they make choices about that.
And there's no question that you've heard no one -- Guy Putney, everyone agrees, that she quit
cold turkey without any assistance or any help in February of 1994.
Now, let me just talk about one issue in the case. As far as her not quitting smoking, you have evidence that Margot Putney did have a bit of a pattern of making some risky lifestyle choices, which she had a right to do, and she had every right to make those choices, and all of us do this in our life; we make some choices, but then obviously we have to take responsibility for what choices we make.
For example, she smoked cigarettes for 40 years and she made no serious attempt to quit. She knew full well the health risks. But she also consumed large amounts of alcohol over many years, knowing full well the problems that drinking can cause. I mean, she was aware of what drinking did, it broke up her family. Her son was nearly killed because of a drunk driver.
Now, she beat those odds. The evidence is she had no harmful effects, according to the evidence, I'm not debating that. Because you get to make choices. And so she did win that one, okay. She didn't have any serious consequences from drinking six or seven beers a night and that's -- God bless
her, that's a good thing. But it didn't happen with smoking. And yet she made that choice, and she came and made the choice; and that's why we're going to ask you to focus on that, because when you make those choices, if you decide you're going to have risky behaviors, you then get to ask about whether you have the responsibility for those choices and you can talk about that when you deliberate.
As far as the credibility of witnesses, you talked to the Court, the Court's going to tell you that you get to consider and judge it. And one of the things will be the interest that maybe someone would have on the outcome of the case, and Sharon Putney clearly has an interest in the outcome of the case. Her lawyer just said she wants five million dollars.
And so I want to just remind you about Sharon Putney went on the witness stand and decided it would help her case to minimize her mother's drinking activity. That was her choice. She had a right to do that.
But here's what she testified on direct exam to all of you, that her mother actually drank one or two cans of beer per night; under oath, she said
that's the truth, that's what happened.
There were, you saw, three medical records from three different dates involving two different doctors that reflect that Margot Putney had candidly -- when she was diagnosed with cancer, she's not going to lie to her doctor, she told her doctor the truth about her smoking two packs a day for years, she told her doctor the truth about her drinking, and I showed at the end -- I just decided to show Mrs. Putney the records and here's what happened.
I said: Have you seen this document during this trial where your mother told the first doctor, Dr. Mitchell, that she had consumed two cases of beer?
Mrs. Putney said: That's not possible. Two cases of beer, that's just not possible.
That's what Dr. Mitchell said Margot told him on February 1st. That's not possible, that's not right.
Question: And did you ever know your mother to make a misrepresentation to a doctor?
No.
So then I went on to the next one and I said -- this is another Dr. Mitchell record, but a
different day. Several -- ten days later, he's doing a procedure on Mrs. Putney, he's asking her a question, this time it's phrased a little differently. She drinks about a six-pack of beer per day, which is two cases a week, so she told the truth again, Mrs. -- Margot Putney did.
So I asked Sharon Putney, which is another Dr. Mitchell record, that says your mother -- she had a six-pack of beer per day, do you see that?
Answer: I see that.
Question: And that s on a different occasion. Do you have any reason to believe that she would mislead that doctor?
Answer: That's got to be a mistake. There's no way she drinks six beers a day.
So we now have someone else making a mistake. First it was Dr. Mitchell on one day, now it's Dr. Mitchell.
What about this? This is on a completely different doctor, February 8th, and the form is filled out that Mrs. Putney is a heavy alcohol consumer, 48 cans per week; same thing she told Dr. Mitchell, same exact testimony.
So I asked Sharon Putney: Did you at least see the where it -- yeah, I see it checked off.
Do you see the word 48 cans per week?
I see that, yeah.
And again, do you have any reason to believe that your mother would mislead this doctor?
She wouldn't mislead. That's not right, there's no way, she couldn't drink that.
So I just respectfully suggest that Sharon Putney for some reason thought that she had to minimize her mother's alcohol consumption, and that's what she told you under oath in this courtroom.
By the way, one other issue Sharon Putney told you about that I just want to call to your attention. Sharon Putney did not want to admit that she ever told her mother that she should stop smoking because cigarettes will hurt you.
She said she only told her mother that it's a smelly habit, dirty habit. And so this was what Sharon Putney said under oath.
See, she thought it would hurt her case if she admitted that she told her mother that she should quit smoking because it could harm you.
Question: Why would you tell her to stop smoking, what would be your reason?
Because it was a dirty, smelly habit.
Question: Did you ever tell your mother to quit smoking because it might harm her health?
Answer: I don't remember telling her about the health issues.
Her live-in boyfriend for many, many years, David Hulette, gave exactly opposite testimony under oath to you, and he testified and specifically Sharon told her mother that smoking was unhealthy, correct?
Answer: Yes.
That was the testimony from her. And Mr. Hulette said he was like a member of the family so he should know.
And then Sharon Putney, I asked her this question: Am I correct, you did not know that cigarette smoking could be harmful to people until approximately 1995 when your mother died, is that right?
Answer: Correct.
You would have been 36 years old at that time?
I just turned 36.
This is Dr. Glassman, her expert, the expert for the Putneys, under oath. And in formulating your opinions in this case, you've found that testimony of Sharon Putney in your words hard to
accept, right?
Answer: I don't remember exactly what I said, but it's hard to believe that in 1994 somebody still didn't recognize that cigarettes caused at least lung cancer.
That was the testimony from her own expert.
And then a juror asked, somebody wanted to know the following. Up until you were 36 years old, did you ever hear of anyone in or outside your family who became ill from smoking? Good question.
Answer: Well, none of my friends did, none of my family that I knew. But yes, yes, I heard people dying from cigarettes, none of my friends, none of my family, I heard people dying from cigarettes.
You can judge that testimony.
You can also judge this testimony about what happened in the filing of this lawsuit.
First of all, the letter was read off to you that Mrs. Putney left or gave to her family on her last birthday, it was read off by counsel and all of us have sympathy for -- that was a very sad occasion for the entire family and no one will minimize that, but there's no evidence in that letter that Margot Putney ever believed that she
had any claim against the tobacco companies.
As her mother giving directions to these kids, nothing, and there's no evidence that Margot Putney ever suggested that she would have a valid claim against the tobacco companies.
And what happened, from the testimony,
Mrs. Putney died in May of 1995. And you had Sharon Putney's deposition read to you at the end of Phase I where Sharon Putney testified that Sharon, Glenn and Guy first discussed and decided to file this lawsuit in 2005. That's ten years later. Ten years later they say they first even talked about filing this lawsuit, and then two years later it gets filed.
And so plaintiff's counsel when he was trying to win in Phase I, he said the delay in filing this lawsuit is not for Phase I. It will become abundantly clear if we go to Phase II why the Putney's suit was not filed before it was, there will not be any mystery over that, that will be explained 100 percent completely.
I waited and I waited and I waited, because Sharon Putney testified and Guy Putney testified and Glenn Putney testified and I never heard anyone, anyone, try to explain to you what possibly
could have happened to them.
Records were destroyed. You're sitting here as jurors, you decide about the validity of this lawsuit in light of the filing of the lawsuit.
That's the testimony of Sharon Putney. Yes, that's when she decided, 2004, yeah, 2005.
There's one other issue I want to talk to you about that might not be obvious, it's important to my client, Philip Morris, you see, my client, she only smoked my client's cigarettes for a short period of time. It's not in dispute, it was four years, 1978 to 1982. That's only ten percent of her smoking activity.
The plaintiffs, they have the burden of proof to establish that smoking cigarettes for only four years is sufficient to have caused Margot Putney's lung cancer and death. And I waited for them to call a medical expert to prove that to you, and they did not.
They did not call any medical expert that explained to you or testified that smoking cigarettes just for four years is going to cause lung cancer of Mrs. Putney. And had tney called someone, I would be able to cross-examine them and they did not. They did not call any witness.
This is the evidence right here on the screen. This evidence is from Sharon Putney's testimony. Margot Putney smoked Reynolds products for many, many years, then she smoked a Liggett product for many, many years, and then she smoked Merits for just four years, from 1978 to 1982, and then she went back to Reynolds product for many, many, many years. And -- oh, and she also smoked Benson & Hedges, which was less than 20 packs of cigarettes over 40 years, that's ten days of smoking. So she smoked Benson & Hedges occasionally when she get -kind of a free deal of some type.
But she smoked cigarettes, my client's cigarettes, for four years on a regular basis. And so the question you have to ask is, what is the evidence that smoking cigarettes for only four years is going to cause lung cancer? And the answer is none. There's not a single witness that came into this courtroom and testified about that.
And that's why when I get to the verdict form, I'm going to show you why and what that means as far as my client is concerned, because it's incredibly important, and that's what the evidence is right now. Think about it just for a moment.
She started smoking my client's cigarettes 23
years after she started smoking cigarettes. According to the evidence, she was addicted to smoking cigarettes after a few years. That means she was addicted to smoking long before she ever, ever picked up a Philip Morris cigarette, ever.
In fact, that's not in dispute in this case.
So that's important evidence, which is why when you get to the verdict form, this is the first question on the verdict form.
Please state as to each defendant whether the negligence on the part of the defendant was the legal cause of Margot Putney's death.
I've walked through now with you all of the evidence that shows whatever conduct we engaged in, negligent or otherwise, whatever conduct they proved up, she never relied upon it, she never paid any attention, there's not a single piece of
evidence and, therefore, that alone you would check off for these tobacco companies "no."
But for my client, there's even another reason, very, very important. They didn't even prove that my product could have been the legal cause of her injury because nobody testified that smoking cigarettes just for four years will give you lung cancer, nobody testified to that in this
courtroom.
And so on that first question on the verdict form, for all the defendants you should check "no," but particularly because of Philip Morris, there's no question that answer should be "no," based on the evidence that's been presented during the course of the trial.
The next question is the same type of question dealing with defective cigarettes, whether it was a legal cause of her death. It's the same reason that we had before. If no one testified that smoking cigarettes for four years, the answer to that question is also "no" for Philip Morris.
Next question on the verdict form. Please state as to each defendant whether Margot Putney reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement by that defendant which concealed or omitted material information and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her death.
There has been no -- I'm not going to repeat the testimony. There is no testimony from any witness that Mrs. Putney ever even saw or relied upon in any way anything done by these tobacco companies, zero.
So you first would have to know about it,
you'd have to read it, understand it and then you got to find out was there something that she saw that was then misleading because it left something out? You can't even get to that step in this case, because there's no evidence from anyone that she saw any specific -- let's just take my client, for example.
There's no evidence that she saw any statement made by my client or relied upon anything my client ever said or did, and then testimony that, well, that cause her to start smoking or that caused her not to quit. Not a single witness has testified to that.
So this is a very important question on the verdict form, and for all the defendants the answer is "no," and I just, as an example, I used Philip Morris. But there's no evidence that Mrs. Putney relied upon any of the statements or conduct by any of the tobacco companies, and so this question number three on the verdict form, there is no evidence at all to support that Mrs. Putney reasonably relied on anything that we said or did which then supposedly -- we supposedly said something or did something, and then that concealed information and then she relied upon it,
there's no evidence, zero on that.
THE CLERK: Twenty minutes left, counsel
MR. WEBB: How much?
THE CLERK: Twenty left.
MR. WEBB: Thank you so much.
This verdict form question is essentially the same, this is another reasonable reliance question. You can read over it when you deliberate. It deals with an agreement between the defendants to conceal or omit material. Again, there's not a single piece of evidence of reliance, zero. The answer should be "no" for each of the defendants.
Let me get to this part of the verdict form.
If you checked off that we don't have liability, you will not get to this portion of the verdict form, but I want to talk about it because I don't know what your verdict's going to be. And if you get to the verdict form and you're starting to decide damages, you have to decide percentages.
And you get to decide what is the evidence as far as who's responsible for Margot Putney's smoking decisions?
I just spent a lot of time walking through what the evidence is. You get to decide that. If Margot Putney is the one who made her own
decisions, she didn't rely upon tobacco companies, then it is her responsibility, but you'll decide that. I'm not going to decide that for you, you can talk about and you put on that line what you think is the right amount to put on that line for Margot Putney. And if you decide to allocate among the three defendants, you get to decide that, you make that choice. But when you do that, I would remind you of this, when you -- if you start to allocate fault among the three defendants, then I respectfully -- obviously, you have to be fair to each of the defendants, it's not going to be the same for each one.
She only smoked my product ten percent out of 40 years. She smoked my client's product for four years, and so you're going to need to allocate.
And I'll just respectfully suggest that the amount that you would allocate to Philip Morris based on whose cigarettes she smoked would be quite small depending -- and you make that decision. I won't make that decision for you, but you're going to have to make judgment calls if you get to that far on the verdict form.
And so, but in my case, she -- 23 years she was already addicted. It was -- she started
smoking my client's 12 years after the warning label went on. So she had warning labels for 12 years before she picked up a Philip Morris cigarette. So you decide how to allocate in connection with that question.
Actual damages. I'm not sure what -- let me -- they want 15 million dollars, so you -first of all, let's start with if you get this far on the verdict form, if you found that we are liable, the first question deals with medical expenses. This is what the evidence is. It's not in dispute.
They have medical expenses of $83,996.
Funeral expenses, 2600. The total is 86,688. An so, yes, they're -- if you get that far on the verdict form, if you do, and you found us liable, then you should give them that money, okay, because that's money they're entitled to and you should
?ive it to them, if you get that far on the verdict orm.
But they now want 15 million dollars on top of that. And I talked to you -- I'm not going to repeat what I just said, I don't have time, I need to move on to another issue -- you get to decide that; out of fairness, you decide, are they
entitled -- based on the facts that I just talked about, are they entitled to some huge sum of money for loss of companionship? You decide that. But when you do, I'll make a suggestion, you want to just find a number that's fair.
They get some reward, but not rewarded becoming millionaires. $300,000, on top of the 86, and there, is that fair? Well, you get to decide that. I'm not going to decide that for you, but I will say this, 15 million dollars is outrageous based on the evidence in this case.
There's one more question on the verdict form. It's called punitive damages. And I want to talk about my client Philip Morris because this question -- counsel told you he wasn't even going to ask for a specific amount, that's because he knows he's not entitled to it. Here's what -punitive damages are -- see, now they, on top of the 15 million, they want some other huge sum of money called punitive damages, beyond compensatory damages. That's what counsel just told you, that's what they want.
But you're going to hear from the evidence and the law that you only give punitive damages if it's designed to punish and deter Philip Morris for its
actions directed at Margot Putney that caused her injury, not actions that could have harmed anybody else.
So what evidence is there, what is the evidence in this case that my client directed conduct at Margot Putney that caused her injury? There's none. There's none whatsoever.
Punitive damages get awarded only if my conduct against her was somehow gross, flagrant, reckless. There's no evidence of that whatsoever. None whatsoever. And, by the way, for punitive damages there's even a much higher burden. It's got to be clear and convincing evidence, and there's no evidence. Let me talk about it.
They're trying to say there should be punitive damages against my client for things that happened 30, 40, 50 years ago, things that haven't occurred in decades, in decades, that's what they're saying they want punitive damage for in this case.
Maybe there can be cases where, yes, because the plaintiff has proven the conduct was directed at her or that the plaintiff the smoker relied on something my client said. That's not this case.
For punitive damages -- one of the major
reasons for punitive damages, if someone is sti
today doing something that you find to be wrong and you want to change it in what they call deterrence, to cause someone to change their conduct because they're doing something wrong today, that's one of the major purposes of punitive damages.
And so let's talk -- I want to talk about that. First of all, as far as what they -- I just want to make sure. I'm not defending the past here. I don't have any need or desire to, although you do need -- this thing about the causation controversy and the addiction controversy, counsel tried to make it like these companies back then were just engaged in all kinds of flagrant bad conduct.
I actually took the time to cross Dr. Feingold because if you went back in that time period, the truth is -- and this is what the evidence has shown -- scientists would not conclude that something caused something else just based on statistics, that's not just me. That's science.
Science requires something called a mechanism, that you need to know why something is effecting the cells and causing cancer or some other problem. You just can't conclude based on statistics.
That's what science -- and everyone in this case
has testified, when the Surgeon General in 1964 decided to adopt something new on causation, my client and the tobacco companies did not agree with that, and they did engage in the scientific debate about that.
But we weren't the only ones. Dr. Feingold tried to pretend like we're the only ones -- what I just put -- these are the people that agreed with Philip Morris and these other companies in the 1950s and 1960's that was statistics is not enough.
This the National Cancer Institute, the College of Chest Physicians, Mayo Clinic, the American Medical Association, most prestigious health organization in the country, the National Institutes of Health and the American Cancer, all of them. And Dr. Feingold finally kept fighting me on it and arguing it, but then he admitted it.
And so the tobacco company -- by the way, from 1966 on, there's no more controversy then, okay, because this is what happened. In 1966, the warnings go on the package. There could be -there's no controversy at that point so you can cut this controversy off in 1966, because these are the warnings that went on the package, and you've seen them over and over and over again.
And this is what the law is from the court. I instruct you, as a matter of law, that the warning labels placed on the cigarette packs by the defendants complied with federal law, and they had no obligation to place any additional warning on their cigarette packages. That's the law in this country that the Court's going to instruct you on.
And so the idea that somehow these warnings are not adequate or that the companies are doing
something that's wrong, we put the warnings on the packs so people know what the risks are, and that happened in 1966, 45 years ago.
Now there should be punishment today in this courtroom on top of requests for 15 million dollars?
And by the way, on the addiction issue, by the way, here's what the facts are. In 1964, guess who agreed with the tobacco companies? The Surgeon General. The Surgeon General in that 1964 report, which they don't want to talk about, the Surgeon General concluded cigarette smoking is not an addiction, it's a habit, because there's a scientific definition for addiction which was not met.
And in the 1988 the Surgeon General admitted
we've changed the definition of addiction and we're now going to conclude smoking is addictive and, yes, Philip Morris and the other companies did not agree with that and they engaged in a scientific debate about that issue.
That's all that happened. That's all that happened. And what's so important, you can call smoking, you can say it's an addiction, call it a habit, call it a very bad behavior, it all comes down to it's because it's hard to quit. And my client has for decades never denied that.
Philip Morris and these other companies have always admitted it's hard to quit.
So the idea for Mr. Feingold -Dr. Feingold -- let me talk about Dr. Feingold, okay, 'cause Dr. Feingold is the only witness that went on the stand to try to say that these companies did something really bad over those years.
THE CLERK: Ten minutes, counsel.
MR. WEBB: Thank you very much.
Here's what Dr. Feingold said. He's their only witness, so I cross-examined him and, first of all, I brought out that he's the only witness that has -- he has -- all he does for the last 30 years
is make money coming into the courtrooms and testifying. He's made -- he said, I think he said, over 20 million dollars and 10 million went to his own pocket, but here's what's more important. I challenged him right off the bat.
I said, Doctor, when you come in and testify in these cases, do you sometimes change your opinion about important issues, based on who's paying you?
And he got indignant. Well, let me make sure I understand. In other words, lie to make money, is that the question? I just need to make sure that's what you're asking.
Question: I'm simply asking you, sir, in your career, have you sometimes changed your opinion about important issues based on who's paying you your fees?
No, sir. I don't lie for money. There's no available money -- no available amount of money that would get me to change my opinion.
I said, okay. Let s talk about it.
And this is what I brought out. Do you remember this?
Before Dr. Feingold started testifying against the tobacco companies, he was testifying in other
cases. Some of them were called asbestos cases, and he testified under oath, swore to tell the truth that smoking is not addictive, he agreed with the tobacco companies and he testified to it under oath.
In fact, as late as 1994, Dr. Feingold testified in an asbestos case, not involving tobacco, that Surgeon General Koop -- the man you saw on the screen -- was simply wrong and that cigarette smoking is not addictive.
Then he comes to his first tobacco trial in 1966, his first time on the witness stand and he changed his opinion. No new science, he just decided someone else was paying him and he admitted that. He changed his testimony and said smoking is addictive. He's now been saying that for 14 years.
And I asked him, I just confronted him directly, and he basically said to me, look, you're right, that's what I've done. Now he says, true, so I said -- I said: When you went on the witness stand under oath before the jury in 1996 you told the jury that smoking is an addiction after you said it wasn't?
He said absolutely. My opinion has been changed.
Question: And that opinion had been changed, that's after you're being paid money to testify against the tobacco companies?
And he said: True.
That's what he said.
So you get to judge the testimony of Dr. Feingold.
Deterrence is the huge issue. If you're going to award punitive damages, you have to decide that my client Philip Morris is doing something wrong today that you want to change.
So I put Mr. Jupe on the stand because I put -- I put on our website for over ten years now no one disagrees that we make it so clear, we're not arguing about causation, we're not standing on scientific principles, we're just -- in order for there to be one message for the entire public health community, even though mechanism has not been established, we say is it right here so clearly, the medical and scientific consensus smoking causes lung cancer, et cetera, no one -Dr. Feingold would not for a moment challenge that. There's nothing that can be changed about that.
The same thing with addiction.
Philip Morris USA agrees the overwhelming
medical scientific consensus, smoking is addictive. We're not arguing about it. Even though they changed the definition, we want one consistent message and we've said it for over ten years.
There s nothing to change there.
And I put Mr. Jupe on the stand because I thought you were entitled to know how we conduct our business today because I wanted to give Mr. Baumberger a chance; if there's someone in this courtroom that thinks there's something you need to change, you're entitled to hear about it. So I put up that scientist because if there's something that we're doing wrong today, he got to cross-examine and show you that there's something that you should change with punitive damages, and there's nothing.
Mr. Jupe explained in detail how the government asked us to lower the tar in cigarettes. They came to us and we worked for ten years together and worked out a plan and we did it.
We have now -- there's no -- we've never added nicotine to our products, ever. No one challenges that. We've implemented the website I just showed you and we've also now completely supported and asked for FDA regulation. There's no industry in the country more regulated than -- what is there
that they think we should change or that you should change as jurors in this case? We did everything the government asked us, we implemented all of these design changes. They worked. Those design changes which took hundreds of millions of dollars we paid for, brought down tar and nicotine levels, according to the Surgeon General.
Mr. Jupe explained that we now offer smokers a wide variety of products so that if you want to get down to virtually no nicotine and tar you can go down to that Merit cigarette, and people do.
That's their choice. We offer lower tar and nicotine cigarettes because they are safer, and we have done that for years. The first lights went on the market in 1970.
Is there anything they want us to do differently? They want us to take the product off the market? This is a legal product. Someone else will have to make that decision, not us in this courtroom.
This product has been legal forever in this country. The government taxes it at the rate of 50 percent, and that's a choice the government has made. We're not here in the courtroom about taking the product off the market.
But we accepted the challenge, can you make them safer, and we did and that product, that Merit Ultima at one milligram of nicotine and one -that's 1900 percent lower than the higher products and smokers have it available because we invested the money to do it. We even -- you heard the story, we even invented the cigarette that took all the nicotine out because we thought maybe it would sell and it didn't because people didn't like it, but we did it. Is someone going to blame me for doing that? Is that -- and we also invented this Accord cigarette that doesn't even burn tobacco, it heats it, and it would reduce tars to nonexistent levels. It didn't work.
THE COURT: You have five minutes, sir.
MR. WEBB: Thank you very much, Your Honor.
Advertising, is there something we're doing today as far as advertisement of cigarettes that someone needs to change? This is what the evidence is. We advertise nowhere. It's gone. You can't find -- the only place in America today that you can find a Philip Morris sign, which is perfectly legal, it's just right at the point -- it's called point of sale. If you want to buy cigarettes, the store can put up a sign that says Marlboros are
here, that's all.
You can't find -- television's been gone for decades, radio. We took all magazines off on our own and all of these stadiums, billboards, all that's gone. There is no visibility today.
We get a sign at point of sale and we communicate with our own smokers. If they want us to communicate with them, we send them direct mail, when they're adults. They have to be adults.
There is no -- I've not heard and when I put Mr. Jupe on the stand, if they thought we were doing something wrong in advertising and that you should change it with punitive damages, why didn't they tell you? Because it's not there.
FDA regulation. This is important. My client took the position that there's things that can be better in America with these cigarettes, and the FDA has never regulated these products ever in this country.
And we, Philip Morris, actually joined with the government and spent eight years getting Congress -- you may ask why, why would a tobacco company want to do that? And it's because we believe we're a responsible company, we believe that there's good things that can come from the
regulation.
We put it in a letter to President Obama. I don't have time to go through these reasons. But by having the FDA monitor standards, we think it will make it easier to develop in the future less hazardous cigarettes. We think it would be better to be able to tell people when cigarettes are less hazardous if the FDA approves what we say, because we can't say it if they don't approve it. And so, yes, we did that.
Is that a company that you think you should punish today and come in with some huge sum of money and all because of what? What are we doing today they want to change?
The FDA regulates the industry. We knew, that means there's going to be larger warnings, more graphic warnings. We agreed to all these new warnings to come on the package. We agreed. We supported the legislation. And yet counsel started talking to you about is Philip Morris a financially successful company today? The answer's yes.
Is that a reason to punish us today? The answer's no. The law permits punishing to us if there's something to discourage or deter, or if there's something that we directed conduct at
Margot Putney. And the answer is no.
And remember, these damages, they don't go to some -- these damages go into their pocket at the expense of shareholders of these companies; whether it's a mutual fund or a pension fund, that's what they want money to take from these companies to go there. And the evidence does not support that in this case. And so I will and am asking you that on that last question of the verdict form, for Philip Morris, the answer is no and the amount of damages is zero because they have not proven any entitlement to punitive damages based on who Philip Morris is today.
THE COURT: You need to conclude, sir.
MR. WEBB: I will. I'm coming back to where I started, who is responsible for Margot Putney's smoking decisions? You get to decide that, you review the evidence and you make a decision.
Thank you for taking the time to listen to me.



MS. KESSLER: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, ma'am.
MS. KESSLER: Counsel.
Members of the jury.
When we first began this phase,
Mr. Baumberger, Mr. Webb, Ms. Ruiz, and I each had the opportunity to talk with you. We appreciate the attention you have given all of us and the effort you have made to listen to all of the evidence in this case. At the start of the case you heard what the evidence would show. Now I have one last chance to talk to you and talk about again what the evidence did show.
And before I do that, I just want to start by taking us back to where this case belongs, just as I did in my opening statement. As I said then, this case is not about whether
cigarettes should be legal. Cigarettes are a
legal product. It's legal to manufacture cigarettes. It's legal to advertise cigarettes. It s legal to sell cigarettes. And it's legal for adults to smoke cigarettes.
The United States with full knowledge of the risks of smoking has chosen to allow cigarettes to be sold.
Now, the State of Florida exercised its rights to make cigarettes illegal back in the late 1800s, and they repealed that law for a variety of reasons, including, of course, tax revenue.
Your job is not to decide if cigarettes should be a legal product. That's the government's job, and they have decided to keep cigarettes legal and to tax them.
So what is this case about? This case is about one smoker, Margot Putney, and whether or not the defendants should be liable, whether or not the defendants should pay money to her family for the legal choice she made to smoke. And make no mistake about it, as I told you in my opening statement, Defendants are not here to second guess Margot Putney's choice to smoke or to somehow suggest that that choice was wrong.
She alone made choices about her smoking behavior.
In this country our government doesn't tell its citizens that they can't smoke. She chose to smoke a legal product, a product with known health risks, and she had that right.
Now, you heard that the American public knew the health risks of smoking, including that cigarettes could be hard to quit, whatever term was used to apply to that behavior, for decades, certainly long before Margot Putney ever picked up her first cigarette.
And Dr. Hoff talked to you about this just a few days ago. Dr. Hoff was the only history professor you heard from in this case. Plaintiffs' expert who talked to you about the history of cigarettes is a pulmonologist.
Now, the addictive qualities of smoking weren't secret. As you see on the screen, the public health authorities in Florida knew about it as far back as the early 1900s. Dr. Hoff told you that the Florida Board of Health, now that's a Florida government agency on health, in 1906 called cigarette smoking addictive in their official public published newsletter.
In that same year, we're still in 1906, that same year the New York Times published a letter to the editor blaming smoking for President Grant's throat cancer and noted, "It is too bad this little cigarette will kill him some day; that is, it will bring on a disease that will kill him." That was 1906.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Excuse me, I don't think either this board or the last board was in
evidence.
MS. KESSLER: They were shown during Dr. Hoff's testimony and I -THE COURT: Step in the jury room, please.
(Jury entered the jury room at 1:54 p.m.)
THE COURT: First of all, have you shown -MR. BAUMBERGER: Yes, they did, and I did not catch it.
THE COURT: You didn't catch it.
MR. BAUMBERGER: I caught some of it. I just got it just a couple minutes ago to look at.
MS. KESSLER: I gave them to them at the lunch break, and I removed any slides they had objections to, Your Honor. These slides were shown and testified to by Dr. Hoff and have
already been shown to the jury during the trial.
MR. BAUMBERGER: The Florida Health Notes July 1906?
MS. KESSLER: Yes, that exact slide.
THE COURT: But is the document in evidence?
MS. KESSLER: The document is not in evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Are there any other documents that are not in evidence then?
MS. KESSLER: I used demonstrative slides that I had shown to the jury during the trial.
MR. BAUMBERGER: Well, I -THE COURT: Sir, I'm sorry, you had an opportunity. I'm not going to delay her closing or this jury.
Bring the jury in.
(Jury exits the jury room at 1:55 p.m. and returned to courtroom.)
MS. KESSLER: The health risks of smoking were also being taught in schools in New York where Margot Putney grew up and went to school.
How do we know this? Because you saw the textbooks that Margot Putney's teachers were required by law to use. Those textbooks said
that tobacco was harmful in many ways and that smoking was being blamed for the rise of lung cancer.
You saw scientific studies linking smoking to lung cancer covered in the popular press of the day. You saw newspapers reporting on these studies in the communities where Margot Putney lived. You saw that coverage beginning in 1950, well before Margot Putney ever smoked her first cigarette.
You saw Reader's Digest's extensive coverage of the health risks of smoking in the '40s and the '50s and the '60s. And remember Reader's Digest subscription rate was five or six times higher than any other national magazine in the country at that time.
Those articles included titles like "Cancer By the Carton" in 1952. So extensive was the smoking and health coverage in Reader's Digest that the American Cancer Society hailed it,
hailed the Reader's Digest for its profound influence in creating public awareness.
You saw Time Magazine committing to a recurring column under the title of "Smoking and Cancer." The column started in December of
1952, again, before Margot Putney ever smoked a cigarette.
The widespread concern about the dangers of smoking quickly made its way into popular culture. People were commonly referring to cigarettes as coffin nails and cancer sticks.
And using these slang terms, people were connecting smoking to cancer and associating smoking with being one step closer to death.
And you heard that Mrs. Putney's ex-husband told her not to buy those coffin nails and that Guy Putney referred to her cigarettes as cancer sticks.
Another way that we can see that the health risks were well-known is through other forms of pop culture, including cartoons like this one entitled "The American Way of Death." This was in 1964.
You saw Time and Life Magazines devoting significant coverage to Wynder and Graham mouse skin painting studies. Time even titled its article "Beyond Any Doubt" and went on to note that Wynder and Graham studies showed conclusively that there's something in cigarette smoke that can produce cancer.
Now, what were the nation's leading public health authorities at this time saying about the coverage of the health risks of smoking and whether the public had been warned? Well, way back in 1957, within a few years of when Margot Putney began smoking, the Surgeon General, Surgeon General Burney said, "It's our position that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and TV." 1957.
And he wasn't alone. You heard about the National Cancer Institute. Dr. John Heller, who is the director of the National Cancer Institute, also said -- we're still in 1957 -"The newspapers, radio, TV, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public."
Mr. Baumberger wants you to believe that the public was in the dark, that the companies had information, secret information, that the public didn't know. And as part of that he showed you this morning Plaintiffs' Exhibit 3608, which was a survey of cancer research written by Claude Teague.
Now, when you're in the jury room, you'll have this with you and you can look at it. And when you look at it, you'll see what Claude Teague was reporting on was public scientific studies. Everything in Claude Teague's paper,
all of the research cited was available to the public.
Again, Mr. Baumberger wants you to believe that only the cigarette companies had this information, but this memo contains a survey of published research.
Now, for the period of time before 1966 -you've all heard a lot about 1966 when the warning labels went on the cigarette packs. The government and the public health community was actually saying that warnings were not needed because the public was already aware of the health risks of smoking.
In 1964, the American Medical Association weighed in and said, "The health hazards of excessive smoking have been well-publicized for more than 10 years and are common knowledge." 1964.
Public health officials who were saying back in the 1950s and 1960s that the public was aware
of the health risks of smoking knew what the tobacco companies were saying, and their conclusion was that the public was being informed about those health risks. That's what the public health officials were saying.
Now, we talked to you about the highest ranking health official in the United States and what he said in 1964. That Surgeon General's Report made front-page news in papers across the country, including right here in Fort Lauderdale. It was on the front page, and it was above the masthead. As Dr. Hoff told you, that's extremely unusual for a newspaper to place a story even above the masthead of the paper.
Now, the next question is: Was the public receiving the question?
If you remember, Dr. Dickie was just with us yesterday, and he talked about polls. And the polls he talked about show that the message about the health risks of smoking was reaching the public.
And I've got up on the screen, which we can look at, one of the polls he talked to you about. And you remember this Gallup Poll from
1954, 10 years before the Surgeon General's Report even came out. People were asked if they had heard or read that cigarette smoking may cause lung cancer.
In January of 1954 83 percent of the people surveyed said yes. They said yes, that they had heard or read about smoking and lung cancer.
In June of 1954 Gallup asked that same question and this time 90 percent said they had heard or read about a link between smoking and lung cancers.
The Defendants couldn't hide something that 90 percent of people had heard about.
Now, Dr. Dickie also showed you a slide of a poll from 1964. And this came out shortly after the Surgeon General's Report and it asked people
if they thought that report -- it asked them what they thought the Surgeon General's Report said; and specifically, Did that report say that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer? 78 percent of people knew the answer to that question, yes.
Again, the health risks and the addictive nature of smoking, whatever you call it, weren't a secret. The evidence shows that there's a
massive amount of information available to the public, including information before Margot Putney ever picked up her first cigarette.
In the middle of all this activity in the 1950s, in the middle of what you heard Dr. Hoff describe as the cancer scare, Margot Putney chose to smoke her first cigarette.
After reviewing all of the evidence, you will have to decide if it's credible to believe that Margot Putney did not know the health risks of smoking. You will have to decide if it's credible that instead she relied on a statement by the Defendants.
I ask you to call on your common sense, call our own life experiences. Please ask yourselves, Does it make sense that Margot Putney ignored warnings from her ex-husband, the rabid nonsmoker you heard about; that she ignored warnings from her daughter, Sharon; that she ignored warnings from her sons, Glenn and Guy; that she ignored warnings from the U.S. Surgeon General; that she ignored warnings in newspapers, in magazines, on television; that she ignored warnings on every single package of cigarettes she smoked from 1966 forward; that
she told her children that they should not smoke because it was bad for them; and yet she didn't know the health risks of smoking?
Now, Mr. Webb already talked to you about the verdict form that you'll have to fill out. And let's just take a quick look at it again.
The key questions that you see on the screen are whether the Plaintiff has proven that something that the Defendants did or didn't do made Margot Putney smoke or continue to smoke.
Now, Mr. Baumberger in his closing this morning said that we will talk to you about arguments and suggestions. I think those -- I tried to take notes; I think that's what he said. And it's not arguments or suggestions.
We are talking to you about the law. We are talking to you about the law and that they must prove a connection to Margot Putney to recover the money they are asking you to award.
This case is not about social reform. It is a lawsuit by this family.
Now, the Plaintiff showed you some company documents and advertisements and videos and some other things. And when you review them, when you review those documents and those ads, please
ask yourself, where's the connection?
Now, let me ask you a question. Let s suppose that the Defendants never existed.
Let's suppose that Reynolds never existed, but there were other Defendants manufacturing cigarettes. Does that mean that Margot Putney would not have smoked?
Suppose that none of the company documents that you saw in this case had been written. Do you really think that means that Margot Putney would not have smoked cigarettes? Of course not.
If the companies had said anything more or anything different about the issue of smoking and health, would Margot Putney have paid any attention to it?
If the companies had said anything more or anything different about the issue of smoking and health, would Margot Putney have acted on it?
And if the companies had said anything more or anything different about the issues of smoking and health, would Margot Putney have never started smoking in the first place, or would she have quit earlier than she did?
Even today people choose to smoke. They're fully informed of the risks, but they still choose to smoke. Plaintiff has not proven at all that Margot Putney would have made any different decisions with any different information.
Now, Judge Streitfeld is going to instruct you that the law is you can't punish the tobacco companies for acts that have nothing to do with Margot Putney. That means you have to disregard everything that's out there that isn't tied to her. If there is no evidence she relied on it or even saw it, you have to disregard it. And that's only fair. If there's an internal company document that she didn't see, it couldn't have affected her choice to smoke.
Plaintiff hasn't shown you a single statement that Margot Putney ever saw that came from Reynolds, not one. They can't prove she relied on it if they can't tell you what the statement was. It's not good enough to say that cigarettes were advertised, that movie stars smoked, that it was cool. None of that amounts to a statement from the Defendants on which Margot Putney could have relied.
So when you get to the verdict form, you should check "no." You should check "no" for my client, Reynolds, and you should check "no" for the other Defendants.
Now, I want to talk to you for just a minute about Winston cigarettes. Tom Monahan, we've talked about Mr. Monahan this morning, he was the only one who supposedly saw Margot Putney's early Winston smoking. And he claims she started smoking Winstons in 1953. But as you heard later, he must have been wrong on the date because Winstons weren't even on the market
until 1954.
As Mr. Webb stated earlier, Margot Putney never told Tom Monahan why she started smoking, and Margot Putney's children were not even born when she had her first cigarette. There is simply no evidence that any ad or statement from Reynolds or the other Defendants influenced her choice to start smoking and to continue to smoke.
Common sense is enough to tell you that an ad for a cigarette does not mean the cigarette is safe, ignore all other information about health hazards, ignore what your family is
telling you, ignore what you're reading in the newspapers and magazines, ignore what you were seeing on television, and ignore the Surgeon General.
And here's what Plaintiff is asking you to accept: That Margot Putney didn't believe scientific studies in the '50s about the dangers of smoking that reported in the newspapers and magazines that she read and on the television that she watched; that Margot Putney didn't believe her ex-husband; that Margot didn't believe her children; that Margot didn't believe the Surgeon General, and that Margot Putney didn't believe the warnings on cigarette packs since 1966. They are asking you to accept that she rejected all of that information, all of those warnings because of an ad or a statement from a cigarette company.
They want you to reject all the information we know she received. They want you to ignore it, instead take a leap that she relied on information that there is no evidence she received.
Now, Mr. Webb addressed the Plaintiffs' demand for compensatory damages and outlined an
approach you should consider if and only if you determine the Putneys are entitled to any recovery at all. And it's our position that they have not, they have not met their burden and are not entitled to recovery.
But as Mr. Webb has pointed out and as I just pointed out, I suggest that you should check "no" when asked if Plaintiff is entitled to recover. But should you find for the Plaintiff, my client joins in his suggested approach to compensatory damages.
Now, there's a final question on the verdict form, a question about punitive damages. And, again, Defendants believe you shouldn't even get this far down on the form. If you check "no" on the earlier questions, you will not even get to these questions.
And I'm not going to repeat all of the law that Mr. Webb has already gone over with you, but I do want to talk to you about my client, Reynolds.
Now, Dr. Figlar of Reynolds was here, and he talked to you. And he told all of us about the
studies Reynolds' scientists have published over the years, starting in the 1950s and continuing
today. And if you remember, Dr. Figlar said there was something called the NCITWG. That was the National Cancer Institute Tobacco Working Group. It was a governmental group. And Reynolds' scientists actively participated in this Tobacco Working Group. It was a cooperative effort with the federal government.
In fact, for 10 years Reynolds voluntarily joined with the government to research and design safer alternatives to conventional cigarettes. Reynolds didn't have to do it, but they voluntarily did so. If they were acting in a reckless disregard for human life, Reynolds could have said forget it and they wouldn't have participated.
Now, you heard from Dr. Figlar and from Mr. Jupe and a little bit in Mr. Webb's opening about the efforts that our clients made to reduce the risk of cigarettes.
If Reynolds was acting wantonly or flagrantly or with reckless disregard, they would not, as Dr. Figlar described to you, devote a whole research and development program starting in the early '50s with thousands of scientists to try and reduce tar and nicotine
and other risks associated with smoking.
Dr. Figlar told you that Reynolds currently uses each and every one of these harm reduction techniques in designing and manufacturing its cigarettes. In fact, Reynolds invented two of them, reconstituted tobacco and expanded tobacco.
And that's proof that Reynolds wasn't just going through the motions.
Let's see what the Surgeon General said about what my client and the other companies were doing in terms of reducing the risk of harm.
You see on the board the Surgeon General's Report card. This was from the 1979 Surgeon General's Report. And Dr. Figlar told you that almost all of these methods, all the methods he talked you through, were given a plus or a double plus by the Surgeon General on significantly reducing tar and nicotine. The Surgeon General was giving the companies positive feedback on the efforts that they were making.
Now, I'm not telling you that cigarettes are safe. Make no mistake about that, and neither
was Dr. Figlar. It's dangerous. No one disputes that. But Reynolds was not acting in a reckless -- with reckless disregard or wantonly or flagrantly when it tried to make all the improvements and the Surgeon General was giving them pluses in their report card.
Dr. Figlar instead told you that Reynolds manufactures cigarettes with a wide range of
nicotine yields because the smoking public demands different cigarettes from full-flavor cigarettes to brands like Carltons, which deliver substantially reduced amounts of tar and nicotine. All of those products, all of that product range are legal products.
Now, looking at this talking about tar yields. Dr. Figlar showed you the trend for tar yields for the very Winston cigarettes that Margot Putney smoked, and he showed you a pattern of significant decline in tar yields since 1954. That same trend that lowered the tar lowered the nicotine in the cigarettes.
More cigarettes that you heard that Margot Putney smoked after smoking other companies' brands for over 14 years, their numbers came down as well. This was a direct result of
Reynolds' efforts to design safer cigarettes.
Dr. Figlar also discussed with you the development of smokeless tobacco products and the massive undertaking and commitment by Reynolds to develop Premier and Eclipse cigarettes.
THE CLERK: 10 minutes.
MS. KESSLER: We saw the substantial reduction in the various compounds for both of those products. Remember the slides that Dr. Figlar showed you. And Dr. Figlar also told you that Reynolds published, they shared with anyone who wanted to read it, they published the results, all of their testing results on Premier.
Now, Dr. Figlar even told you that when he smokes, he chooses to smoke Eclipse. He is aware of the dangers of cigarettes, but when he smokes, his product choice is Eclipse. The development and manufacture of those products demonstrates that Reynolds was not acting wantonly, flagrantly, or in a reckless disregard. Instead Reynolds' R&D has been and is doing everything it can to develop products that may significantly reduce the risk of
disease.
So when the Surgeon General changed the definition of addiction in 1988 for the first time in 50 years and said that cigarettes are now considered addictive in the same class as heroin and cocaine, it was not a flagrant and reckless disregard for human life when the tobacco companies said, hey, wait a second, we don't think heroin addicts or cocaine addicts are the same as somebody who picks up a pack of cigarettes.
And you heard from Mr. Baumberger that the Reynolds CEO in 1994 testified that he didn't agree with the classic definition of addiction. He did not say quitting smoking is easy. He just said, look, under the definition, cigarettes aren't intoxicating and they aren't the same as heroin or cocaine.
Most importantly, Margot Putney had quit
smoking by the time they testified in Congress. Nothing Mr. Johnson said could have had any effect on her.
Going back to the -- if we can look at the verdict form.
The mere fact that Reynolds manufactures,
advertises, and sells cigarettes does not amount to punitive damages. Whatever your views on tobacco companies, this is all legal conduct.
So with that evidence in mind, when you answer this question, if you even get to it, I want to ask you to answer it with a no.
And I want -- before I go to my last topic I want to make it perfectly clear, based on the evidence you've heard in this trial, the Plaintiff has not met her burden of proof with respect to punitive damages and is not entitled to punitive damages.
Compensatory damages are meant to compensate the Plaintiff for their injuries. In other words, to determine compensatory damages you look at what the Plaintiff has lost and compensate them for that loss, and that fully compensates them. So if you deliberate and decide to award compensatory damages, you will have made the Plaintiff whole.
Punitive damages are different. They have nothing to do with compensating the Plaintiff for a loss. They are an award of cash over and above that amount that you determine fully compensates the Plaintiff. Every dollar that
you award a Plaintiff in punitive damages is a dollar over and above what you've already determined fully compensated it.
The other thing I want you to keep in mind is who receives that award. You can only award punitive damages to the Plaintiff, not to the American Cancer Society, not to some other group. Any punitive damages are just going directly to the Putneys.
Now, while I think that no punitive damages are justified in this case, if you find that they are appropriate, I suggest that $500,000 is a reasonable number for Reynolds. And I want to make it clear that I am only speaking for Reynolds on this. I am not speaking for the other Defendants.
Now, why do I suggest that amount? In this case we learned that Margot Putney started smoking in the mid 1950s. That was about 10 years before the first warnings appeared on cigarette packages. And as you heard -- if we can go to -- as you heard from Dr. Dickie, by that time 93 percent of smokers were aware of the warning labels in 1966. From that point on, from 1966 on, there can be no doubt that Margot
Putney was aware of the risks associated with smoking.
And so attributing, for Reynolds, attributing $50,000 for each year during that
period equals $500,000 or half a million dollars. I respectfully ask you to consider that a payment to her family of $500,000 over and above any amount you've determined fairly compensates her is absolutely reasonable. And, again, this is only if you determine punitive damages are warranted, which, again, I submit they are not.
The judge will instruct you on the law.
We can look at that.
As he will tell you, You have heard evidence concerning harms suffered by persons who are not parties to this case, and you may not award punitive damages on behalf of those other individuals. Any punitive damages you award must represent the punishment you deem appropriate for Margot Putney. Other individuals who have been harmed can bring their own suit and seek compensatory damages in their own right. She was just one of thousands of smokers, Margot Putney was just one of thousands
of smokers in Florida who was a part of the class that led to the findings the judge has already read to you.
And Judge Streitfeld will instruct you that other individuals who have been harmed can bring their own suits and seek compensatory and punitive damages in their own right. That means thousands of other Floridians have the same ability to come into this Court as Margot Putney's children have. And each of those individuals have the same ability to seek their own damages. The damages here are only for her children. I ask you to consider that when you deliberate.
Now, we're nearing the end of a long trial, and I'm almost finished. But before I sit down, I want to remind you of a few things.
Mr. Baumberger will have a chance to talk to you again because his client has the burden of proof. He gets the last word. I don't get to stand up and respond to anything he might say. And when he talks to you again, I want you to ask yourself two questions. The first is: Did you see any evidence connecting any negligence or defect to Margot Putney? Did anything
Mr. Baumberger is trying to convince you of mean that Margot Putney couldn't quit smoking? And the answer to those questions are no.
We know Margot Putney could quit smoking because she did quit smoking. And because we know this, I ask you to answer no for all the Defendants on the first two questions of the verdict form.
The second question is: Did anything he is telling us about what tobacco companies said or didn't say, did or didn't do have any direct link to Margot Putney? And the answer to these questions are also no for all the Defendants. Because of this I would ask you again to check "no."
Let me also ask that when you deliberate and discuss this case amongst yourselves that you trust your recollection of the evidence and have the courage in your convictions and stick with your views of the case. You need not and should not compromise your views.
Sympathy cannot be a guide. You must be guided only by the law and the evidence.
Finally, I want to thank you again on behalf of my team and Reynolds for your attention and
your service throughout this trial. Thank you.



MS. RUIZ: Good afternoon. May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, ma'am.
MS. RUIZ: I'd like to begin by saying that it has been a privilege to be here in Judge Streitfeld's courtroom representing Liggett in this case. On behalf of all of the parties and Liggett in particular, thank you for your time, your attention, and your commitment to jury service. We know it wasn't easy, and we appreciate it.
As you've heard throughout the trial,
Mr. Webb and Ms. Kessler have already covered much ground, and I will do my best not to repeat what you've already heard.
As you heard, one of the things you'll be asked to determine when you go back to the jury room to deliberate is whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by Liggett was the legal cause of Margot Putney's death. Based on the evidence that you've heard, smoking cigarettes was not the legal cause of her death.
As Ms. Kessler went into detail, you saw the hazards of smoking were well-known by 1953, when Margot Putney started smoking.
You've heard about the Life Magazine story that covered the mouse painting study and all of those other articles that are in evidence that you'll have an opportunity to look at.
The first Surgeon General's warning went on the cigarette packs and cartons in 1966. By 1972, when Ms. Putney began smoking Lark brand cigarettes, the Surgeon General's warning that appeared on every pack and every carton of cigarettes that Ms. Putney touched said, "Warning, the Surgeon General has determined that smoking cigarettes is dangerous to your health." You saw that warning and others throughout the trial.
She made a choice when she started smoking with actual knowledge of the potential risks.
She made a choice when she continued smoking with actual knowledge of the potential risks.
All of the experts who testified in this case, whether for the Plaintiff or for the Defendants, confirmed that smokers can and do quit. And Ms. Putney actually did quit without
any assistance, cold turkey, as you heard, in 1994. There's no reason why she could not have quit sooner, but for the fact that she really didn't want to.
The bottom line is, and all the experts agreed, if you don't want to quit, you're not going to quit. And for these reasons, smoking cigarettes was not the legal cause of Margot Putney's death.
Now, the others have discussed brands that Ms. Putney may have smoked that were manufactured by the other Defendants. I'd like to talk to you about Ms. Putney's smoking of Lark brand cigarettes manufactured at the time by Liggett.
You heard from Sharon Putney and Glenn Putney about Ms. Putney's smoking of Lark brand cigarettes. I'd like to show you what the testimony is.
We heard from Glenn Putney. He testified, "Because Larks didn't last that long, maybe roughly five years or so, and then Merit came up for four years roughly."
Sharon's testimony was a bit inconsistent on her mom's smoking of Lark brand cigarettes, but
she testified: "Question: Your recollection is that your mom stopped smoking Lark brand cigarettes around 1977; is that right?
"Answer: Yeah.
"And do you think your mom may have started smoking the Larks in the early '70s? Does that round right?
"Answer: Yes."
She further testified: "Do think that maybe your brothers or your cousin Tom Monahan may have better information about the brands that your mom smoked than you did?
"Answer: Prior.
"Question: About the earlier brands?
"Answer: Right."
Taking this testimony together, it is more likely that Ms. Putney smoked Larks from 1972 to 1977. That's five years out of a total of 40 years that she smoked. This is well after the hazards of smoking were well-known by the public and Margot Putney, well after the warnings were placed on packs of cigarettes that you saw during the trial. Ana no one came here and testified that smoking Lark brand cigarettes for five years caused Margot Putney's lung cancer.
Now, one of the other issues that you must decide is whether Margot Putney reasonably relied to her detriment on the concealment or omission of material information from a statement by Liggett concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking.
Plaintiff would have you believe that the addictive nature of nicotine and smoking was not public knowledge until only recently. But Plaintiffs' own expert, Dr. Feingold, confirmed just the opposite. Information regarding the
addictive nature and the dangers of smoking have been well-known for decades.
Mr. Baumberger also showed you a number of print and television ads from the '40s and '50s. Some of them were from when Margot Putney was a small child. There's no proof that Ms. Putney saw any of these advertisements. Nothing Liggett or any other company did, including the ads that Mr. Baumberger showed you, caused Ms. Putney to start or continue smoking. That's not just my opinion, that's what the evidence shows.
Dr. Feingold himself testified that he doesn't know if Ms. Putney ever saw any of these
ads. And that's as far as the inquiry needs to go on this point. As much as any lawyer wants to convince you that she could not have avoided seeing these ads, that's not enough to prove that she saw and relied on these ads. It is undisputed that there's no connection between Ms. Putney and any statements.
Plaintiff has failed to satisfy her burden on that point.
Now, the last area I'd like to discuss with you is this notion of company conduct.
Mr. Baumberger spent a lot of time during the trial discussing the conduct of the tobacco companies, and he lumped them together into one group and used terms like the tobacco company or the industry, but remember, your duty here is to hold Plaintiff to her burden of proof as to each Defendant. These are distinct companies.
Now, Mr. Baumberger and I agree on some points. As you heard from Dr. Feingold, Liggett especially was different. After the link between smoking and cancer became known, Liggett chose an independent path from that of the other companies. It hired a well-respected research firm, Arthur D. Little, to conduct research on
the subject.
Liggett and Arthur D. Little turned over that research to the Surgeon General's advisory committee on smoking and cancer. Their submission was 9 volumes thick. It's right there.
Dr. Feingold characterized it as a spin document. Now, the document is in evidence. You'll have an opportunity to look at it if you choose, and you can decide for yourself whether it was a spin.
Liggett's and Arthur D. Little's submission was recognized in the 1964 Surgeon General Report. You will see that acknowledgment in the portions of the Surgeon General Report that are in evidence. Ask yourself, would the Surgeon General of the United States rely on a spin document when making health recommendations to the public? I think not.
You've heard during the trial that a meeting took place among certain tobacco company executives at the Plaza Hotel in New York. You
also heard from Dr. Feingold that Liggett was not at that meeting. Out of that meeting came The Frank Statement that Mr. Baumberger spent
considerable amount of time discussing with many of the witnesses that you saw. As Dr. Feingold also confirmed, Liggett did not play a role in The Frank Statement. And when you look at it, it's in evidence, you will see that Liggett's name does not appear anywhere on that document.
Also Liggett was not a part of the TIRC, the so-called industry group you heard so much about; nor did you see any Liggett company executive being interviewed on the news programs that were shown to you.
THE CLERK: Two minutes.
MS. RUIZ: Thank you.
Instead, Dr. Feingold told us that Liggett was the first tobacco company to publicly acknowledge that cigarettes are addictive and cause serious diseases, including lung cancer, in 1966, well before Ms. Putney ever touched a Lark brand cigarette.
Plaintiff has not presented any evidence that Liggett concealed information or agreed with any other tobacco company to conceal information.
Plaintiff has not satisfied her burden of proving that she is entitled to punitive damages
against Liggett by clear and convincing evidence.
As Ms. Kessler said, when I sit down I won't get the chance to talk to you again.
Mr. Baumberger will have another opportunity to talk to you, that is because he has the burden of proof. Plaintiff has the burden of proof so the rules allow Mr. Baumberger to go last.
During jury selection you each committed to set aside your natural sympathy for the Putney family in evaluating facts of this case. You also committed to holding Plaintiff to her burden of proof. Because Plaintiff failed to satisfy her burden of proof, I ask that you return a verdict in favor of the Defendants. Thank you.
