MR. SLOMAN: May it please the Court.
Counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury -- Judge, may I have a quick second just to bring this over here?
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your attention and your patience during this trial. The greatest action a citizen can do is to sit on a jury in their community, and without you, we would not be able to perform our functions, this courthouse would fold. And we appreciate all that
you have done. And I know that I not only speak on behalf of my client, but I speak on behalf of Mr. Reid, and I'm sure he feels the same way.
One thing I'm going to do at the outset, I'm going to get rid of this phone, so it's going to go into a crypt so that nobody ever hears it again, it's off, I've removed the battery.
One other thing, please, if I have offended anybody, please don t hold it against my client. Okay? Things get heated in a trial, and -- but whatever I have done, please don't hold it against Mrs. Reese. Thank you.
This case, ladies and gentlemen, is about the choices R.J. Reynolds made over a 50-year period, the choice to reassure the public that all these reports about smoking were nothing, to create controversy where there wouldn't have been otherwise, and to instill doubt. That's what this case is about.
You know, listening to Dr. Martin the other
day, listening to all the information that was coming out really emphasized and hammered home the point that that was why R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies were putting out their campaign to reassure the public, create controversy, and
instill doubt. We'll talk about Dr. Martin again throughout my remarks.
First thing I would like to do is show you a chart, and it kind of reiterates what the Judge just told us in the jury instructions.
Of course, it's a little off -- it's got to be a little off because even though my phone isn't going to go off, this easel will probably collapse, but hopefully everybody can see it.
In order to be a member of the Engle class, we have to prove that Mrs. Reese was addicted to R.J. Reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine and -which we'll go through the evidence in a minute, but we think that's clear, and that her addiction was the legal cause of her laryngeal cancer and C.O.P.D. Now, you'll hear the term throat cancer or laryngeal cancer. You'll know what I mean when I'm talking about laryngeal cancer and throat cancer.
And addiction is a legal cause of her injuries if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing those injuries so it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the injuries would not have
occurred.
So we'll go through the evidence, and like I said, as far as Mrs. Reese being addicted, it's so obvious that it barely requires me addressing it, but let me go through it.
The obvious facts. She's been smoking for over 65 years. She cannot quit. She is smoking in the face of horrific consequences. And remember, we just have to prove this by the greater weight of the evidence. This isn't a criminal case where I have had -- where we have to prove this beyond and to the exclusion of a reasonable doubt.
Mrs. Reese wakes up, and within ten minutes of her waking, she has to smoke a cigarette. She has to smoke a cigarette despite the fact that she has C.O.P.D. and she can barely get through it. But let's not just take those obvious facts. Let's think about what Dr. Pitchenik said.
Now, Dr. Pitchenik, who is clear -- Dr. Pitchenik lectures and teaches to medical doctors on the subject of addiction. Clearly, he was not a professional witness. He wasn't turning to you with each and every question. He was a little disheveled.
But the point was that he went through all the
criteria, the Surgeon General's criteria, and testified that nicotine is a chronic disease which weakens the motivation to choose quitting because of the powerful psychoactive reinforcing effects of nicotine.
And Julie Reese smoked in the face of horrendous health consequences that jeopardized not only her life, but her relationship with her husband, with relationships with other people, and she had to smoke -- she had to cross a six-lane highway in order to get cigarettes. I mean, this is the action of an addicted person.
And is there anything that corroborates her?
Is there any objective evidence that you can look at?
Well, let's look at some of her medical records from -- none of the -- from her treating doctors.
Mr. Lawson.
This is Plaintiff's Exhibit 103. This is a -Can you make that larger?
Okay. This is November 18th, 2003. "Nicotine addiction/abuse."
Let's go to the next one.
This is her treating physician, Dr. Testa, who
is including this in practically every single medical record that Julie, when she went to see him, he noted that she is addicted to nicotine.
The next one, please.
That was 104. 105, 106. There are so many that document her addiction to nicotine, it's not even funny. So you don't have to accept Dr. Pitchenik. This corroborates Dr. Pitchenik, but it's so obvious that it defies even further discussion about the subject.
By the way, you know, again, "Nicotine addiction and abuse ongoing. Again we discussed the necessity of stopping the smoking because of her lung disease. And this goes -- this is a constant theme. This is in Julie Reese's medical records, which you'll have an opportunity to go back and see.
All right, you can take that down, sir.
Now, we also have Dr. Wingert's medical records. Dr. Wingert, who was treating her after Dr. Harper had left the practice, Dr. Wingert noted her addiction in April 2006. "The patient is doing well and has no new problems, but unfortunately, she continues to smoke and is unable to stop."
These are people who have had nothing to do
with this litigation. This is all objective evidence that corroborates Dr. Pitchenik's opinion.
Can you show the next one, Scott?
Again, this is a October 3rd, 2003 entry from Dr. Wingert. She was -- "carcinoma of the larynx, currently in remission. The situation was discussed with her, she was encouraged to quit smoking. I doubt that she will be able to do this, however, and I will see her at six-month intervals."
So this is a constant theme, this is a constant threat throughout her life. She is smoking in the face of horrendous consequences.
So in terms of addiction -- is there other evidence? Well, we know about her crossing the six-lane highway to get cigarettes. What about
R.J. Reynolds' own internal documents? Okay.
Let's go to Exhibit 71.
This is confidential research planning memorandum on the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine therein.
Let's go to the next page, Scott.
This was, of course, Dr. Teague. Remember old friend Dr. Teague. "In a sense, tobacco" -- this is, I believe, a 1973 internal R.J. Reynolds
document, in which Dr. Teague admits that "In a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry.
"Tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. Thus, a tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine, designed to deliver the nicotine in a generally acceptable and attractive form.
"Our company's position and our industry is determined by our ability to produce dosage forms of nicotine which have more overall value, tangible or intangible, to the consumer than those of our competitors."
This is — they're making our case for us.
And really kind of sums it up right here.
"Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions; hence, no other active material or combination of materials provides equivalent satisfaction."
They're preaching to the choir. I mean, this is -- these are their statements. This is from their internal documents.
Let's go to 88.
And these are all in evidence.
The previous one was Exhibit 71. This is Exhibit 88, and then there is another one, 89. And I'm not going to go through all of these, because I think you get the point.
Let's go to the next page, Scott.
This is an internal R.J. Reynolds document where they were -- it says, "Thus, as the amount of ammonia or ammonium salts in smoke increases above a certain level, the smoke becomes less addictive. More nicotine occurs in free, volatile, rapidly-absorbed form, and the nicotine impact is enhanced."
They're studying the effects of nicotine because they know if, as suggested, the ammonia and the salts are found to make desirable contributions to the physiological satisfactions derived from smoking, we will want to optimize this effect in existing and/or new products." They know nicotine is why they're in business.
And again, this is Claude Teague, June 1st,
1973.
We'll skip 89, because I think you get the point.
Now, why does R.J.R. not just say, all right,
Mrs. Reese, you're addicted, you know, we'll defend it on other grounds? The reason that addiction is so important to R.J. Reynolds is, I think, best exemplified by Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 36. And this is a September 9th -- September 9, 1980 Tobacco Institute memo, which is in evidence.
And the highlighted portion really says it all. "Shook, Hardy," the law firm that was representing one of the tobacco companies, "reminds us, I am told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer slash cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted." They can't defend it if she was addicted.
If there is anybody that's addicted to cigarettes and the nicotine therein, it's Julie Reese.
That's why they had to bring in a professional expert, Dr. Abramson, to tell you the sky is green. She's not addicted. Why isn't she addicted?
Because she hasn't suffered any social or psychological consequences. That's what he said. How about dying? That doesn't quite cut it? No,
no, she's got -- she's got to lose her job or somebody has to walk out the door on her. So absurd.
To reach that conclusion, all you really need to know is how much he was paid on this case and others. 35,000 on this case. He's working on six other cases for the defendant.
One other factor for you to consider about Dr. Abramson, first of all, he doesn't lecture, he doesn't teach doctors. Yes, he does have a board certification in addiction. He took a test. But one thing that I think is important is that over the 20 years of his practice, he's only -- he's treated less than 50 people who are solely addicted to nicotine.
Yeah, he treats people who smoke, as he said, it was a comorbid disease, in other words, people have psychiatric problems and then they also have addiction problems, but he wasn't just treating people addicted to smoking.
What did he fail to consider? He failed to consider all those medical records that I just showed you. By the way, he said he considered them, he really didn't give them any credit. He failed to credit her smoking despite the fact that
she might die from it. That really didn't seem to be a big concern with Abramson.
And he really didn't include -- remember I asked him about his report, and he didn't think it was important to include in that report the fact that she tried to cross a six-lane highway, blind, to get cigarettes.
What did he claim? She's strong willed. This little woman, strong willed, therefore, she was into smoke, this is fun. And then he documented she didn't want to quit. She doesn't want to quit. But when I asked him did you ever ask her why? Why
didn't she want to quit?
Well, if he asked her that, and her testimony in this case, I asked her, "So when Dr. Harper told you that if the radiation treatments didn't work and you would lose your voice box, did that scare you?"
Answer: "Yes, it did. But when Dr. Harper told me if I continued smoking, I had a choice -- a chance of getting it back nine out of ten, but if I didn't smoke, that he didn't think it would come back at all."
Then I asked her, "So did that give you the sufficient motivation to quit smoking?"
She said, "No."
And I asked her, "Why is that?"
She said, "I don't know if you would call it stupid or what, addicted to it, whatever, but I insisted upon having those cigarettes. And I knew what was going to happen. I knew what could happen."
That's -- then I asked her, "Did it worry you that not being able to quit smoking and what Dr. Harper told you, did that worry you on a daily basis?"
And her answer was, "Yes, it did. You're thinking of that constantly. With every cigarette you're having, you think of it."
And then I said, "Why didn't you quit smoking, Julie?"
"I couldn't quit. I couldn't quit."
"And yet you knew from what Dr. Harper told you what the consequences were?"
Answer: "Yes.
"So why didn't you quit?"
Answer: "I couldn't quit. I -- I knew going out in the back and having those cigarettes that were -- never knowing whether I would finish the cigarette or not, I couldn't quit then. I don't
know. Stupid? I don't know. Just stupidity, addiction, whatever."
That's it. It's hard to describe how a person can be more addicted. This is the -- if you look in the dictionary under addiction, you'll see her face.
Now, Dr. Abramson's testimony was just a bunch of psychobabble nonsense, and the reason that they put him up there is because of that. They can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. That was back in 1980 and before.
And remember, the Judge -- you've already heard, use your common sense, and this, again, is a greater weight of the evidence. Remember I told you about a teeter totter in opening? We've -that teeter totter is all the way to the ground.
Now, the next question is did that -- did her addiction cause her diseases. How did the addiction cause her diseases? Well, remember we talked about in her lifetime, she's had more than 7 million doses of nicotine, every puff. Remember we did that calculation?
I	don't know -- I know I bored you to death with that Dr. Eisenberg deposition, I won't do that
again, but mixed up in all of this, okay, there was testimony about how many doses Julie Reese received, doses of nicotine. And during her lifetime, each cigarette is ten doses, ten puffs, and she's had a lot of cigarettes, and we calculated it over 7 million.
Along with every dose of nicotine comes along the 69 carcinogens and toxins that pour into her lungs and into her throat. And that is the cause of her injury. Without the nicotine, she would not be inhaling these toxins, these carcinogens. Very simple. And those exposures caused her laryngeal cancer. Laryngeal cancer is the voice box. And remember, we've got -Let's go to Dr. Harper's records, Scott.
If you could blow up the highlighted portion.
Now, there was some dispute as to whether this cancer was laryngeal or hypopharyngeal. Remember they had Dr. Espinola say, no, it's hypopharyngeal, not laryngeal. Why? Because Dr. Harper originally on one or two documents said it was hypopharyngeal.
Take care of that.
This is the tumor map. This is Dr. Harper's writing.
And that was the other thing. Well, he's not
here, why didn't they bring him in? Well, they could subpoena Dr. Harper, okay, if they thought this was really an issue and wanted to get down to the nitty-gritty. Okay?
But this is Dr. Harper's writing back at the time that the laryngeal cancer was discovered.
It's a T2N0M0 S.C.C., not Southeastern Conference football, but S.C.C., squamous cell carcinoma, of supraglottic larynx. This was right around the end of June, beginning of July 1994, right when it was diagnosed.
Okay, next one.
Now, here are a bunch of different follow-up documents, medical records, documenting that this was a cancer of the larynx. All right, this is July 30th, 1977. Can you just -- this was a radiology report. t2n0 squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx. "Mrs. Reese is now nearly three years post radiation therapy for carcinoma of the larynx," not the hypopharynx.
Next one.
And these are all in the medical records of Julie Reese. You'll have a chance.
October 6, 1994, supraglottic laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.
Next.
July 3rd, T2N0, squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx.
Next.
You can go over and over and over. You'll have the records.
October 6, 1990, supraglottic fragilistic. Supraglottic laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, not
hypopharynx. Okay?
And do we have any more?
All right. Well, you get the idea. There is
more.
Now, what did Dr. Wingert testify to?
Remember he was -- that's not the one that I read, so don't -- let's go to the video. This is Dr. Wingert testifying about it being in the larynx.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. Exhibit 15. And could you describe what this area is here?
A. That's the hypopharynx, an area called the pyriform sinus. It's shaped like a pear, pyriform sinus.
Q. And where the ink circle is where the letter B is, could you describe what this is?
A. Yes, this is the -- this -(Videotaped deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: Okay. I knew the phone wasn't going to go off, but...
There is always a fallback position.
Do you have it?
MR. LAWSON: Yeah.
MR. SLOMAN: We'll try it again. His salary
is -MR. LAWSON: Just shut down there. Just shut
down.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. Exhibit 15. And could you describe what this area is here?
A. That's the hypopharynx, an area called the pyriform sinus. It's shaped like a pear, the pyriform sinus.
Q. And where the ink circle is with -- where the letter B is, can you describe what this is?
A. Yes, this is the -- this area behind is the arytenoid, and this is the epiglottis, and, therefore, this is the aryepiglottic fold, it's the fold between the back of the voice box and the front of the voice box. And the dark area is a tumor on that fold of tissue between those two areas.
Q. Is that the tumor that Dr. Harper identified -A. Yes.
Q. -- on June the 29th, 1994?
A. Yes.
Q. And looking at the lower right-hand quadrant here where the letter C is, can you describe what that is?
A. Yes. That would be a sagittal view of the lesion as seen from the patient's right side looking into the left side of their voice box.
Q. Okay. Now, the area that's marked A with the lines through it there, you had mentioned that that was the hypopharynx?
Right here.
A. Pyriform sinus, yes, hypopharynx.
Q. So is it true that the tumor that Dr. Harper identified was not actually in the hypopharynx?
A. Yes.
Q. It's actually in -- would be it be more correct in saying it's in the larynx?
A. Yes.
(Videotaped deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: Okay, that's the explanation.
Now let's to go the next clip.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. Now, is it your opinion within a reasonable degree of medical probability that Julie Reese's cigarette smoking was a substantial cause of her T2 carcinoma of the left posterior supraglottic larynx?
A. Yes.
MR. REID: Object to the form, move to strike. (Videotaped deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: All right, and the next clip you're going to see is Dr. Harper -- I mean Dr. Wingert talking about the fact that he's never heard of a case occurring in a nonsmoker.
Let's go to that one.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. Would you be concerned if Ms. Reese had developed this type of cancer and not been a smoker?
A. Be extremely concerned.
Q. And why is that?
A. I've never heard of it.
(Videotaped deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: And this is her treating physician, not the -- they'll distinguish, well,
Dr. Harper, he's not here. This was the doctor who took over for Dr. Harper in the same practice, were partners.
Now, the next clip, Scott.
(Portion of videotaped deposition played.)
Q. Now, let's turn now to her smoking. And I believe that we've covered it, but for the sake of completeness, do you have an opinion as to what caused Julie Reese's cancer?
A. Mrs. Cancer -- yeah, Mrs. Reese's cancer was caused by intensive cigarette smoking.
MR. REID: Object to the form, move to strike. Q. And what is the basis of that opinion?
A. Her past history of 50 pack-years of smoking.
MR. REID: Same objection, same motion.
Q. And is that also based on your background and experience?
A. Yes, my -MR. REID: Object to the form.
A. -- lifetime of experience of doing this.
MR. REID: Move to strike the response.
Q. Is there anything in Mrs. Reese -- in Julie Reese's medical records that point to her cancer being caused by smoking?
A. Yes, her past history of smoking.
Q. Which we've gone through?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. In your 31 years of experience as a E.N.T.,
does laryngeal cancer or have you seen laryngeal cancer occur in nonsmokers?
A. No.
(Portion of videotaped deposition stopped.)
ll
MR. SLOMAN: All right. Now, the last clip I'm going to show you about — with Dr. Wingert is him talking about the interplay between alcohol and smoking. And remember, his testimony is, is that, and Dr. Espinola basically agreed, that alcohol potentiates the effects of tobacco, magnifies it. Let's go to that one.
(Portion of videotaped deposition played.)
A. Within your throat, you have your breathing assage, which is — we call your airway, and your wallowing passage, which is your esophagus. Alcohol is ostly swallowed as opposed to inhaled, therefore, I hink alcohol is more a causative agent in cancers of he esophagus and areas around the voice box where it ould come in contact.
Cigarette smoke is actually inhaled right by his area where she developed the cancer. So in her ase, I think that that is more of a causative factor.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
Q. And, sir, is that opinion within a reasonable egree of medical probability?
A. Yes.
(Portion of videotaped deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: Okay, now, what was -- what did Dr. Espinola say?
First thing, let me go to the Elmo, Scott.
Dr. Espinola, first, her opinion was, "It is expected that Dr. Espinola's testimony will include but not be limited to the following: In 1994, Ms. Reese was diagnosed with moderately differentiated squamous cell laryngeal carcinoma following the biopsy of a growth arising on her left aryepiglottic fold."
That was her first opinion. And that opinion came out not before she got all the medical records; she had all the medical records, she saw the tumor map, she saw Mrs. Reese's information, she billed $10,000 to the law firm.
But she changed her opinion. Why did she change her opinion? I submit to you that the reason she changed her opinion, because if it's laryngeal cancer, they're out of the box, they're out of the box.
Why are they out of the box? Because the literature, and Dr. Espinola admitted that if it's laryngeal cancer, the studies have said that H.P.V.
is not a factor. It's not a factor. So she has to -- I don't know. You be the judge of why that opinion changes.
That opinion changes because if it's hypopharyngeal, then there is more of an argument that it was H.P.V. If it's H.P.V., then its not smoking, and 65, 70 years of smoking isn't in play, just disregards it. That's for you to consider.
Let's go -- do you want to go, Scott, to the testimony that we have up there?
H.P.V. page 3, bottom.
No, no, no. Her testimony.
Well, suffice to say that her testimony is that she did not produce this, it was the lawyers, and, therefore, she blamed it on them. And then I
asked her, I said, you remember -- I said -- here it is.
"And your first opinion in this case, Doctor, was a little bit different than what you testified to today; correct? It is expected that" -- and I read the disclosure. "It is expected that Dr. Espinola's testimony will include but not be limited to the following, that Julie Reese was diagnosed with moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, not hypopharyngeal." And I said,
"That was filed November 2010; correct?
"That's correct.
Next page.
Make that larger, please.
"All right, ma'am. You knew when you were hired in this case, you had billed $10,000 by the time that this particular disclosure was made; correct?
"That's correct. And we discussed that" -she said, "we discussed that I did not write that."
"You did not write it? You had been communicating with the law firm of Womble Carlyle for three months at that point; correct?
"Correct.
"And they just prepared that on their own?
"No, we discussed it, but I should have been more specific about the anatomy."
I said, "Well, it's important in this case?"
Answer: "It's very important in this case."
Greater weight of the evidence, a teeter-totter. I don't have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, but, ladies and gentlemen, the $35,000 that she has billed and received for this case should tell you all that you need to know about why that opinion was changed.
Now, what about exposures to -Take that down, please.
What about her exposures to C.O.P.D., severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? First of all, we know that at least 85 percent, maybe more, of all C.O.P.D. is caused by smoking. C.O.P.D. is where the airways are severely obstructed and when you try to exhale, you can't -- it's like breathing through a straw. And when you try to inhale, the air in your lungs get trapped. So you have this incredibly bad feeling that you can't breathe, you can't exhale, you can t inhale.
Julie Reese's C.O.P.D. is severe. There is no -- there is no doubt that she has C.O.P.D. and that it's severe. And according to Dr. Pitchenik, she doesn't have much further to go before she needs oxygen, and then, unfortunately after that, death from C.O.P.D. And it's made worse because she can't quit smoking.
Now, let's go to Dr. Eisenberg's P.F.T.
This is Dr. -- remember that scintillating deposition I wrote -- I read to you? This was Dr. Eisenberg's opinion that he sent to Dr. Testa, her treating -- her primary physician. "Severe airflow -- this is December 3rd, 2010. "Severe
airflow obstruction was seen. There is some reversibility seen, but less than 200 C.C.s to her FEV-1. Impression, C.O.P.D., severe, with ongoing smoking."
Now, during opening, they made a big deal about the fact that, oh, she came in because of a lawsuit. Well, the fact is is that Dr. Testa had diagnosed for years, going back -- and we'll show you the medical records, that she had had C.O.P. --C.O.P.D. going back to 2003. You'll see exhibit after exhibit, medical record after medical record documenting the fact that he believed that she had C.O.P.D.
The reason she went to get -- to Dr. Eisenberg was to confirm, yes, everybody agrees a pulmonary function test will solid- -- will tell one way or another whether she has C.O.P.D. So this pulmonary function test, although it was in December of 2010, confirms Dr. Testa's medical records year after year after year going back to 2003 and the radiology reports, the x-rays going back as far as May of 1994.
So instead of showing you all those medical records, the exhibits that you can look for are Exhibits 102, 103, 104, 105, all the way to 114.
All those exhibits you'll have back in evidence, the hundred series, one after the other after the other will document Dr. Testa, who treated Julie Reese, she had C.O.P.D. all those years.
And they made a big deal that she would lie to her doctors and misrepresent what she -- what her symptoms were. But the reason that she did it was because she didn't want to go on oxygen. She knew that she had this, but she -- smoking is more important to her than being -- being forthright with her doctor. She didn t want to go on oxygen. If she goes on oxygen, then how can she smoke? That's the rationale, that's how crazy this addiction is.
Now, Dr. Pitchenik told us about asthma.
Let's go to that.
That's their defense. This wasn't smoking, it's asthma. Of course.
Dr. Pitchenik's testimony.
Question: "If you had reversibility, would that -- that would suggest asthma?
"No.
"Could suggest asthma?
"No.
"Not at all?
"It would be still totally compatible and consistent.
"If it reversed to normal?
"Then I would say she had asthma."
Remember we talked about reversing. That means if you take a bronchodilator and you reverse and now you can breathe as though you're normal, then that would be asthma. But a little bit of reversibility when you take a bronchodilator, it has to reach a certain threshold. And under the GOLD criteria, it has to be 200 C.C.s. She didn't
meet that criteria.
And Dr. Klein is, well, it almost reached there, we don't know, we could keep testing her over and over and over again, maybe she would get up to that.
That's not the way you do it. We'll talk about Dr. Klein in a second.
"C.O.P.D. can reverse, can mildly, modestly improve. As a matter of fact, frequently does.
"Would you agree that her P.F.T. cannot exclude asthma?"
Answer: "I would say that you take the whole P.F.T. and the D.L.C.O., it's against asthma, just that alone, okay, because the asthma gives you a
normal to high diffusion. She had low."
Okay. So no question, according to Dr. Pitchenik, no question.
"Would you agree that the components of her symptoms would suggest asthma?
"No.
"And it would be consistent with untreated asthma?
"No. And -- I don't think she had asthma at
all."
Okay. Now, I'm sure they'll come up and say, well, the plaintiffs paid for this guy Pitchenik to come in and testify and they bought his testimony. Well, you can be the judge of that. You can be the judge of that. Remember, 85 percent of all C.O.P.D. cases are from smoking. Vast majority.
So it's not as though Dr. Pitchenik's testimony is so crazy. Use your common sense, the greater weight of the evidence, very simple.
Let's talk about Dr. Klein for a second. He's another professional expert. And one thing about their experts, they really swerved towards you, turned towards you and spoke to the jury. It's really impressive how each of them did that, talked to you and established eye contact, it was very
nice.
But remember, they had to go to California to find a pulmonologist who didn't use the GOLD criteria. Couldn't find anybody here, they had to go to California to find this guy.
And he suspects that the reversible component in her P.F.T. is from asthma, is from asthma, even though there is nothing. Not only is there nothing in her medical records except for maybe a wheeze here or there over the years, okay, but Julie Reese testified -- and if there's one thing about Julie, she's honest to a fault. I mean, who else would come in here and tell you that she had, you know, three, four beers a day. I mean, who would check on that? This woman is honest to a fault.
So with regard to her asthma, don't you think she would come in and say, well, yeah, I had asthma when I was a kid or -- she had never been diagnosed, never had asthma, no -- no asthma at all.
The common denominator regarding Espinola and Dr. Klein, each found something in Julie's smoking
that no one on earth had ever uncovered before this trial. In Espinola's case, it was the fact that she believed that her -- it wasn't squamous cell
carcinoma of the supraglottic larynx, no, no, no, it's hypopharyngeal, but nobody had ever thought of that before.
And with Dr. Klein, it was that C.O.P.D. that you have, that's not from the 70 years of smoking, uh-uh, that's from asthma, even though there is no asthma referenced at all anywhere. And you can look through all the medical records till the cows come home and not find one reference to that at all.
You know, Mr. Reid mentioned in opening about the television show C.S.I., remember that? If these doctors had their own television show, it would be called C.C.D., Creating Doubt -- Creating Controversy and Doubt. Okay? Because that's the theme. Going back to 1953, the forwarding memo that we told you about from the beginning, that has been the strategy of the tobacco companies throughout this 50-year conspiracy.
Again, the greater weight of the evidence, it doesn't have to be beyond a reasonable doubt, Julie Reese is addicted and her addiction caused her laryngeal cancer.
And then they may argue something about statute of limitations, that Julie should have
known before 1990, and this is another one that's just beyond the pale, that she should have known that her throat problems four or five years before she was diagnosed with laryngeal cancer, that she should have known, hey, I've got a smoking-related illness, I've got laryngeal cancer, I'd better sue the tobacco companies.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's a desperate attempt to get you off the trail of what's really at issue here.
Now, we expect that you will find that Julie Reese was addicted and that her addiction caused her laryngeal cancer and her C.O.P.D. Now, if that is your verdict, if you answer those two questions that way, then, as you've heard, you will be -- you will find, you are bound by these findings. And these findings, we mentioned that some work had already been done for you, and that these findings are a fact.
If you find that she was addicted and that addiction caused her smoking-related illness, then these apply. These are binding. Even if you don't, geez, that's pretty severe. But as jurors, that is the oath that you have taken, to follow the law as the Court instructs you.
And these are the findings. And you have them in your jury instructions. Smoking cigarettes, another jury has already determined smoking cigarettes causes laryngeal cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cigarettes containing nicotine are addictive.
These are findings. No dispute. Reynolds,
R.J. Reynolds was negligent. R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. R.J. Reynolds conspired with other companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both.
R.J. Reynolds, in furtherance of the conspiracy, concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
Now, how did R.J. Reynolds' actions cause Julie's injuries? How did their negligence, how did their defective product placement, how did their concealment, and how did the conspiracy, how did they cause this woman's injuries?
I'll tell you. First of all, they manufactured a defective product. They designed, you heard Dr. Proctor, they designed a cigarette
that's inhalable. And why is that important? In other words, cigars are not inhalable. They made it palatable, they made it nice and easy to inhale.
And what does that do? Because if you can't inhale the smoke, you can't get the nicotine; you can't get the nicotine, you can't be addicted. Simple as that.
She's addicted because of the fact that it's designed that way, that it's easy to inhale. And if you can't inhale it, you don't get the nicotine; you don't get the nicotine, you don't get addicted.
Now, could they remove that nicotine? Sure. Dr. Proctor testified about this. Remember Dr. Proctor. That seemed like light years ago, almost two weeks ago. We've been here a long time, I know.
But Dr. Proctor, he testified, he called it the fatal flaw of cigarette manufacturing, because it's why we have all the lung cancer. If you have -- if you have it go into your lungs, you get a more rapid, more powerful dose of nicotine.
The lungs are much more suitable to absorbing something like nicotine because they have an enormous surface area, they're actually the size of a tennis court, the inside of your lungs are huge,
and so it makes it easier to get a higher dose and you inhale more, you end up taking in a lot more nicotine.
So flue curing is one of the things that allows, cigarette -- flue curing, remember that, reduced the acidic nature, made it easier to inhale. So flue curing is one of the things that allows -- this is according to Dr. Proctor, allows cigarettes to exist, really because they become more inhalable, they become popular.
And if there's no nicotine, they go out of business. But they designed it that way to keep repeat customers. But repeat customers like Julie end up suffering the effects.
Now, what else did they do? They targeted minors. Now, we're not saying that Julie Reese saw an ad back in 1939 and became a Camel cigarette smoker. That's -- we're not saying that. But it's
not a coincidence that R.J. Reynolds targeted youth smokers.
Scott, let's go to 76.
This is a 1984 strategic research report authored by Diane S. Burrows, and look up there, "R.J.R. secret."
Let's go to the next page.
Make that larger.
"The importance of younger adult smokers."
Now, in this document, 1984, they defined adult smokers as 21 or older, but stay with me. "Younger adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. They will continue to be just as important to brands or companies in the future, for two simple reasons, the renewal of the market stems from -- almost entirely from 18-year-old smokers. No more than 5 percent of smokers start after age 24. The brand loyalty of 18-year-old smokers far outweighs any tendency to switch with age."
I'm sorry, young adult smokers in this memo are 18. But the critical importance is that they -- young adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. This is 1984, so this goes back to the mid 1930s, that's how important youth or young adult smokers are.
Let's go to the next exhibit.
So ten years earlier, and this is Exhibit Number 77, which again, you'll have an opportunity to look at, this is 1975, this is at a marketing
plan presentation in Hilton Head, South Carolina.
And here, the R.J.R. document says, "Our paramount marketing objective in 1975 and ensuing years is to reestablish R.J.R.'s share of market and growth within the domestic cigarette industry. And where are our opportunity areas? Increase our young adult franchise."
All right. But let's look at this paragraph. "First, let's look at the growing importance of the young adult in the cigarette market. In 1960, this young adult market, the 14 to 24 age group, represented 21 percent of the population." So ten years before, in 1974, they weren't really concerned to put on paper that the young adult smokers, the ones that they were targeting, were in the 14 to 24 age group. Okay?
Now let's go to the next exhibit. Now let's go back to the 1920s and look at a letter to the sales staff at R.J. Reynolds. And again, I'm not saying that Julie Reese was approached by an R.J. Reynolds salesman, I'm not saying that.
What I am saying is, is that Julie Reese was their perfect customer, because what R.J.R. did and who they targeted were people just like Julie Reese, and she ended up, according to game plan,
following in lock step to what they sought, what they asked for, and what they did.
This is 1926, and this is "Building a better
business." This is sent to the sales staff.
"School days are rapidly approaching. The fact that several million students will be enrolled this fall, not counting primary schools," that's good, "should cause you to quickly sense the very great importance of this matter. Attached is a list in duplicate of the most important prep schools, colleges, and universities in your division." Prep schools is before colleges. High schools. "Give every school a good working just as quick as possible after it opens."
So when you look at those three documents, 76, 77, 78, you see R.J.R.'s 50-year -- going back to the 1930s, they wanted youth smokers, they cultivated youth smokers, and they got youth smokers.
Okay. Now, they also provided smokers and the uninitiated with harm reduction alternatives. And for Julie, this was -- you remember the testimony was that in about 1947, 1948, after Julie had been smoking about a pack a day of Camels, her throat was bothering her a little bit, so she went to
Kools, because -- and we're not saying that this was the ad, but the point that Julie made -- tried to make during her testimony was that this was the type of ad that she relied on to switch from Camels to Kools.
Let's go to Exhibit 15.
(Video clip played.)
MR. SLOMAN: It's almost comical to see those type of ads being broadcast in this day and age. It's hard to fathom what the world was like then for television advertisement, print ads. And you'll have an opportunity to look at, you know, more doctors smoking, you saw that stuff, it was a different world.
And, you know, you -- we would request that you kind of alter your thinking a little bit about what that world was like when Julie Reese was 10, 11, 12 years old versus somebody who just would start smoking today.
I agree with somebody -- with all the information out today, with all the public service announcements, with everything that's out today, somebody who starts smoking now really is -- would just have a lot of gall to come in and blame a tobacco company.
But this was a different world then. And when Julie Reese started to smoke, this was commonplace. This was commonplace.
Let's go now -- she smoked -- and again, we're not arguing that this was the ad, but this was the ad campaign that was going on, and her time -- and when she started smoking Kools versus Camel, you know, try to build in a little bit of some leeway here in terms of having a recollection as (snaps fingers), when these things happened.
Julie can't come in and say with scientific precision I started this brand on this particular day or a particular year. So -- and we're not trying to say that that's what happened here. But
her best estimate, best guess is that she started smoking Kools in 1947 to 1950 time frame. And then she smokes till -- smokes Kools till about 1957 and then switches to Pall Malls.
Now let's go to -- and she said she switched, she saw an ad. And again, this was the type of ad that she either saw in print or heard on radio or on television.
Go ahead, Scott. And this is Exhibit 15 -I'm sorry, 14.
(Video clip played.)
MR. SLOMAN: What's unbelievable, at this time, that R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies know in their internal documents that smoking causes cancer. They know. You heard Dr. Proctor pin the date to about 1955. And they're putting commercials out about the fun of smoking, reassuring the public that everything is all right, creating controversy, instilling doubt. That's what makes this case so incredibly outrageous.
Now, let's go to Exhibits 85 and 87 real quick.
This was in 1967, '68, when Julie Reese went to the Chicago doctor and he told her that she should quit smoking, and she sees this ad, or an ad like this. And again, ladies and gentlemen, she's not coming in here and saying that's the ad, but this is the type of ad that she saw. "Pall Mall Gold 100s, lower tar than the best-selling filter king. Who says so? The latest U.S. government figures."
Now, you're an addicted smoker and you see something like that and you're faced with the choice, hey, my doctor told me to quit, but wait a minute, this is the low -- lower in tar than the
best-selling filter king. Maybe I'll just stay a smoker.
And Julie's testimony was the longer she smoked, the more addicted she got, and that was consistent with what Dr. Pitchenik said. So if she had any chance to quit smoking, it would have been earlier on, earlier on, in the late '50s, early '60s, maybe even by this time, when -- if the tobacco companies had been straight and just said, you know, we're selling an addictive product, we agree with the medical authorities that cigarettes -- smoking causes lung cancer, we're
going to be honest and say that our research -- we aven't found anything to say otherwise.
But they do just the opposite. So they give an addicted smoker like Julie Reese a psychological crutch to continue smoking.
Let's see the next one. The next one I believe is 87.
The same thing. "U.S. government figures show Pall Mall Gold 100s now lower in tar than the best-selling filter king." Well, if you are addicted, if you are as severely addicted as Julie was, she is going to continue to smoke and use that as an alternative, even though her doctor told her,
hey, Julie, these filter cigarettes, these lower tar and nicotine cigarettes, that's a bunch of bunk. In her mind, it wasn't.
Now, let's go to some clips by Dr. Heimann. Robert Heimann. Remember that guy? He was the president and C.E.O. of American Tobacco Company, which is now owned by and part of R.J. Reynolds.
And let's go to the first -- and this is Robert Heimann talking about advertising, how it plays a role in a person's selection of a cigarette.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. Does advertising play a role in a person's selection of a cigarette?
A. We hope so. When we advertise, it's difficult to confirm this, but we do make the effort, and I think it's fair to assume that the expenditure of large funds for advertising does give status to a brand, and, therefore, influences some people to select that brand. (Video deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: At least he's honest. At least he's honest. And that was the great thing about Heimann, he was honest. He said, you know, we advertise, we hope people rely on it, you know, we don't deny -- I'm not denying that I think the Surgeon General is wrong. And we're going to play
a few of these other ones.
And let's talk about the next clip where he talks about how he expects consumers, like Julie Reese, to rely on these ads.
Scott, this is 12.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. Would you expect a consumer to rely upon your advertisements?
A. Yes, our advertising is truthful and we would anticipate that they would rely on it, if they chose.
Q. That's sort of your promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, isn't it?
A. Yes, it is.
(Video deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: And then he even testified about the very same ads that were playing when Julie switched from Kools to Pall Mall.
Let's go to 13.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. That advertisement begins by telling consumers don't miss the fun of smoking, does it not?
A. Yes, that's what it says.
Q. And it is sort of a promise to smokers that it's fun to smoke, isn't it?
A. It doesn't say fun any -- well, yes, it does
say fun. Don't miss the fun of smoking. Yes.
(Video deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: And let's go to clip 14, which talks about guarding against throat scratch.
(Video deposition being played.)
Q. All right, sir, if you would put that on the board also.
That advertisement associates smoking with a country club scene of golfing, is that accurate, at the top?
A. Yes, I would say so.
Q. And it states, quote, guard against throat scratch, close quote?
A. Right.
Q. It also mentions that it is directed at people to switch to this brand. In the course of that advertising, it asks how many people have changed to Pall Malls; is that correct?
A. How many people changed?
Q. Right where your thumb is, I believe.
A. Oh, yes. Yes. Yes.
Q. All right, sir. Right where your thumb is, I believe.
(Video deposition stopped.)
MR. SLOMAN: So good old Mr. Heimann, he said
we want people to rely -- we want them to rely on the truth of these cigarette ads. At least he was honest.
Now, they engaged R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies, American Tobacco, Brown and Williamson, they engaged in a 50-year conspiracy to reassure the public, Julie Reese, that there is nothing to these medical reports that started out in the early '50s, and one built upon the other upon the other, and the evidence became more and more damning against the tobacco companies, and yet they kept reassuring the public, creating controversy, and instilling doubt.
And, you know, just one more time to show you the Frank Statement. Remember the Frank Statement. 42, Scott.
This is where kind of it all started. And what I like about the Frank Statement and what really kind of hits home -Could you, right, make that first box larger? "We accept" -- this is January 1954, "We accept an interest in peoples' health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. We believe the products we make are not injurious to health. We
always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public's health."
All the tobacco companies sponsored this, and that was the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, the front company for the tobacco industry. They made a promise back in 1954 to cooperate closely with all of them. That couldn't have been anything further from the truth.
They promised the American people that peoples' health, they accept an interest in peoples' health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. Nothing is further than the truth.
Now, what did Dr. Proctor say about all this?
I asked him, I said, "Doctor, do you have an opinion concerning the defendant or the tobacco industry, whether or not it engaged in a coordinated campaign to deny and deceive the American public about these hazards and that this campaign lasted for a length of time?"
Answer: "Yes.
"And approximately how long did this campaign
last?
"In terms of a coordinated effort, it really
lasts for over 50 years, from the 1950s on forward, so it's a multi-decade enterprise.
"Do you have an opinion regarding the defendant slash tobacco industry and when it knew and/or denied that cigarettes were addictive and concealed its knowledge about what it knew about smoking and health and addiction?
"I think certainly by the 1960s, and there are elements of it even earlier into the 1950s.
"As a historian, do you have an opinion concerning the actual design of the cigarette as part of the misrepresenting its knowledge of health hazards and addiction?"
Answer: "Yes."
And he, of course, said it was.
Now, this conspiracy is so plain that it still goes on in this courtroom today.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SLOMAN: Creating controversy, reassuring the public and instilling doubt. Whenever the public health authorities tried to tell the public that filters were a fraud, they came out against it.
Let's go to Exhibit 70, Scott.
This was 1958, false and misleading advertising.
Let's go to the next page.
This was a congressional committee called the Gladnick Committee, and if we enlarge this, it says, "Cigarette manufacturers have deceived the American public through their advertising of filter tip cigarettes. Ironically, while denying the alleged health hazards of cigarette smoking, the cigarette industry has, in its advertising, made these charges appear true."
Let's go to the next page.
And most filter cigarettes produce as much or more nicotine and tar as cigarettes without filters.
Now, in 1960 -- that was 1958. In 1967, another congressional committee, actually, the F.T.C., the Federal Trade Commission -Let's go to 69 -Issued a report -And let's go to page -This was from 1967, report to Congress.
And let's go to page 23, and again, this is Exhibit 69.
It says, "The belief appears to be widely held
that filter cigarettes are less hazardous to health than regular cigarettes." Explains Julie Reese going to those filter cigarettes in 1967.
Next page, please.
MR. LAWSON: Which page?
MR. SLOMAN: Is there a next page on this?
I'm sorry, it's page 24.
"As previously indicated, the belief that filter cigarettes are less hazardous appears to be widespread. It may be assumed, therefore, that to people holding this belief, the word filter itself connotes less hazard, and through addition of suitable adjectives to the word filter, this impression of relative safety can be enhanced."
So they're playing off of peoples' fears, they're reassuring them, and I think we saw Exhibit 42, which was Mr. Cullman from the Tobacco Merchants Association who was on T.V. saying if there is anything hazardous, we can filter it out. Well, that's the belief, that was the impression that they were giving the public and people like Julie Reese.
Now, Julie Reese does take some responsibility in this case. R.J. Reynolds takes zero. And is it really -- the question is, how much responsibility
do you want to assign to her? Okay? Because as a minor, she begins smoking, becomes addicted probably on the cusp between the time that she is 16, 17 years old. But she'll accept your determination of how much blame to assign her of not trying to quit harder.
You've got to remember, we all -- you know, people are different. I don't have to tell you that. And an addiction to some people is an addiction -- is different than addictions to other people. And the severity of an addiction to me may be different than her.
So we're talking about a person who is so severely addicted that she can't quit in the face of horrific consequence. But she is willing to accept your judgment as to how much blame to assign to her for not quitting.
I would suggest that it not be much. Because in the 10 or 15 years from the time that she started smoking, remember, she starts really becoming addicted about 1947, by 1957, there are -the tobacco companies are in full -- in a full court press to deny and to create controversy.
It's not until 1966, nearly -- I'm sorry, 1964 that the Surgeon General's report comes out. So
she had been smoking almost 25 years by the time the first Surgeon General's report came out, over 25 years when the first label came out, first warnings on cigarette packs. So she is -- if she's not far gone by that time, she is close to it.
So this isn't a person who decided to start smoking after cigarette warnings had been placed on cigarette packs, after the Surgeon General had come out and said cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in men. This is a person who had been smoking for 25 -- 24 years before the Surgeon General's report came out. So it's real easy for them to get up here and say she knew, she knew, you know.
And that leads me to Dr. Martin, the last witness. He wasn't an expert on the subject until R.J.R. made him and paid for him to be an expert on the subject. He wasn't a historian like Dr.
Proctor who had written books about tobacco and public knowledge. They came to him in 1994 and asked him to start reviewing all these documents, go to this law firm, Arnold and Porter, go here, go there, we will provide you the documents. That's not really the way historians operate.
Now, he can get up here and produce mountains of newspaper articles and say Julie Reese knew, the
public knew, the Gallup polls, you know, this was so common that you had to be deaf, dumb, and blind not to know.
But when he says that people knew and that Julie Reese knew, what did she know? What did she know? Did she know the extent that -- when she started smoking in 1940 to '47, and even into the '50s, that cigarette smoking could cause her to die? Or did she know that, you know, I heard something's bad about smoking?
There is a difference. When you go to the hospital before an operation, they tell you what the consequences of your operation may be. You may experience stroke, you may -- there is more disclosures on Viagra than there is on a pack of cigarettes.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor, that would be preemption. We re not permitted -THE COURT: I know what preemption is.
MR. REID: The ads are required by the government.
THE COURT: I know what they are.
MR. REID: I don't mean ads, I'm sorry, I mean the warnings are required by the government.
MR. SLOMAN: Am I good to go, Judge?
THE COURT: It's over -- it's sustained.
MR. SLOMAN: It's sustained, okay.
Suffice to say Julie Reese did not know to the level that they claimed that she knew or should have.
Dr. Proctor testified about this during his -during the trial. He said, "But the proof, the scientific proof that it was killing hundreds of people did not come up until later and it did not get a lot of people, especially in the 1940s and '50s, you didn't get a lot of people saying this" -- 'that' -- "ordinary people saying that this would kill them.
"It was an unusual view, it was a rare view, even doctors, it was the unusual doctor as late as the 1950s who thought that tobacco would kill you. That really doesn't come up until later."
So as Julie is dealing with all the issues in her life, from the marriages to her daughter being put up for adoption to waiting on tables, just trying to find some happiness, they're blaming her and saying you should have known, all this information was out there, you had to have been blind, you had to have been deaf.
It's insulting to blame this poor woman who
was addicted because of what they did to her, what they -- their whole plan, from before the
scientific reports came out in the '50s until after, when they tried to reassure the public, create controversy, and instill doubt.
It was their job to tell her, Julie, members of the public, what we've discovered is that there are links to lung cancer, that this information that is coming out appears to be uncontroverted, the way that they had it in their internal documents.
There is -- remember, there is a difference between awareness and knowledge. And on cross-examination, Mr. Kaiser the other day brought that out, I thought very clearly, with Mr. Kirby, Dr. Kirby. If everyone knew, why did R.J. Reynolds spend all that money to create controversy and instill doubt? The answer is it kept people like Julie Reese addicted to smoking and gave her reasons to ignore the public information. It was highly effective. And how do we know that?
Let's go to Exhibit 67, Scott.
We know that their campaign was very effective.
May 1st, 1972, the Roper proposal. This is a
Tobacco Institute document. "While the strategy," they're talking about the doubt strategy, "was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory.
"On the contrary, it's been our only strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it, encouraging," and then they go on. Again, you'll have an opportunity to review this.
Now, with regard to R.J.R. concealed information that Julie Reese did not know, again, R.J.R. knew internally and did not release to the public documents like -Let's go to Exhibit 22, Scott.
This is the survey -- this is the original Claude Teague document.
Let's go to the end.
This is in 1953. This was kept secret. "Studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and incidence of cancer of the lung." This goes way back to the '50s.
And then there is Exhibit 27. And you can
take a look at these later. But Exhibit 27 is another internal document by R.J.R.
Proctor admitted during his direct examination that there was a lot of information on smoking and health, but he points out that the manufacturer was always denying the truth. And it would be one thing if the tobacco companies weren't denying it over all these years because then she wouldn't -or she would have had a chance to -- to realize that the information was actually true.
I want to talk a little bit about damages.
And in this case, in 1994, Julie Reese was diagnosed with laryngeal cancer. And if you think
of it in terms of she was given -- on June 22nd, June 29th, she was given a job.
What was the job that she was given? She was given a job to deal with the cancer in her voice box. She was given the job of dealing with the threat of her voice box being removed, the threat of its recurrence, the threat of having a hole in her throat, severe C.O.P.D., and suffocating to death, all because R.J.R. intentionally manufactured a defective product that's addicting and keeps her addicted.
And on June 29th, 1994, the date of her
diagnosis of laryngeal cancer, she got to worry about all those consequences. That job has lasted until today, to deal with all of that, and especially because, and especially because she can't quit smoking.
So the first five years of her job, she was diagnosed, she was operated on, she was told she needs radiation, and if the radiation doesn't work, Julie, that voice box is going to come out, there is going to be a hole in your throat.
She went through two months of radiation. She was told the cancer may return, and the five-year survival rate was going to be 40 percent of all people are going to die from what you have.
So the next 12 years, she knew that she couldn't quit smoking, so she has to deal with that up until the present day, almost 17 years. And then on top of that, she has C.O.P.D. And that C.O.P.D. is going to last until, unfortunately, she dies.
So the future is bleak. And according to Dr. Pitchenik, if she lives another eight years, she is going to -- you know, hopefully she does.
But very soon, she is going to have to go on oxygen.
And we can't come in in another year from now and ask you, hey, wait a minute, you know, now she's on oxygen, she can't move. All right. This is our only chance. This is her only chance to ask you for money. Okay.
So this job that R.J.R. gave her back in June of 1994 and lasts with her today, the job given to her because of what they did, that they intentionally omitted this information and concealed it from her and were strictly liable and negligent and conspired with other companies to keep that information from her, that job that they gave her, okay, how much is that worth?
And if you are a good waitress, and Julie Reese was a good waitress, you know, a good waitress can make about $20 an hour. And is that a good figure to give her an hourly wage over all these years? An hourly wage is what most jobs entail.
So for Julie Reese, her job, though, lasts 16 hours a day, because she does get to sleep, and hopefully, it doesn't keep her up at night. But those 16 hours a day is what she has to deal with.
And let's go to the first slide, Scott.
This is Julie Reese's past pain and suffering.
Diagnosis date, June 29th, 1994, through today is 6,168 days. At 20 to -- depending -- look, you could come up with a higher figure. I'm not going to stop you.
THE CLERK: Five minutes remaining, Counsel.
MR. SLOMAN: Thank you.
At that rate, 20 to $40 an hour, 20 hour -$20 an hour times 16 hours a day times 6,168 days, close to 2 million dollars. $30 an hour would be close to 3 million dollars. $40 an hour would be close to 4 million dollars. That would compensate her for her past pain and suffering up till today.
Now, you may, like I say, you could come back with more. No one is stopping you.
Now let's go to the next slide.
Her future pain and suffering, I think she deserves a raise to deal with what she has to look forward to in the future. Calculating at 70 to $90 an hour, and, you know, you may think it's less or more, but we'll, obviously, abide by what you say. But let's look at -The next one, Scott.
$70 an hour times 16 hours times her life expectancy of 3,178 days would be $3,559,360. And obviously, it goes up if you believe that she
deserves more.
So that's what Julie Reese, we believe, deserves. We can't come back in a year or two from now. This is our one shot. So we're trying to give you a realistic, reasonable picture of what she deserves.
Let's go to the last slide. So total pain and suffering for past, 2 million 960 dollars. Future, 4 million, total, 7 million 28 dollars -$7,028,488. We believe that that would be a reasonable amount of money to compensate Julie for what they have done to her.
Now, again, this is by the greater weight of the evidence. And I'm briefly going to talk to you about punitive damages. And punitive damages are, as the judge instructed you, for conduct that showed such an entire lack of care that R.J. Reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences.
This is to punish them for what they've done. This wasn't an isolated act of misconduct. This was over a 50-year period of time what they did to Julie, people like Julie.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: It will be stricken, the last portion of that statement.
THE CLERK: Two minutes, Counsel.
MR. SLOMAN: Thank you.
This is for their wanton and reckless disregard of safety and welfare to the public.
This is for -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
2.)
MR. SLOMAN: That's the instruction.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SLOMAN: The reckless indifference, equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. Now, we have to prove this part by clear and convincing evidence, but is there anything more clear and convincing as to what they have done, for a company that took the position back in 1954 that they were going to place peoples' health above all else, above their own monetary goals, they were going to put peoples' health above everything else, and for 50 years did exactly the opposite. This is a case that cries out for punitive damages.
Now, Julie Reese was their perfect customer, and she followed their game plan to a tee. And this is where she sits today because of what they
did, because they were recklessly indifferent, they had a wanton disregard of the consequences to her.
So ladies and gentlemen, think of the hundred billion dollar megaphone that Dr. Proctor told you was going out from the tobacco companies, the industry -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor, that's different from -MR. SLOMAN: That's what he said.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SLOMAN: The hundred billion dollar megaphone over 50 years trying to drown out the public health authorities, to create doubt, to reassure the public, and to -- and to make people like Julie Reese think, you know, cigarettes, how harmful can it be. That's what they did over a 50-year period. So it's not an isolated incident.
Now, my colleague, Mr. Kaiser, will have a chance to address you after Mr. Reid, I know everybody wants to go to lunch, he'll go through the verdict form a little bit to show you hopefully what you'll check -THE COURT: You're done.
MR. SLOMAN: -- in our favor. And it's been a pleasure and an honor to address you on behalf of
my client. Thank you very much.



MR. KAISER: May it please the Court.
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. I'd ask
li
you just to please listen for a little while longer, I only have two hours to talk to you and I'll talk fast. I'm kidding, I've got 30 minutes.
Let me just comment about a couple of issues, first beginning with the question of the statute of limitations that you've heard Mr. Reid tell you about.
And you're going to see that on the verdict form when you get to that, it's going to be question 4 and question 5, and you're going to be asked, "Did Julie Reese know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known on or before May 5th of 1990 that she had throat cancer and that there was a reasonable possibility that her throat
cancer was caused by smoking cigarettes?"
So contrary to what Mr. Reid told you in his closing argument, absolutely Ms. Reese had to know or believe that when she had any symptoms, it was for throat cancer, not for anything else.
So the question is prior to May 5th of 1990, any symptoms that Ms. Reese had, was that something that she knew was throat cancer? And there is absolutely not one shred of evidence that prior to 1990, she had any clue, any inkling, any idea in the world that she had throat cancer.
Of course, having a sore throat could be a number of possibilities, not merely throat cancer.
I would submit that when someone gets hoarseness or a sore throat, whether they smoke or not, their first thought is not I must have throat cancer, I'd better get to the doctor.
The bottom line is what you've seen from the evidence in this case is that the throat cancer was diagnosed sometime in 1994. And according to the medical records, according to the medical records, the symptoms came on a few months before that date. That's what the records say.
So the symptoms perhaps manifested themselves months before she was diagnosed, but she was
diagnosed in 1994, so the answer to number 4 is she didn't know and had no reason to know that any symptoms prior to 1990, if she had any, would have been throat cancer.
And secondly, as to her C.O.P.D., "Did Julie Reese know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known on or before May 5th, 1990 that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
C.O.P.D., and that there was a reasonable possibility that her C.O.P.D. was caused by smoking cigarettes?"
Again, merely because Ms. Reese might have coughed, might have been wheezing, might have had a number of symptoms doesn't necessarily mean that she should have known at that time that I must have C.O.P.D., I'd better rush to the doctor.
In fact, you heard from Dr. Pitchenik that her C.O.P.D. didn't manifest itself until the '90s.
It's a long process of a disease. Now, if, as Mr. Reid says, she had symptoms in the '60s of C.O.P.D., by the time she was diagnosed or the symptoms manifested in 1990 or 2003, her C.O.P.D.
would have been so severe, she would have been oxygen dependent well, well prior to now.
And yet she wasn't diagnosed, there is no
indication in any medical records of C.O.P.D. until 2003 or 2004. And you have seen those records.
And despite the references on several of those medical records, there is no medication. Why? Because the C.O.P.D. as diagnosed was nevertheless stable.
And so at the time in 2003 and 2004 that C.O.P.D. is referenced, it is not serious, it is stable C.O.P.D. that doesn't even need medication yet.
Now, December of 2010, she has the pulmonary function test, and what does it show? Severe, severe C.O.P.D., severe airway obstruction that is irreversible, C.O.P.D. that she is on medication for and that eventually she will become oxygen dependent. So her diagnosis in 2010 and her symptoms sometime in 2003, 2004. So the answer to number 5, no.
So there is the statute of limitations.
Let's talk about addiction real quick. I don't want to belabor the point. The fact remains that when you get back into the jury room, and if you have any questions, just think, sucking in, blowing out, sucking in, blowing out, sucking in, blowing out for 70 years, is it still new, novel,
and pleasurable in the face of the disease where you are going to die? And the answer is absolutely not. That's addiction. There is nothing pleasurable about doing this for 70 years.
And remember Dr. Pitchenik. Dr. Pitchenik has seen thousands of addicted people. He has taught doctors. He is not a professional witness that was trained to come in here and look at you all and talk to you. He sees patients every day and he teaches medical doctors about addiction and he knows his craft.
And his testimony was unequivocal that Ms. Reese is addicted. And the medical records are replete with reference after reference after reference to her addiction, and that is a nonissue.
And whether or not Mrs. Reese believed that she was addicted at some point is of no moment, it's the expert testimony that he believed that Mrs. Reese was addicted sometime in the '50s, not in '67 as she would believe. She's not the expert. It was sometime long before that in the '50s where there is an opinion of her addiction.
Dr. Pitchenik was seeing addicted people, thousands of addicted people when Abramson was in diapers. He has told you that Mrs. Reese is
addicted. That's a nonissue.
As for the throat cancer, you have heard laryngeal, hypophar- -- throat cancer. Now, everybody who testified came into this courtroom, and they agreed and they showed you a map exactly where the tumor was, and nobody disputed that. Nobody disputed that.
And, in fact, and, in fact, even Dr. Espinola, in her disclosure, after she had been able to look at all of these medical records, after she had been able to examine the medical records, what did she say? Laryngeal cancer.
And all of a sudden, somehow that opinion changes. And what does she tell you? Maybe I should have been more accurate. You know, experts don't live on maybes, should have. Maybe if she had accidentally taken someone's voice box out instead of their pharynx, that would be a problem, too. You want to be a little more accurate.
This is not a question of accuracy, this is a question of opinion, and she knew well in advance this was larynx and nothing else.
And that's what Dr. Wingert said also. And, in fact, on the tape, and I want to put that up now just for a second, you'll see his opinion about
what he had to say about whether it was related to a virus.
(Videotaped deposition being played.)
Q. Let's go to H.P.V. What is H.P.V.?
A. Well, that's an acronym for Human Papilloma Virus.
Q. And are you aware of any evidence that Julie Reese ever had H.P.V. or Human Papilloma Virus?
A. No.
Q. Is Dr. Harper's description of the cancer, the laryngeal cancer that Julie Reese had, consistent with a H.P.V. virus?
A. No.
(Video was stopped.)
MR. KAISER: I was hoping we were going to be able to see the good doctor, because at some point when he was talking about this, he is actually almost grinning because it is such a bizarre question to ask because there is no way in the world that it was any type of virus because of its location and it was totally smoking related.
That's why he was almost like a Cheshire cat grinning when he was asked that question, and his answer, absolutely no. Absolutely no.
In fact, Dr. Harper, the person who made the
initial diagnosis, on subsequent records, what does he say? Larynx, cancer of the larynx. And, you know, the defense, R.J. Reynolds, they chose to put on evidence about that issue. And if for a second, if for a second they thought that Dr. Harper's testimony could help them, his testimony would have been on this chair so quick your head would spin. But obviously, that was not the case.
So you have before you the opinion of Dr. Wingert as he sat here and told you on this video it was not a virus, it was right exactly where it's mapped, laryngeal cancer, smoking is the cause.
Now, when Mr. Reid got up here, you notice he made his entire presentation related to Mrs. Reese. It was Mrs. Reese. It wasn't his client. It was Mrs. Reese. Why is that? Well, obviously, he could not talk about his client's lies. He could
not talk about his client's fraud. He could not talk about his client's conspiracy for 50 years.
He could not address any of that behavior head on. And so what did he do? He made this case about Mrs. Reese.
This case is about R.J. Reynolds. It's about the choices that R.J. Reynolds made. That's why we
are here.
Who was it that said, "Mrs. Reese, why don't you smoke our cigarettes? They are pleasure and refreshing." It was R.J. Reynolds that said that to her. Who was it who said, "Mrs. Reese, why don't you smoke our cigarettes for that throat scratch?" It was R.J. Reynolds who said that.
Who was it that said, "Mrs. Reese, why don't you smoke our low tar and nicotine cigarettes? They're better for you." It was R.J. Reynolds that said that. Who was it that said, "Mrs. Reese, why don't you smoke our filter cigarettes, because they take out all the bad stuff"? It was R.J. Reynolds that said that to Mrs. Reese.
And Mrs. Reese listened to all of that. And at the same time that R.J. Reynolds was asking Mrs. Reese and everyone else to do that, they had a little secret, because at some point in the '50s, they knew two things, they knew that their products were dangerous to health, and they knew that the nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive.
And they didn't just sit idly by knowing that information, ladies and gentlemen. You know what they did? For 50 years went on this campaign, this conspiracy of denial and controversy and reassuring
people like Mrs. Reese that you can go ahead and continue smoking, because we're going to get to the bottom of this, we're going to make sure that this controversy comes to an end, and by gosh, if we find anything wrong with these cigarettes, we're going to let you know and we're going to fix it.
And they did that not for a day, not for a month, but for 50 years to create this doubt, to create this controversy, and to reassure people like Mrs. Reese who bought in hook, line, and sinker, and did everything they wanted her to do.
And, in fact, you've heard -- you've heard Mr. Heimann, sure, we want people to listen to our ads, we want people to believe our ads, we want people to smoke our cigarettes, we want people to rely on our ads, and Mrs. Reese did just that.
And now you know what R.J. Reynolds says, ladies and gentlemen? "Mrs. Reese, you screwed up because you trusted us. You trusted us when you bought into our advertising, when you bought our products, when you relied on our advertising, you messed up, because instead of listening to us, you should have been reading Dear Abby and Gene Tunny's article in Reader's Digest, but you didn't. You didn't do that.
And so what did they do? They brought for you Dr. Martin. Dr. Martin was created, he was packaged, and he was delivered before you for your
approval as an expert in awareness of the dangers of tobacco and the addictive nature of the nicotine in cigarettes produced by R.J. Reynolds.
And up to this point in 1994, when Dr. Martin was contacted by R.J. Reynolds, or by the law firm that was representing R.J. Reynolds, he hadn't done any work in this area of public awareness of tobacco and the addictive qualities of nicotine.
He hadn't done anything in that area whatsoever.
But they were going to make him their expert, just as they were going to make other historians.
Now, there is no question, this was a well-credentialed historian who wrote many, many, many articles and books on the Revolutionary War, and there is no doubt, he was credentialed, he was a professor of history at the University of Houston who absolutely had no idea and knowledge about the public awareness of the tobacco dangers and the nicotine and the addictive qualities in that nicotine in cigarettes. Nothing.
And so what did Jones Day do, what did Arnold and Porter do? Well, they sent him to different
law firms. "Here, go to Arnold and Porter's law firm and you can pick up some magazines. Go to Jones Day and you can pick up some tapes." He had a research assistant, he could send her places to pick up some materials.
He actually went himself to the Library of Congress to get newspaper clippings. He had other people that he knew that he could call up and they could provide him with documents.
Now, I ask you, what expertise does it take to collate and gather materials like that? And I asked him that question. And you know what he said? You know what he said? Well, you have to know the places where you're going. You have to know how to get there.
Okay, Ill give him that. It is basically clerical to go into a library and look for clippings. It is clerical to go to a law firm and pick up their documents. It is clerical to go -to call your research assistant and have her pick up documents. But according to Dr. Martin, you had to have some expertise in finding your way. That's what he said.
By his own admission, he told you he wasn't a medical doctor, he wasn't a psychologist, he wasn't
an addictionologist, he wasn't a statistician, he was not an expert in polling, other than having one class in the '60s.
And in connection with the polls, I want to talk to you just briefly about some of the polls that you were shown. Beginning -Could you put up Martin 18, please?
This was what's called an awareness poll, not knowledge, but this was just asking people, "Have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung?" Doesn't ask do you believe it. This is knowledge.
And so what you have here is 90 percent answer
that. Now, you don t know who those people were, you don't know how that survey was taken, you don't know the number of people, but 90 percent, a huge number of course said, yeah, they had read something. What? We don't know. But it didn't ask them do you believe it.
Now, what was asked of Dr. Martin was something he wasn't shown, and that is, of those people that answered that question, how many answered the question, "Do you believe that smoking causes cancer of the lung?" It was a little
different there. Because at that point, 41 percent said they believed it, and the rest said either no, or they were unsure.
So it's a lot different than just what someone might have read, on the one hand, with what someone might have believed on the other.
And moving on, if you could put up, please, Martin 19.
You have to pay attention to this one, because again, there's the 90 percent, that's the question about are you aware, have you heard, not what you know. And that's 90 percent. That's in that first category as representing the highest number of people, the greatest percentage, as if that has meaning, because when you look further, couldn't name Washington, knowledge. Knew about atomic weapon, knowledge. Knew Al Gore was U.S. vice president, knowledge. Have heard, awareness. Have heard, awareness. Knew, knowledge. So the great percentage of all of these things is knowledge, not awareness. So this is a little bit skewed.
Now, if you took the answer to the second question I asked Dr. Martin, which was the 41 percent figure that actually believed it, we've gone from the first column, then, to the
second-to-last column, 41 percent. So it's the second-to-last category on the awareness aspect -I mean on the knowledge aspect. So this is apples and oranges that was presented to you.
Of course, they didn't present the other side of the equation, what actually those 90 percent knew. It's a lot different, 90 percent, 41 percent.
Now, if we can go, please, to Martin 20.
This question, "Do you think cigarette smoking is harmful or not?" Now, as people today sit here and they are asked the same question, harmful means something now that it didn't mean back then because people know a lot more now about smoking than they did back then.
That's why I asked Dr. Martin, tell us what present mindedness is, and he told you what that is. And that is, sitting here today and thinking harmful means the same thing that it meant way back in 1954. And it doesn't. So you have to put yourself back in 1954.
So the fact that 70 percent of people thought that cigarette smoking was harmful back then meant a lot different than it does today, but you weren't shown the second part of that, and that was, well,
how do you think it's harmful?
Of that 70 percent that said they thought it was harmful, 6 percent said lung cancer. So that meant 94 percent thought it was harmful in some other ways. 6 percent lung cancer.
Now, how many people were involved in that study? Who was involved in that study? What type of study? No one told you that. But you know what, in evidence, in evidence was the actual question, you didn't see it, and the only purpose of this, it's the same question, but you have the population size, and it's 1,500 people. That's the sample size.
So analogize these things. When you get facts presented to you, sometimes it's just easy to just make an analogy. 1,500. Okay? I'll give you a good analogy. Take any Marlins baseball game. That's probably the attendance at a Marlins baseball game. 1,500. When you watch on T.V., they always say 6 or 7,000, but when they pan in, there's about 1,000 people there.
So any average Marlins game, 1,500 people, most of whom are wearing the visiting team's jerseys. Of those 1,500, that's what that survey meant. Of those 1,500 people in the universe, in
the United States, that's what that meant, that's who had knowledge that cigarette smoking was harmful.
And of that 70 percent of that 1,500 people sitting at that Marlins game, 6 percent thought lung cancer.
So think of it in terms of an analogy. Not a lot of people can be said to have known anything about smoking at that point when you consider the sheer numbers.
And so Dr. Martin testified about the historical method, and no one disputes that. Remember what he said, you identify the topic, you evaluate the sources, and you research all of the sources, you come up with your conclusion, and you present it publicly, either by a book, article, or lecture.
But the problem here, according to Dr. Martin's testimony when you heard it, it's faulty research here. And why is that? Because everything was totally one sided. Totally.
And again, let me give you an analogy of what I mean as to one sided. You might read or you might hear that, you know, last night's game, Danny played very well, Rose had a great game, Boozer was
really hitting the boards, the Bulls played one heck of a defensive game last night. They are really on top of their game. What is being ignored is the fact that the Heat won by ten points.
So you need both sides of the equation before you can really come to a conclusion, and that's what they did to you here, they only put on one side of the story.
So when Dr. Martin was testifying, he wasn't giving you the score, he was telling one side.
Even Dr. Martin said context is important, context is important, like the polls, like his testimony.
And so when you put the other side of the equation together, you didn't have the testimony about the unbelievable amount of advertising on all sorts of medium over time. You didn't get the testimony about the thousands of letters that were sent to schools and to school children with this doubt and controversy and reassurance that there has been nothing proven yet.
You didn't get the testimony about the thousands of these white papers that the tobacco industry sent to all of these professionals and public officials about the controversy and the doubt and the reassurance.
And you need to get all of that stuff in order to be able to look at things and put things in perspective, and that testimony was flawed because of that, because you only got one side.
And that's a problem. Because you really can't draw a conclusion. And you know what,
Dr. Martin knows about one-sidedness, because you know what he did, Allan Brandt, a person who wrote -- he's an expert historian, he wrote a book about the cigarette industry, the tobacco industry, he got several rewards for that, it was a peer reviewed article in a magazine, won many awards.
Dr. Martin reviewed that book, reviewed that book and trashed it, trashed it. And you know what he said? It was one sided, it was only one side.
He didn't offer the side of the tobacco industry. And this is from a person who ignored the fact that he's an expert witness for tobacco companies, like R.J. Reynolds.
You think maybe that would have been important in his book review to tell everyone that I'm reviewing this book, unfavorably, but at the same time, I am an advocate for tobacco? He didn't do that. He knows what one-sidedness is. Didn't do it.
And the proof is in the pudding, ladies and gentlemen, because after the study is done and you arrive at your conclusion, the last step is publicize it, either by way of book, by way of article, by way of lecture.
Nothing was done. Dr. Martin has never and knows of no one else who has written any peer reviewed articles or books on the subject of tobacco awareness, of the dangers of tobacco in cigarettes and nicotine, the addiction in nicotine and cigarettes.
And you know why? Because nothing like that would ever get published. Nothing like that would ever survive a peer review process. Why? Because it's flawed methodology, and that's why there is nothing published.
And so you know what, you are going to determine whether or not this was expert testimony, and I submit to you it was not, not at all. This was junk history. That's it. That's what you heard. That's the bottom line.
The most important thing in this case, the most important thing in this case is the conduct of R.J. Reynolds. And we've been through this already. And they sat on their hands and then they
went overtly and they put out for 50 years this doubt and this controversy.
And so you have to look at what they've done to Mrs. Reese. You know, they want you to say that -- believe that Mrs. Reese did this because it was her choice.
Now, really, at what point was it her choice? Obviously, when she started smoking at ten years old, it wasn't her choice. Do you think she was able to weigh the pros and cons of cigarette smoking at ten years old? That's ridiculous.
And by the time there really was a consensus, and by the time there really was public truthful knowledge about all the dangers of cigarettes and the addictive qualities of cigarettes that the company had known for years and years, -THE CLERK: Five minutes remaining, Counsel.
MR. KAISER: -- Mrs. Reese had been smoking for 30 years, she was hopelessly addicted and couldn't quit. And, you know, that's not some big surprise that the woman couldn't quit and can't quit. She still faces death and can't quit.
That's not a choice that she's making because she likes it.
I just want to talk to you quickly about
damages before I sit down, because it's very important to consider some things.
Mr. Sloman gave you an indication of how to compute the damages. And when you do that, you have to consider that Mrs. Reese has suffered already in the past for her pain and suffering because of this throat cancer, and she worried every day of her life when she was diagnosed with this throat cancer because she didn't know if she was going to live or die, and nobody did.
And fortunately for her, after going through this radiation treatment, the effect now is that she has no saliva glands, but she was cured or in remission. But there is no guarantee that this won't come back.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KAISER: There's no guarantee. No one can give her that guarantee. She is cured now, and she is still smoking because she is addicted, but there is no guarantee. But she suffered from that laryngeal cancer, all through the diagnosis, all through the treatment, all through the worry about is this going to come back.
And now since she's been diagnosed and has
this C.O.P.D., she's got future worry because she has this, she has had it, she's suffered, and by the mortality tables, she has, what, eight years left to live, and if there is no other intervening causes, she is likely to die from C.O.P.D. And that's not to a pleasurable situation.
You heard that from Dr. Pitchenik. I say like breathing through a straw. And it gets progressively worse, but slow. You don't wake up one morning and you just can't breathe anymore.
It's slow, and you know it, and it comes on slower and slower, and your airway gets more obstructed and more obstructed to the point where breathing is harder each day, and each day you are wondering is this going to be my last day.
And that's a terrible suffering that she has to go through. And it's even more horrendous because this woman knows that eventually, she is
?oing to die from C.O.P.D. That's her lot in life rom R.J. Reynolds, and she knows that.
And so when you consider damages, this is a serious thing. This is a full-time job that she now has, realizing that this is just going to be a slow, progressive death, and that is something that no one wants.
And so you know what, we don't for a second deny that Mrs. Reese has some responsibility here. She told you she does. But you know what else she said? She said if R.J. Reynolds had told me, had they been truthful with me in my younger days, a lot of things would have been different, it would have been different.
What does that mean? That she could have quit, that she -- at least she could have tried to quit.
THE CLERK: Two minutes remaining.
MR. KAISER: They didn't tell her that. They didn't tell her that. So it's not Mrs. Reese's choice, it was R.J. Reynolds' choice through their advertising, through everything they did to get someone like this woman hooked on their product, and they were satisfied with that, and now that they are through with Mrs. Reese, they can just go on about their business, go onto the next business.
And that's how they do it. She means nothing to them anymore. She was a loyal smoker of their cigarettes and continues to be for 70 years. And that's what they've wanted.
As far as punitive damages, ladies and gentlemen, the conduct in this case from R.J.
Reynolds is reprehensible. It is intentional. It is reckless. They knew that their product was dangerous and it killed people and they didn't care. How much more reprehensible can you get than that?
And they didn't just sit idly by and try and correct anything. They then started this controversy so that people like Mrs. Reese wouldn't quit their product. "Mrs. Reese, everything is fine, we'll get to the bottom of this. And, in fact, don't quit, smoke our filter cigarettes."
And they knew that was a fraud also.
And so when counsel comes up here and tells you look at all the things we've done, we have expanded tobacco in cigarettes, you know what that means? That there is less tobacco that's used in cigarettes which means an addicted person smokes
more, more money for the tobacco company, that's what that means.
The holes in the filters, that's supposed to be some technique to make it safer? No. You know what that means? It means that the addicted smoker covers the holes so that she can get the nicotine delivery that she needs, that's what that means.
So again, all of these things, these harm
reduction methods, it's a fraud. It's a fraud.
So I ask you on the verdict form, just pay attention to the fact that the conduct in this case is reprehensible. And you know what you should consider when you punish R.J. Reynolds, that their conduct showed such an entire lack of care that R.J. Reynolds must have wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public, of the public that their conduct -THE CLERK: Time.
MR. KAISER: -- affected the public and especially Mrs. Reese.
THE COURT: Wrap it up.
MR. KAISER: And so, ladies and gentlemen, all Mrs. Reese asks of you is that despite R.J.
Reynolds telling her we don't believe that you're entitled to squat, we're not responsible one iota, that you make R.J. Reynolds pay for what they've done. Thank you