CLOSING ARGUMENTS
MS. BARNETT: Yes, Your Honor, and I want to pull up
my board.
THE COURT: That will be fine.
MS. BARNETT: Thank you. I was about to block myself.
Good morning, everybody. In just a little while
you're going to go back in the deliberation room and you'll have
three jobs in there. One will be to answer the questions on the
verdict form that the Court gives you. One will be to make sure
that everybody on this jury follows the law that the judge just
instructed to you. And a third job is, before you answer any of
those questions, you'll need to talk to each other about why it
is -- why you feel the way you feel about some of those
questions. And so what I want to try to do within the next 40
minutes or so, hopefully less, is talk about some ways to do
that.
So remember, we're suing Philip Morris for two
reasons. The first reason we're suing Philip Morris is because
they violated the safety rule that a company can never lie about
a danger it knows about its product. And even that guy, the
videotape -- the guy who came here on video from Philip Morris,
Mr. Jupe, even he admitted every customer is entitled to know 62
the truth about their products.
And if we could have the ELMO, just to remind you who
he was, individuals are entitled to know the truth about any
product they buy. Even Philip Morris admits that. We know
Philip Morris violated this rule. Philip Morris lied about the
fact that cigarettes cause cancer. Philip Morris lied about the
fact that cigarettes were addictive. Philip Morris lied about
the facts that filters were not any safer, and lied about the
fact that light and low-tar cigarettes weren't any safer and
didn't provide any less nicotine. And the proof of all of this
came straight from Philip Morris's own records. Philip Morris
should have just told the truth.
And the second reason that we're suing Philip Morris
is because they violated the safety rule that a manufacturer can
never hide a danger they know about in their product. We know
now that Philip Morris studied, very carefully, addiction, to
discover how it worked and how it took ahold of people, and they
used that knowledge to design their cigarettes to make them as
addictive as possible. We know all this straight from Philip
Morris's own records they simply shouldn't have hidden the truth
about what they were doing to cigarettes.
Now, I want to talk about the instructions and the
verdict form. Instruction 6 that the Court gave you, it's a
very important one, so I'm going to put it back up here again.
It says that we have to prove everything, except for punitive 63
damages, by a preponderance of the evidence. And it explains
it, a preponderance of the evidence simply means an amount of
evidence that is enough to persuade you that Ms. Reider's claim
is more likely true than not true.
We can take that down.
And that's what we've been talking about all along
this week, whether it's more likely right than wrong. And we
started out this trial, everybody, Philip Morris and we, we were
all at zero percent. We had to build our case up to prove to
you 51 percent. But as the judge said, now the question is have
we tipped the scale. I think she said that at the beginning of
the trial. The question is, are we more likely right than wrong
on each of these questions. And you can have doubts, it's not a
criminal trial. You can have doubts on both sides, and when you
weigh them all out, the question is, are we more likely right
than wrong. And if you believe that we are more likely right
than wrong on any question, even just by a little bit, then the
law is you have to answer that question in our favor, and that
is -- again, that's instruction No. 6, it will be back there
with you.
So if during deliberations someone says, "I'm not
sure, I have some doubts about this question," remind them, it's
okay to have some doubts, you don't have to be sure or certain.
The standard here is, are we more likely right than wrong that
what we say is right. And if you find that we are, even just by 64
a little bit, you have to answer that question in our favor.
Again, that's instruction No. 6.
I want to look at the verdict form and talk through
it. Question No. 1, was Mr. Reider addicted to cigarettes
containing nicotine? Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings explained to us
how they both concluded that Mr. Reider was addicted. They both
have spent decades working in the field, studying, researching,
trying to help smokers, trying to understand how to warn people,
and they explained to us they use the same definition that the
Surgeon Generals publish and that the National Institute of --
sorry, the National Institute of Drug Addiction has published,
and the same definition that they both use when they teach
doctors, and that they write about, and the definition is simply
this: A chronic relapsing brain disease that results in or is
characterized by compulsive use despite knowledge of the harmful
consequences.
And Dr. Cummings explained to us how it is that
cigarette addiction causes these changes to the brain, and in
fact, we saw Philip Morris's documents where they were studying
nicotine brain receptors and EEGs, so that's how we know that
nicotine addiction is a chronic relapsing brain disease. And
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns explained to us how they concluded
that Mr. Reider's use was compulsive, despite knowledge. But
you heard it not just from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, you heard
it straight from Mr. Reider's family and his friend, he smoked 65
compulsively and he smoked despite the harms. He smoked
continuously up to two packs or more a day for more than 35
years. Think about that, for more than 35 years, every single
day, day in and day out, up to two packs or more a day. He had
to smoke first thing in the morning when he woke up, ashtray by
the bedside, ashtray in the bathroom, and he would even
sometimes light one cigarette off the other. Had to leave
church to go smoke. And he kept smoking even after he had two
heart attacks, and even after he had lung cancer and they had
taken a whole lung out of his body, he still had to go outside
(demonstrating), and get the nicotine doses into his body. Now,
that is the picture of addiction. That is not somebody smoking
just because they like it or think it's fun, and they're just
making a choice to keep doing it.
And we know, too, not just Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings,
but we saw it in his medical records. Even Mr. Reider's doctors
who treated him, knew him, laid hands on him and tried to help
him when he had cancer, they concluded the same thing and wrote
in his medical records that he was addicted and he had ongoing
cigarette abuse. Not one witness came in this courtroom and
told you anything different. So question No. 1, is it more
likely right than wrong that Mr. Reider was addicted? The
answer to that is yes. In fact, it's way more than that.
Second question, question No. 2, was Richard Reider's
addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, that were 66
manufactured by Philip Morris, a legal cause of his death? And
this is an important question. The important part is --
Can you put that back up again? Sorry.
This does not say was the addiction "the" legal cause
or "the only legal cause," it says "a legal cause." So you need
to know what the instruction says. And the judge has already
told you, but let's look at it again. It's instruction 8 on
page 11. And it's very, very important, these are the only
place where the law comes, is what the judge tells you and these
instructions. "In order to prove that addiction to smoking
cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Reider's
death, Ms. Reider must prove by a preponderance of the evidence
that such addiction directly and in natural and continuous
sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such
death, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the
addiction, that death would not have occurred. In order to be
regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the
only cause. Addiction may be a legal cause of death, even
though it operates in combination with the act of another, some
natural cause, or some other cause, if the addiction contributes
substantially to producing the death."
It's important what that says. Addiction doesn't need
to be the only cause of his death, it just must be a cause. So
if you determine that his addiction was the cause or that it was
a cause, one of many causes, you must answer that question, if 67
you find that more likely right than wrong, it was one of the
causes for us.
And you're allowed to think that multiple things
contributed here. The law recognizes that that's the way the
real world works. There may be multiple things that
contributed. But if you think that it's more likely right than
wrong that addiction played a substantial role here in his
death, if it was either the cause or a cause, one of the causes,
then as a matter of law you must decide that question for us and
answer yes.
So if in deliberation someone says, "I think someone
else or something else was at fault also," remind them that the
question is only whether addiction was a cause, one of the
causes. That's instruction 8 on page 11, and you might have to
pull it back out. We will talk about what to do with other
possible causes in just a minute.
But Dr. Cummings explained to us how, for people who
are addicted, their body becomes physically wired for nicotine,
they crave nicotine, they need nicotine to fill these receptors,
and Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings explained that it's the addiction
that causes the repeated compulsive use day after day, year
after year, decade after decade. And that in Mr. Reider's case,
it was his addiction that caused the smoking that we heard about
over decades. And Dr. Burns explained to us in those slides he
showed -- it seems like a long time ago now, it was just 68
Tuesday -- about the body and how it is, the amazing defenses
our body has. You don't just smoke a few cigarettes and get
lung cancer, it's the repeated exposure, it's the compulsive
use, that's what causes the lung cancer.
And Dr. Burns showed you, too, that his conclusions
and discussions with you are the very same as those by the
Surgeon General. That was Exhibit 237. And this is just one
part of it that we talked about. "Nicotine addiction is the
fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco
products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to the
many diseases described in this report."
And there's no question, by the way --
You can take that down.
-- over whether it was Philip Morris's cigarettes that
he was addicted to that caused this. That was even in the
stipulations that you just heard. And you didn't hear any
witness say anything else. If there was any witness in the land
who would tell you that addiction wasn't a cause of his lung
cancer, believe me, Philip Morris would have brought them here
to tell you that. No, there's nothing. It's undisputed. Dr.
Burns and Dr. Cummings were clear and plain. Is it more likely
right than wrong that Mr. Reider's addiction was a cause, at
least one of the causes of his death? The answer to that
question is yes.
Now, if you answer yes to those two questions, you 69
pull out your sheet of those Engle findings -- and that's
instruction 9 that the Court already read, you'll have it back
there with you. If you answer yes to those questions,
instruction 9 of the Engle findings are the law of the case.
They apply. They can't be questioned by you, and they apply.
So -- and they'll help you answer the rest of the questions on
the verdict form.
The next question on your verdict form, you'll see a
place to write the percentage of responsibility for Philip
Morris and for Mr. Reider for his death, and that is question
No. 3.
You can take that down.
In every case a person has -- a person or a company
has to use reasonable care to avoid harm -- foreseeable harm to
themselves and to others. And if you don't, you're responsible
for the harms that you didn't avoid by using reasonable care.
And we already know that Philip Morris did not use reasonable
care. That's in those Engle findings. And I just want to look
at a couple, and again, instruction 9.
The Engle findings. No. 3, that the defendants in
Engle, which includes Philip Morris, placed cigarettes on the
market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
And then can we look over at No. 6. This is already a
finding, already applies, can't be questioned. All the Engle
defendants -- and again, that includes Philip Morris -- were 70
negligent. So that's already been determined.
You can take that down.
We already know Philip Morris was negligent, and they
made and sold defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes,
and we know that those cigarettes are what killed Mr. Reider.
And like any manufacturer, they're responsible for harm from
their products. But it's worse than that, it's worse than just
making a product that kills somebody, which would be bad enough,
because Philip Morris made the choice to lie about and to hide
the dangers of their product, and did so to keep Mr. Reider and
all of their customers smoking and addicted, and to make it as
hard as possible to quit.
We know from their records, we saw it, Philip Morris
had -- in the '50s, the time about when Mr. Reider was starting
to smoke, they knew it, cigarettes cause cancer. And they had
100 percent of the knowledge that filters were not safer, and
they had 100 percent of the knowledge that light and low-tar
cigarettes, not safer, no less addictive. Philip Morris knew
all of those things, and it was in the documents we saw, and
nobody came in here and tried to explain away, it's not true, we
didn't know, we weren't sure. No, they knew, and we saw that
Philip Morris did everything in their power, everything with
this knowledge, to keep Mr. Reider's knowledge as close to zero,
to keep all Americans' knowledge as close to zero, to keep even
the Surgeon General's knowledge as close to zero, to take away 71
people's right to make a free, fully informed choice.
And we saw from the records that Philip Morris had 100
percent power and control over their choices, 100 percent. And
they made a calculated business decision that had two prongs.
One, get them hooked young while their brains are vulnerable to
nicotine, and then keep them hooked. They knew if people waited
until they were in their 20s before they smoked cigarettes, very
unlikely to be addicted, very unlikely to be a lifelong
customer. So they had to get them as teenagers, and they had to
make sure when they tried them, these were cigarettes that you
could inhale and get down deep in your lungs, they wouldn't
irritate your throat, so that you would be sure to get as much
nicotine as possible into the brain to make those changes in the
brain.
So they went after teenagers and they got them. And
then you saw those documents, they cheered for their success at
getting young teenagers to start smoking their cigarettes.
And of course, they could market their product, of
course, they can sell a product, but this is different than just
selling something like cereal to kids. This is targeting people
who are vulnerable to addiction, with a product you know is
addictive, telling them it's healthy and macho and it will help
you get the girls -- remember we saw probably more ads than you
ever wanted to see. But the point is when they ran all those
ads, the football stars and the cartoons, Philip Morris knew 72
those cigarettes caused cancer and they were addictive, and they
never said it, never once. In fact, they lied about it. They
made sure to set the hook in those kids and set it deep, because
the second prong was to make sure the cigarettes were as
addictive as possible, to suppress everybody, including Mr.
Reider's control, and to wire his body and brain for addiction,
to make his choice not totally a free choice anymore, but
something constrained, that he had to fight with his body about,
to strengthen and nurture and grow the power of addiction over
him and turn him into -- you remember that document I told you
about at the beginning, Exhibit 70. As much as possible into a
Pavlov dog or a Skinner rat, pressing the lever for nicotine as
much as possible. And do whatever they could to stop anybody
who was trying to help him, to ridicule and attack doctors and
the Surgeon General trying to warn, that tobacco working group
that we heard about, where the National Cancer Institute was
trying to look at this, to keep them from doing smoking
cessation clinics, to keep them from finding out the truth about
the design, and even to fight the Great American Smokeout with
their own thing, their Great American Smoker Day.
Philip Morris had 100 percent power and control over
these choices, and they used that power to chip away, to chip
away at Mr. Reider's and other people's power over the control
of their addiction, and to make their power and control as low
as possible. 73
And as I said, we've agreed, you should look at Mr.
Reider's responsibility. And I'm not up here saying he has no
part in this, all right. You should look at that, but you need
to also look at Philip Morris's responsibility. And unlike
Philip Morris, who spent the whole trial talking about anything
and everything, except for what they did and what they knew, we
tried to show you both sides of the story.
And one way of looking at this is this: You could
just say 50/50, you could start out there. Philip Morris made
them, and Mr. Reider smoked them and it killed him. But as I
said, it's much, much worse. They designed these cigarettes to
addict him and they kept it a secret, and they lied about
whether they caused cancer, for 50 years. And those cartoons
and ads when Mr. Reider started smoking -- remember, this is a
time when smoking was normal, everyone smoked, there were no
warnings on the packages. He was a boy. In fact, the cigarette
companies didn't tell people in ads about the dangers, and they
lied about it every chance they got. They spent a vast fortune
lying about it.
And worst of all, worst of all, they took advantage of
people's fears by marketing for people who are worried, this
filter, that Selectrate filter, and then the light cigarettes,
the low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes, knowing that those filter
and those low-tar cigarettes would kill them just as much as
regulars, and knowing that the light cigarettes would keep them 74
addicted.
Now, could Mr. Reider have tried harder to quit? Of
course. Of course, he could have. An addict can always try
harder. But at least he tried to quit. Philip Morris never
tried once to tell the truth and let people know the real, full
truth about their products, or give him a fighting chance with a
nonaddictive cigarette.
Mr. Reider was reaching out for help. He didn't have
a death wish. He tried to quit. He couldn't quit. He went on
to those light, low-tar cigarettes that they said would be
safer. Philip Morris put those in his hands, knowing they would
keep him hooked, and that they would kill him.
So if somebody in deliberations says, "Well, I think
you should put more fault on Mr. Reider because he knew, he
knew, he didn't try hard," remember this: He started as a boy
in a different time when there were no warnings, and compare
what he knew, what Rich Reider knew about cigarettes when he
started, about the Selectrate filters, about those light
cigarettes, compare that to what Philip Morris knew about those
things, and compare the role here of addiction.
What was impairing Mr. Reider's choices and abilities
versus Philip Morris? There was nothing in the way of the
choices they made. They were completely full and free. Nobody
was impairing their choices of what to do.
So as I said at the beginning, we believe when you 75
weigh all this out, the evidence might allow as much as 15
percent fault on Mr. Reider, but that's up for you to decide.
And whatever everyone agrees, you write that down on the verdict
form based on what you think Philip Morris has proved to you
about how much responsibility Mr. Reider has. But remember,
Philip Morris's lies and concealment and deception, they're 100
percent responsible for that. Those are separate questions on
the verdict form and those are the next questions.
And I'm going to try to talk about these all together,
it's four questions, but they really all go together.
So let's look at those questions, and talk about them.
Questions 4 and 5, did Mr. Reider rely to his detriment on
Philip Morris's concealment or omission of material information
on or after May '82 concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes, and was that reliance a legal
cause of his death?
And then let's look at 6 and 7 -- or 5, 6 and 7, and
did he rely to his detriment on an act taken on or after May of
'82 in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit material
information or some combination concerning health effects or
addictive nature, and over on the next question is whether that
was a legal cause.
And here's what you don't have to decide --
You can take that down.
Here's what you don't have to decide: We can go back 76
to the Engle findings, that's instruction nine.
Can you pull that up, Ms. London?
Here's what we know and here is what's already been
determined, here's what cannot be questioned in this trial.
No. 4, the Engle defendants concealed or omitted information not
otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was
false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact
concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes, or both.
And, No. 5, that the Engle defendants -- which, again,
Engle defendants includes Philip Morris, agreed to conceal or
omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or
their addictive nature, with the intention that smokers in the
public would rely on this information to their detriment.
You can take that down.
If there's any question about this, pull out
instruction 9, they're the Engle findings, they're right there,
Nos. 4 and 5, and here's what's important: It's already been
found, what Philip Morris omitted and concealed was not known or
otherwise available.
So if in deliberations someone says, well, what did
Phillip -- people knew since John Quincy Adams that it might be
hard to quit, or from Reader's Digest that there might be cancer
in cigarettes. Remember, it's already been determined that what
they concealed was not otherwise known or available, and that 77
can't be questioned in this trial. And that's all right there,
again, in instruction No. 9.
So if anyone in deliberations forgets and says, well,
he knew, it wasn't a secret, it wasn't a mystery what Philip
Morris hid. Sure, they shouldn't have hid it, but he knew it,
remind them instruction 9, it's already been determined what
they hid was not known and was not available.
So the only question here is whether it's more likely
right than wrong that those omissions and concealment were a
legal cause of his lung cancer and death.
And again, the importance here is, the question
doesn't ask you, was it the legal cause, the only thing involved
here. The question is a legal cause. And you have that
definition again in instruction 10. And this is critically
important. This is the only place that will tell you how to
determine it.
Can you show them the top, so they can see that it's
instruction 10?
Wrongful conduct is the legal cause of someone's
death, including the legal cause of damages resulting from
someone's death, if it directly and in natural and continuous
sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such
death, so it can be reasonably said that but for the wrongful
conduct, the death would not have occurred. In order to be
regarded as a legal cause of death -- in order to be regarded as 78 a legal cause of death, wrongful conduct need not be the only
cause. Wrongful conduct may be a legal cause of death even
though it operates in combination with the act of another, some
natural cause or some other cause, if the wrongful conduct
contributes substantially to producing a death.
So again, you don't have to decide whether these lies
and conspiracy, the omission and concealment were the only
cause. You just have to decide if it was one of the causes, a
cause. And you may think that it was the only cause, you may
think that it's one of a number of causes. Either way, if you
find more likely right than wrong that these omissions and the
conspiracy to work together to make them were one of the causes
of Mr. Reider's death, you must answer that question yes.
And there's two ways here that we've seen that the
omissions and concealment were a cause of Mr. Reider's death.
First, the omissions about cancer. Dr. Burns showed us Philip
Morris knew Americans were stopping smoking because they were
worried about cancer, and he showed us Philip Morris spent
millions and millions of dollars to deny and lie about that.
And they did it not for the general public; for addicted
smokers, to keep them smoking. To create a doubt, a
controversy, a debate in their mind.
And they also, they also attacked the Surgeon
General's Office to undermine people trying to warn. And
finally, they made the choice to take advantage of fears by Closing/Barnett
selling things like that Selectrate Marlboro filter that works
fine, does what it's there for, and then by selling the Marlboro
Light cigarettes that said on the front of the pack, lower tar
and nicotine. And we heard it and Dr. Burns showed us how those
lies and concealment -- and that's that line there. It worked
not just with Mr. Reider, but a whole generation of kids who
started smoking and became addicted when Mr. Reider started
smoking.
We also heard it directly from Mr. Reider's family.
He smoked those Marlboro Lights because he thought they were
safer. He thought they had less tar and nicotine. And those
cigarettes killed him.
So that's how we know that the omission and
concealment about cancer were a cause of Mr. Reider's lung
cancer and death.
But there's a second way, which are the omissions and
concealments about addiction. Dr. Cummings showed how the
cigarette companies -- or, I'm sorry, Philip Morris's omissions
and concealment played a role here, too.
Philip Morris understood those cigarettes were --
nicotine was addictive, studied exactly how it works in the body
and the brain, and they engineered cigarettes to make them as
addictive as possible, to make sure they had enough nicotine to
keep you hooked and make it hard to quit. And they hid the
truth about that, and they lied all the way through Mr. Reider's 80
lifetime, even to Congress, about that. And they also designed
and sold those cigarettes that were supposed to be low nicotine,
that people used as a way to try to wean and cut back and stop.
And they knew the whole time, clear in their record, that those
were just as addictive, they didn't provide any less nicotine.
In fact, they were meant to be sure to provide enough nicotine
to keep someone addicted.
And we also know it again from Mr. Reider's family
that he smoked those Marlboro Lights that said low nicotine on
the pack because he thought they were less nicotine and it would
help him wean or cut back and break his habit. But instead of
that, those same cigarettes were designed to keep him hooked and
they did keep him hooked, and they ultimately cost his life.
So either way, if you find that it's more likely right
than wrong that the omissions about cancer -- which is kind of
the orange stuff up there. If you find that those were one of
the causes of his death, then you must answer yes. If you find
that the omissions and the concealment about what they did to
the cigarettes and about addiction were one of the causes, then
you must answer yes. Or if you find both of those things
contributed, along with many other factors, any of those
things -- in any of those circumstances you must answer the
question yes, the omissions and concealment were a cause of his
continued smoking, his addiction, and his lung cancer and death.
And the final part of those questions is whether or 81
not this continued to happen from 1982 forward. And it's
confusing why that's in there. It's a defense here that Philip
Morris is raising and saying --
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor, it's improper.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. BARNETT: All right. Well, there's no question
here for you to talk about -- for you guys to decide about his
reliance all those years before. There's been plenty of
evidence of all that. But the question here is whether or not
the reliance and the omissions and concealments continued into
1982. And if you look at the timeline -- and I should say about
this timeline, it's not -- it's a demonstrative I've used to
organize the evidence. The exhibit numbers are on there. The
exhibits will go back with you to the deliberation room. The
timeline doesn't get to go back there with you, which you may
or -- you may be glad not to see it again. But it's not coming
back there. But look at the timeline, look at the timeline.
The lies about cigarettes causing cancer, they came before '82
and after '82, and they never stopped. They lied about
cigarettes being addictive before '82 and after '82, and they
never stopped. And they rigged the cigarettes for addiction
before, after '82, they never stopped. The low tar -- the
filters and the low tar and the low nicotine, it started before
'82, it went on after '82, it never stopped. And they printed
on the front of those packs "low tar" and "low nicotine," the 82 Marlboro Lights that Mr. Reider smoked, before '82, after '82.
Even though Philip Morris knew it wasn't true, they didn't stop
in '82, they didn't stop until they were forced to stop, and
that was years after Mr. Reider was dead.
It's perfectly clear this went on the whole time he
was alive, and that's how you know the answers to these
questions. 4, 5, 6 and 7 are yes, yes, yes and yes. Yes, the
omissions and the concealment were one of the causes of Mr.
Reider's death.
And in response to all of the evidence you heard, all
the documents that we made you sit and listen to and see, and
everything we presented, when Philip Morris could call any
witness in the land to come in here and present any evidence it
wanted to, explain what they did, or tell you something we
showed you was wrong or incomplete, they could have, like I did
several times, stood up and said there's another part of this
document you need to see -- in response to all of that, they
didn't call a single witness, nobody in here to explain that
what we said was wrong or show you the other side of the story
or say somehow what Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings explained was
inaccurate or incomplete. Instead they just said, well, people
have known for a long time it could be hard to quit and smoking
is bad for you. And they pointed to Reader's Digest, and the
public service announcement with James Earl Jones. And no
kidding, right? The efforts of the doctors and scientists and Closing/Barnett
Surgeon Generals to warn Americans and addicted smokers, that's
exactly -- we already heard all that from Dr. Burns. That is
why, that's exactly why Philip Morris, along with all those
other cigarette companies, did what they did, why they made the
choice to lie and to sell these gimmicks, because they knew word
was getting out and they knew people would quit if they didn't
do something about it. So of course, all that was out there,
and that's all, really, that Philip Morris showed you.
So other people also warning Americans, the
information that was out in the public, that doesn't help Philip
Morris escape responsibility here, and here's the reason why:
Remember the Engle finding. It's already been determined, what
they hid and concealed and omitted, that they knew was false,
according to the finding, it wasn't otherwise known or
available.
Can you put that back up just one more time?
It's very important, and you may have to remind each
other about this. You'll have the instructions back there.
It's instruction 9, it's the Engle findings, and it's No. 4,
"not otherwise known or available."
Nobody outside cigarette companies knew that the
filters in low-tar cigarettes weren't any safer. If the Surgeon
General's Office had known that, they never would have
recommended it. Nobody knew --
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, that's a 84
mischaracterization in the findings.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. BARNETT: Nobody outside the cigarette companies
knew that the low-nicotine cigarettes were just as addictive,
and in fact, were made to be just as addictive. Mr. Reider
smoked low tar because he thought they were safer, and Philip
Morris never told the truth while he was alive, and Mr. Reider
smoked low-nicotine cigarettes because he thought they would
help him break his addiction, he thought they had less nicotine.
Why would he think that? It says it on the front of the pack,
"less nicotine." Philip Morris never told the truth, and those
are the cigarettes that killed him. And that is why, is it more
likely right than wrong that those omissions and concealments
were one of the causes of his death? The answers to those
questions are yes.
Now, question 8 on the verdict form --
Put it up quickly.
-- how much money the verdict should be. It says
"The total amount of damages you find, if any, for Barbara
Reider's loss of services, her loss of companionship and
protection, and her mental pain and suffering as a result of her
husband's lung cancer and death."
Take that down.
Instruction 14 talks about how to figure this out, so
let's look at that. You need to -- instruction 14, you should 85
assess the amount you find to be justified by, again, a
preponderance of the evidence, as full, just, and reasonable
compensation for the damages, no more and no less.
You can take that down.
Just full, just, and reasonable compensation. And to
figure that out, you take only one thing into account, the level
of harms and losses that Philip Morris caused. Nothing else.
Everything else is outside the box.
For example, you can't raise a verdict because you
feel sympathy. Of course you're allowed to feel sympathy, but
you can't raise a verdict because of it. That's an outside
reason. And you can't lower a verdict because money can't bring
Mr. Reider back. That's an outside reason. Harms and losses
only. And there's lots of outside reasons. Jurors have to
avoid them all. So if in deliberations someone says an outside
reason about what amount, like "Barbara Reider doesn't need that
money, she seems like she's doing fine," or "It doesn't matter
if we award the full and fair amount, because it's not going to
make any difference to this big company," those are all outside
reasons.
If there's a juror who insists on using an outside
reason, remind him, it's outside, that's not allowed, pull out
instruction 14 and show them what you can consider. Full, just,
and reasonable compensation, nothing else. And if you have a
juror who won't listen, you should knock on the door and let the 86
Court know that you've got a juror who's not following the
instructions, because your most important duty is to follow the
law here, and no one has the right to make you sit on a jury
that doesn't follow the law.
So in answering question 8, in valuing the harms and
losses, you need to look at how bad the harm was and how long
the harm was. And I'm going to give you a quick kind of example
of how to think about that. So an example of how bad the loss
was or the harm was. Someone caused your wife to have a
sprained ankle --
MS. GALLAGHER: Judge, the "golden rule."
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. BARNETT: I didn't hear the objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: It was the "golden rule" objection.
MS. BARNETT: Oh.
All right. Consider how bad the harm is. If the harm
is a small damage, something that you might be worried about,
you hate to see someone in pain, you might have to help around
the house or run errands, that would be a small amount of
damage. There would be some money to make up for that loss, but
not too much. And that might be the kind of case where I would
have to ask -- it would be low on the scale for a verdict, maybe
in the thousands of dollars.
Imagine a case where someone's injury is worse and a
leg is crushed, and they have to have surgery after surgery, and 87
they're in a cast and they have physical therapy. Well, that's
worse. That's more of a midlevel harm, and it's the kind of
case where I might have to ask -- well, to come back and ask for
a verdict maybe in the hundreds of thousands.
And they go up the scale another step to high. What
happens, what happens where you have to watch your husband
suffer a slow and painful death, and there's nothing you can do,
no cure, nothing to stop it. That's the worst kind of harm.
That's the highest level type of case, and the kind of case
where I have to ask for a verdict in the millions.
And you can evaluate the length of the harm the same
way. A harm that only lasts a few days, that's a small level
harm. I would be at the lower end of the scale, where I would
ask for a verdict of a few thousand dollars maybe. In the
midlevel, if you had an injury that caused someone to be gone
out of your life for six months, maybe a year, that would be a
midlevel harm. That would be a midlevel harm.
But think about the top of the scale, when someone
takes away your husband forever. That's the highest, highest
kind of harm of a case, and that's the kind of case where I have
to ask for a verdict in the millions.
Now, we heard from this family, and we saw it in the
medical records and heard from their friends, how Mr. Reider
died, and we heard how Barbara Reider stood by his side and
tried to make his last months as best as she could possibly make 88
them. And we heard from the family and from the friends how
special Mr. Reider was, how he and Barbara Reider had the kind
of relationship that people dream of. Les Cato said it was a
match made in heaven. It was love at first sight. The minute
Barbara Reider laid eyes on Richard Reider before she met him,
she said, "I'm going to marry that man." And she was 14 when
she met him, they fell in love, they stayed in love, it was a
love that lasted decades, through sickness and in health, and he
was only 54 when he died. Only 54. She met him when she was 14
and she was 50 when he died. They lost their last decades
together, their precious years. And instead of enjoying those
years and the trips they had planned on her retirement, and all
the grandchildren, and all the special moments of growing old
together, instead of that, Barbara Reider is left with the final
memories of her big, strong husband, her first love and her
soulmate, as a shell, a shell of the man that he was, of the
husband and father that he was, weak and dying, and being eaten
from the inside out by cancer in a bed, hospital bed in the
family room. And on oxygen, still needing to go outside -- it
was described on the witness stand -- (illustrating) -- to go
out and suck in the doses of nicotine.
I told you, based on the harms and losses in this
case, that I would have to ask for a significant verdict. And
when you consider what happened to this family, the amount of
that verdict should be $8 million, I submit. But that's up for 89
you to decide. You could put more or less, depending on what
you decide is more likely right than wrong, the right amount, a
fair and just amount.
And finally, the last question, question No. 9 is
whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive
damages are warranted in this case. I need you to look at
instruction 15 --
Did we show the question?
Here's the question -- if you find yes to those
questions about the omission and concealment, do you find by
clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted
against Philip Morris under the circumstances of this case?
Look at instruction 15. That is --
I want the part about did they know -- did they have
the high probability --
All right. Here we go. Punitive damages are
warranted if you find that Ms. Reider has proven that Philip
Morris had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of its conduct,
and that --
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor. May I
approach? I don't think these are the instructions -- the final
instructions.
THE COURT: Okay.
All right, ladies and gentlemen, let me stress
something to you. I gave you the instructions before the 90
closing arguments, so that you would have your actual
instructions on the law before the attorneys made their closing
arguments to you. It's natural and normal for the attorneys to
discuss the instructions with you, but it is only the
instructions that I gave to you, and give to you at any time,
that are your actual instructions on the law. And again, you
will have those same very instructions for your consideration
and reference during your deliberations.
MS. BARNETT: And I don't know if -- absolutely, the
instructions that go -- I'm not -- the instructions that go back
with you are the instructions to look at. And I'm not sure what
the issue is.
But here is the paragraph I was talking about.
Punitive damages are warranted if you find Ms. Reider has proven
by clear and convincing evidence that Philip Morris had actual
knowledge of the wrongfulness of its conduct, that there was a
high probability of injury or damage, and that despite that
knowledge they intentionally pursued the course of conduct
resulting in his death.
You can take that down.
And the answers are yes, yes and yes. We know that
straight from Philip Morris's own documents. They speak for
themselves and speak loud and clear. No witness came in here
and disputed any of that or anything from the records. And we
know -- 91
Can you put up Engle finding No. 4.
Did Philip Morris know its conduct was wrong? Well,
Engle finding No. 4 tells us this: Not only was the information
not otherwise known or available --
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor, findings cannot
be used as a basis for punitive damages.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. BARNETT: All right. I guess take that down.
Your Honor, I --
THE COURT: Do you want to approach?
MS. BARNETT: I'll just -- I disagree with the
characterization of the law, but I'll just continue with my
argument. I don't want to interrupt --
THE COURT: If we need to discuss the law -- if you
disagree and you want to make a record, then you need to come to
the bench to do that, if you feel -- if you need to. I don't
want to do this from where you are.
MS. BARNETT: I just -- I don't want to -- I hate
to -- I hate to interrupt this further.
THE COURT: Okay. Well, it's up to you.
MS. BARNETT: Yeah, I think so.
THE COURT: I can only deal with the objection when
it's made.
MS. BARNETT: I understand, and I'm going to let Ms.
London -- I know it's one lawyer, so I'll let Ms. London 92
approach on this issue.
THE COURT: Now?
MS. BARNETT: Yes, I guess so, yes, please.
(Bench conference between the Court and counsel:)
MS. LONDON: There's an order in this case, the
Defendants moved for summary judgment on punitive damages,
arguing that the Plaintiff cannot rely in any part on the
findings, and that summary judgment was denied. The governing
orders in this case are that the Plaintiff may rely in part on
the Engle findings for punitive damages. That's the governing
order of the case.
THE COURT: What's the "in part"?
MS. LONDON: Well, we have to provide other evidence.
We can use the findings plus other evidence to prove punitive
damages.
THE COURT: What's the basis of the objection?
MS. GALLAGHER: The problem is the concealment
findings were determined by the Engle jury on a preponderance of
the evidence. The standard for punitive is clear and
convincing. So by definition, that cannot be a basis for
punitive damages. It's the wrong standard of proof.
MS. LONDON: And Judge Dalton ruled on that.
THE COURT: Has this already been determined and
decided in this case? It does sound like the summary judgment
motion in limine. Isn't that what's on appeal right now? 93
MS. LONDON: You preserved the issue. This is the
issue that I expect we'll raise on appeal, but that issue has
already been decided in those cases.
THE COURT: Do you -- I mean, I -- it sounds like that
summary judgment -- now that Ms. London is discussing it, it
seems like what has been -- I agree with you the standard is
different, but if some judge has already decided, then I'm not
going to redecide or reconsider it. So I'm going to reverse my
ruling and let her go ahead -- go back and show the finding,
unless you can tell me --
MS. GALLAGHER: No, that's it, Your Honor, it's the
wrong standard of proof.
THE COURT: Right, but if it's been argued -- and
again, I wasn't present for that argument and I didn't -- it
wasn't my initial ruling, but I've adopted it and it's
incorporated here, so it will be applied.
MS. LONDON: Thank you, Your Honor.
(Bench conference concluded.)
THE COURT: Ms. Barnett, it appears you're correct,
you'll be able to proceed with your argument, and I apologize
for the interruption.
And if you would, go ahead, Ms. London, and place that
finding back up on the overhead screen. Thank you.
MS. BARNETT: So we were -- and I promise I'm wrapping
up. We were talking about the last question on the verdict form 94
and what evidence there is that Philip Morris had actual
knowledge of the wrongfulness of its conduct. And I was just
going to point out to you that there's a finding that they knew
the material was false or misleading.
You can take that down.
You know what, are they seriously going to argue to
you that they didn't know what they were doing was wrong? I
don't think so. There's been no witness to come in here and say
that they were confused in any way about what they were doing
and why they were doing it.
And the second question is whether -- there is a
finding, there is an Engle finding about specifically these
actions were taken with the intention that smokers rely upon it.
And that's already been determined by another jury. But there's
nobody who has come in here and presented any evidence to you
that it wasn't intentional. Everything that's been presented,
and it's in their documents, is that everything the cigarette
companies did was intentional.
And did they know it was going to harm people? Yes,
they knew it, they knew it -- I'm trying to stay behind the
podium. From the '50s, from the '50s they knew their cigarettes
killed people. Everything they did was knowingly, intentionally
for profit. It was premeditated. And they knew they had to get
teenagers smoking because they were the ones vulnerable to
addiction. They knew they had to engineer cigarettes, once they 95
got them, to hook them and keep people hooked. And they knew
when the information came out, they had to intercept people who
might quit, intercept them with denials and lies, intercept them
with cigarettes that were supposed to be safer, intercept them
with cigarettes that were supposed to give less nicotine that
would help them quit, but really wouldn't.
Oh, yeah, and slow down anything that might help
people, like Nicorette chewing gum. Nothing they did was an
accident. We saw it clear and plain from their own documents,
and there's been no evidence whatsoever to the contrary. And
did Philip Morris disregard the consequences, do it anyway?
Yeah. You heard it even from Mr. Jupe.
Can we put that slide up, the Phillip Morris slide?
And we did those depositions because we were afraid
they wouldn't bring someone here to answer our questions. We
were right. Mr. Jupe said -- he admitted it, they know it.
400,000 Americans die every year.
Take that down, please.
That's 40 to 50 percent of these companies' customers,
just from using their product as it's sold to be used. That
means in the United States about every minute-and-a-half someone
dies from cigarettes. And they didn't just -- they didn't just
disregard the consequences. Heck, Philip Morris and those
companies they worked with, they patted themselves on the back
and celebrated, and said, wow, this was a brilliantly conceived 96
and executed plan, and they wrote it in their documents.
So I want to look at instruction 15 again. Punitive
damages are for punishment to Philip Morris -- two purposes --
punishment to Philip Morris and -- "and" as a deterrent -- it's
that line up there, punishment to Philip Morris and as a
deterrent to others.
So they're not -- they are to punish, and that's an
important thing here, but they are also to deter, to deter
Philip Morris and other companies.
And do you remember what else Mr. Jupe said? Let's
have a look at that. He said, "Oh, no, Philip Morris does
not believe addiction to cigarettes is a substantial public
health problem." And Mr. Kornegay, we read this guy's
deposition, but you saw his picture in one of those videos, the
guy they said they don't know what briar in the patch got him.
What did he say? This was --
Can you just zoom that back, please.
This was in the '90s. You know what he said?
"Nothing is wrong with what the cigarette companies have done."
So it's important not just to punish, but to deter
further conduct by Philip Morris, and not just Philip Morris,
but every other manufacturer of every product in this country.
Every manufacturer is looking at what you do right here right
now. Punitive damages tell companies it's not okay to lie about
a danger in your product, it is not okay to hide a danger in 97
your product. And we need you to be plain and clear here, every
American needs you to be plain and clear right here, you have
the power to tell these companies, Philip Morris and everybody
else, it's not okay to lie about dangers, you just can't do it.
And it's not okay to hide dangers you know about in your
products, you just can't do it, not here in this community, we
will not allow it.
So when you're deciding if punitive damages are
warranted in this case, the answer to that question is yes.
Thank you very much for your attention.
