                    CLOSING ARUMENT
          MR. BARINGER:  Good afternoon.  This will be
     the last time I get a chance talk to you, and I do
     want to join everyone.  You've been remarkable. And we appreciate your service and I hope you're
     proud of what you've done for your community and
     for your country by performing this vital duty.
          You heard the evidence in Phase 2.  And when I
     talk to you before we started, I said that Phase 2
     is different, it's not a rehash of Phase 1.  It's
     not to go back to the issues that you already
     considered.  It's not to revisit the decisions that
     you made because no one is questioning those
     decisions.
          The question is what effect does the new
     evidence that you have heard have on what you're
     going to do ultimately about punitive damages?
          It wasn't about talking all the things that
     you had heard before.  It's about the new evidence.
     And the ultimate question is r.J. Reynolds in 20 --
          MR. GARY:  Objection.  Your Honor, it is about
     R.J. Reynolds.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BARINGER:  The question is, when you
     consider the evidence of both phases.  But this
     phase in particular is the question is does the
     R.J. Reynolds of 2014 need to be punished and
     deterred?  And that's ultimately the question that
     you will have to answer when you go back into the jury deliberation room.
          You can, at your discretion, decline to assess
     punitive damages.  It means the fact that you found
     for entitlement to punitive damages to get this
     phase doesn't bind you.  You are not obligated.
     And ultimately you'll have to decide if you're
     going to award any and what amount if you do.
          And that's -- that's the point of what we're
     doing here.  That's what this has been all about.
     And I want you to remember that punitive damages
     can only be awarded to the estate of
     Michael Johnson.  It's not like in some other
     places where money can go to charities or it can go
     to the public health community.  It only goes to
     the Estate of Michael Johnson which is Ms. Robinson
     and Michael Johnson.
          And keep in mind that any amount that you
     award today will go to them, and it will be in
     addition to the compensatory damages that you've
     already awarded.
          And that compensatory award that you made was
     supposed to reflect the amount of money that you
     felt was adequate to make them whole for their
     loss, to make them whole for the loss of the
     relationship. And I can tell you that the $17 million that
     you awarded yesterday sent a very, very loud
     message to R.J. Reynolds.  But you have to
     consider, they've already been made whole.  Is
     there a reason to give them more money on top of
     that?  Because that is what a punitive damages
     award would do.
          The scope of punitive damages.  Remember that
     Reynolds can only be punished for the conduct that
     you found caused his death.  And most importantly,
     it's not for harm to other smokers.  Ladies and
     gentlemen, those other smokers have their own
     cases.  They have their own opportunity.
          You heard that there are over 5,000 more of
     these cases pending in Florida right now.  Those
     people will get their day in court.  You're not
     here to decide this case on the basis of what may
     or may not happen in those other 5,000 cases.
          And remember that -- go back.
          The most important part here is it's not for
     selling cigarettes.  And I want you to think just
     for a moment what Mr. Gary just told you in his
     remarks a few minutes ago.  He said R.J. Reynolds
     is making money selling cigarettes that they know
     are addictive and they know are deadly. Ladies and gentlemen, yes, they are.  Every
     cigarette company in the United States sells a
     product that the United States Congress decided was
     deadly and addictive over 50 years ago.
          And remember we have made that choice as a
     society to allow companies to sell cigarettes and
     to advertise cigarettes knowing full well that
     they're dangerous, knowing full well that they are
     addictive.
          That doesn't mean that wrongful conduct isn't
     punished.  What it means is you can't punish them
     for engaging in legal conduct.  That's not the role
     that you've been assigned.  You're to decide the
     case about Michael Johnson, not punish Reynolds for
     doing what it has a legal right to do every day,
     and that is sell cigarettes.
          Punishment can only be based on concealment of
     information and agreement to conceal information
     that were a legal cause of Michael Johnson's death.
     And what was the concealment?  Remember what the
     specific concealment was that you were to consider?
     Concealing information about the health effects and
     addictive nature of nicotine.  That was
     specifically what it was about.  And we'll talk
     about that in the context of where Reynolds is now compared to where they were in the period of time
     that you evaluated in Phase 1.
          Because if you listen to the evidence and saw
     what they're doing today, there cannot be any
     question that Reynolds does not do business in 2014
     the way it did back during that period of time.
          Mitigating evidence.  Mitigating evidence is
     evidence you may consider in determining the
     appropriate amount of punitive damages.  Mitigating
     evidence is evidence that you consider in addition
     to the evidence you considered to decide they were
     liable for Mr. Johnson's death.
          Mitigating evidence is evidence that shows you
     things have changed.  Mitigating evidence is
     evidence that tells you don't have to be worried
     about deterring conduct because the conduct stopped
     a long time before this case even began.
          Mitigating evidence is what you balance
     against what you found and what you consider now to
     make a just award, an award that is right based on
     the evidence, not based on anger and not based on
     sympathy.
          R.J. Reynolds has been punished and has made a
     fresh start.  Remember, there are two purposes to
     punitive damages, punishment and deterrence.  We'll talk about both of them.
          But remember, deterrence in particular.
     Deterrence is designed to change someone's behavior
     so that they do better in the future.  R.J.
     Reynolds has started doing better long, long before
     this case was filed.
          Remember that The Tobacco Institute is gone,
     the Council for Tobacco Research is gone, the
     Tobacco Industry Research Committee is gone.  They
     were all gone in 1999 or 2000, long before this
     case was ever filed.  It didn't take this to make
     them go away.
          All of these people who you heard from, read
     their documents, they are all gone long before we
     got to this courtroom.  It wouldn't -- it didn't
     take a punitive damages award in this case for
     those people to be gone.
          R.J. Reynolds in 2014, it's new ownership, new
     executives and new scientists, just like
     Dr. Borgerding, a man who has spent the last 30
     years of his life, his entire professional life,
     working to try to find ways to make products less
     hazardous.  That's what he's devoted his life to,
     and that's who you would be punishing with a
     punitive damages award today, the people that are at R.J. Reynolds in 2014.  Not the people that were
     there in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s.
          The question, as we described it, are punitive
     damages needed to be prevent Reynolds from
     concealing and agreeing to conceal information in
     2014?
          I want you to keep something in mind,
     Dr. Proctor, during his testimony told you that
     Reynolds had admitted in 2000 that cigarettes cause
     diseases, including lung cancer and nicotine is
     addictive.
          The main complaint from plaintiffs during
     Phase 1 was that Michael Johnson didn't know that
     smoking was addictive or that it could cause
     serious disease like lung cancer because Reynolds
     didn't tell him.
          Reynolds has been telling the world since
     2000, 14 years before we arrived in this courtroom
     that nicotine is addictive and that smoking causes
     disease.
          It doesn't take a $100 million punitive
     damages award to make Reynolds tell people that.
     They've been doing it for over ten years already.
     Why punish them for doing the right thing for the
     last 14 years?  It makes no sense. Reynolds informed smokers in 2014.  Through
     the website which you saw, they talk about -- they
     have general sections on health, they have risk.
     They talk about risk -- reduced-risk products to
     encourage people, they talk about cessation, and
     they talk about youth smoking prevention programs.
          Every piece of that is a communication to the
     public in its own way.  When they talk about
     reduced-risk products, they acknowledge the risk
     that exists with smoking and say you can lower that
     risk.
          When they talk about cessation, it's you take
     a risk by smoking and we're developing products
     that can help you quit.  If you're concerned about
     your health, if you recognize the risk, we're going
     to make something that can help you stop and they
     encourage it.
          R.J. Reynolds doesn't want people smoking that
     aren't informed.  It doesn't want people that are
     concerned about their health.  It wants only people
     who recognize the risk, weigh it, and make an adult
     decision.  That's it.
          Let's see what they specifically -- what they
     say:  "Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of
     preventable deaths in the United States.  Cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of
     developing lung cancer, heart disease, chronic
     bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases
     and adverse health conditions."
          Ladies and gentlemen, the allegation in the
     case was that Reynolds didn't acknowledge any of
     that.  That was the heart of the concealment claim,
     that they didn't tell people that.  Well, they do
     tell people.  They have been telling people.  They
     tell people today that.  There is no concealment.
     It's right there for everyone to see.
          Next slide.
          Quitting cigarette smoking significantly
     reduces the risk for serious disease.  They tell
     them they're taking a risk by smoking and that they
     can lower that risk.  R.J. Reynolds believes that
     individuals should rely on the conclusions of the
     U.S. Surgeon General.
          Now, there was a lot about this today, and I
     want to talk about it very frankly.  The allegation
     before was, well, Reynolds said that they didn't
     believe smoking caused cancer and that interrupted
     the Surgeon General's message, that caused people
     not to believe it.  It created doubt.  Remember
     they said it was a psychological crutch because R.J. Reynolds disputed the Surgeon General's
     conclusion.
          So what happens today?  They try to
     manufacturer a controversy that doesn't exist.
     Mr. Acosta desperately wanted to find something
     that Dr. Borgerding disagreed with so he can stand
     up here in closing and say, see, they haven't
     changed, they still disagree with the Surgeon
     General.
          The whole point of Reynolds' policy of doing
     this is so that those controversies don't exist, so
     that their scientific disagreements, perhaps with
     the Surgeon General, don't get in the way of a
     smoker's decision whether to quit or not.
          There's an old saying "Damned if you do,
     damned if you don't."  Phase 1 it was you disagreed
     with the Surgeon General.  Phase 2, you tell them
     to rely on the Surgeon General.  I thought that's
     what they wanted.
          The point is Reynolds does not take any action
     to state a position that would cause people to
     doubt the messages about smoking from the Surgeon
     General.  They -- Reynolds tells them it's
     dangerous and it's addictive.  The Surgeon General
     talks about it. But it's completely unreasonable to say in
     2014 that when Reynolds tells smokers to rely on
     the Surgeon General that they're doing something
     wrong and they're doing something different.  It is
     180 degrees different than what they told you
     during Phase 1 because they want to manufacture a
     controversy so they can crank up a number.
          And I want you to remember one thing.  Let's
     talk about ingredients.  Dr. Borgerding told you --
     it's not just a matter of they list of ingredients,
     it's not just a matter that all the ingredients are
     there, or you can get the ingredients on a
     brand-by-brand basis.
          But Dr. Borgerding told you that R.J.
     Reynolds, in its product stewardship program, tests
     every ingredient that it adds to a cigarette.
          And if that addition increases the risk
     through chemistry, through toxicology, in-vitro,
     all kinds of different tests, if it shows any
     increase, any potential for increase in risk, R.J.
     Reynolds doesn't use it.
          And remember, none of the agencies that have
     reviewed the kind of ingredients that are being
     used have ever determined that one shouldn't.
     Remember what Dr. Proctor told you.  Dr. Proctor said cigarettes without additives are not safer
     than cigarettes with additives.  Cigarettes with
     additives are no more addicting and no more
     dangerous than cigarettes without additives.
          It's great to have the information on the
     ingredients.  But from a safety standpoint, that's
     not where -- that's not the issue.
          And one other thing, remember what did
     Dr. Proctor and Dr. Benowitz both tell you?  If you
     went out in a field, chopped tobacco, cured it,
     rolled it in paper and smoked it, it can cause
     cancer just like a manufactured cigarette with
     ingredients.
          It could be addictive, just like a
     manufactured cigarette with ingredients.  But the
     information on ingredients is certainly been -- is
     certainly available.
          Reynolds tells everyone:  No tobacco product
     has been shown to be safe and without risks.
     That's not just cigarettes.  Every product they
     make that is a tobacco people they tell people.
     They all have risks.
          What else does Reynolds say?  It informs
     smokers about the availability of reduced-risk
     products and cessation aids.  First of all, it says the best course of action for tobacco consumers
     concerned about their health is to quit.
          The second is:  Adults who continue to use
     products should consider reductions of risk for
     serious diseases associated with moving from
     cigarettes to the use of smoke-free tobacco or
     nicotine products.
          R.J. Reynolds is telling people that you have
     the ability to choose your level of risk.  You
     should move down from cigarettes to less risky
     products.  They tell them the product is risky, and
     then they tell them what's potentially better.
          And this is the continuum.  Remember
     Dr. Borgerding told you the highest risk tobacco
     product available is a regular cigarette because
     you burn tobacco and that creates all of those
     chemicals.  Remember, there are dangerous chemicals
     in smoke, not from the ingredients, but from
     burning tobacco.
          And so burning tobacco is the highest risk.
     Then you work your way down, heat, not burn,
     smoke-free Vuse, SNUS, down to the nicotine
     replacement products.  It shows people that they
     can choose where they want to be along that
     continuum of risk.  It's a decision they have a right to make.  It's a decision they have a right
     to be informed and this informs them.
          Let's talk about a few of them.  Remember,
     Premiere.  Reynolds spent a billion dollars between
     Premiere and Eclipse trying to invent a product
     that would reduce risk by not burning tobacco.  It
     took all of its knowledge about how constituents
     got into smoke, about how the burning of tobacco
     created carcinogens.  And it looked for a solution
     to make money, if it would have been successful, of
     course.
          But it was because it would reduce risk to
     smokers.  That's why they did it.  It was a failure
     but they didn't stop.  They went -- and one other
     thing I want to remind you of, Dr. Proctor, when he
     testified said that Reynolds working to develop a
     heat-not-burn product was safe -- the product would
     have been safer than a conventional cigarette.
          Then Eclipse, available since '96, still
     available nationally, sold in Florida.  R.J.
     Reynolds loses money on every pack of Eclipse it
     sells.  Why does it continue to do it?  Doesn't
     have that.  It continues to do it because on that
     risk continuum it is lower than conventional
     cigarettes and Reynolds believes smokers have a right to choose whether to use it or not, and
     Reynolds tells the public that.  It doesn't conceal
     information.  It tells them:  You're increasing
     your risk if you smoke conventional cigarettes
     versus using something like Eclipse.
          Then there's SNUS.  Dramatically lowered
     smoking-related disease rates.  Has a warning
     label.  Doesn't have to, but says smokeless tobacco
     is addictive.  The point is SNUS is another option
     that R.J. Reynolds provides to its customers by
     telling them, by marketing the product so they know
     that they are -- that they have a chance to reduce
     their risk if they still want to use tobacco.
          And then there's Vuse, the electronic
     cigarette.  Dr. Proctor incidentally thought it was
     a very positive -- very positive development.  He
     said that it's safer than conventional cigarettes.
     It's acceptable to consumers.  And Dr. Proctor
     said, Pure nicotine is not carcinogenic.
          Vuse is a product that's being offered and
     it's offered in a way that delivers a message to
     smokers about the relative risk of the product.
     That's not concealment of the health risks.  It's
     not concealment of the addictive nature.  It's just
     the opposite.  It's what plaintiffs claim to want you to give Reynolds the incentive to do.
          The point is they've been doing it long before
     this trial ever started.  It's not necessary to
     motivate them to do these things through an award
     of punitive damages in this case.  They're already
     doing it.  They've already been doing it.
     Niconovum, Zonnic.  Reynolds helped smokers quit
     smoking.  Reynolds' scientists work to help develop
     and market this product, which is designed to get
     smokers to quit smoking because Reynolds wants them
     to have the information, they want them to have the
     option.
          And remember with Niconovum, with Zonnic, one
     of the things they're doing is they're selling it
     where cigarettes are sold, instead of off in a
     pharmacy somewhere in the back where it's hard to
     get to.  They're putting Zonnic right out where the
     cigarettes are, right where they're sold on the
     counter, so that smokers have an option to choose
     to quit smoking.  They're even less expensive than
     cigarettes.
          It's more of a commitment than just doing
     something hypothetical.  It's thinking about it and
     how can we help consumers, how can we help smokers
     reduce their risk?  Reynolds doesn't need to have a massive judgment against them to be incentivized to
     do it.  They're already doing it.
          Youth smoking.  We've talked a lot about this.
     Reynolds is committed to prevent youth tobacco use.
     The position clear on the website, but it's not
     just stating a position.  I want you to think about
     the evidence that you heard in Phase 1 about youth
     marketing.
          Do you remember seeing a single document after
     the 1980s?  Let's talk about what's happened to
     youth smoking rates in the United States since
     1997.  Take a look at the reductions.
     Dr. Borgerding talked about this.  In every age
     category since 1997 you see massive drops in youth
     smoking rates.
          The plaintiffs tell you that Reynolds is doing
     the same old thing.  Reynolds is still getting kids
     to smoke.  But the evidence is to the contrary.
          The youth smoking rates are dramatically lower
     in the United States than they were.  And why?
     There are a lot of reasons, but one is Reynolds has
     been committed to doing something about it.
     Reynolds has youth prevention programs:  Under 18
     Tobacco, We Card, and Right Decisions Right Now, Be
     Tobacco Free. They restrict marketing and advertising to
     adults.  They promote stringent laws to prevent
     youth tobacco use.  They support the We Card
     program and they support Right Decisions Right Now.
     You don't need to have a massive judgment against
     them to make them do something to help prevent
     youth smoking.  They've been doing it for years and
     years before this case was ever thought of.
          They showed you -- Dr. Borgerding showed you
     some of the things.  They give materials for
     parents to talk to their kids, for grandparents to
     talk to their kids.  You saw that they sent out to
     over 20,000 schools in the United States.  They
     weren't sending letters like the letter you saw
     from Willow Ridge talking about the dangers of
     smoking back in the '50s and '60s.
          What they're sending now, the Reynolds of
     2014, is they're sending material they had outside
     experts develop to help keep kids from starting to
     smoke.  That's what Reynolds is doing in 2014
     without any incentive of a massive judgment.  What
     else does Reynolds do?  It warns about the risks.
     We talked about the marketing guidelines.
          The restrictions and penalties for retailers.
     Don't sell them to kids.  Stiffer penalties for kids that have them or try to buy them and use
     them.  Every bit of it is designed to help stop
     youth smoking.
          Harm reduction strategy.  Remember,
     Dr. Borgerding talked about harm reduction, and
     there are a lot of pieces to it.  Part of the harm
     reduction is you prevent initiation among youth,
     which we just talked about.  Then you promote
     quitting among adults and youth, and that's like
     Niconovum and other products, and you eliminate the
     exposure to secondhand smoke.
          The smokeless products, SNUS, and Vuse,
     there's no secondhand smoke, and that's another
     design that is intended to alert people about
     dangers and to do something about them.
          Are punitive damages needed to prevent
     Reynolds from concealing information in 2014?  I
     think the evidence pretty overwhelmingly shows no.
     They've been doing things for ten or more years,
     actually almost 20 years, they've been providing
     information openly.  The denial is ended.  They've
     made the admissions and they've gone forward.
          And now you have another -- one other
     additional piece to add to the puzzle, not only
     have they been doing it voluntarily, but the regulatory structure in the United States ensures
     that they will have to continue to do that, just
     like everyone else, and that's through the FDA.
     The FDA requires disclosure.  They have to tell
     them about the research on smoking and health.
          They have to tell them about research to
     smoking and addiction, product ingredients, they
     have to provide that and disclosure it; content and
     delivery of nicotine by brand they have to tell
     them; quantities of carcinogens and other harmful
     constituents in tobacco products and tobacco smoke.
          You don't have to just rely on Reynolds doing
     it because it thinks it's right, which it is doing
     right now, because they started doing all this
     before the FDA ever got the power in 2009.  But you
     can count on the fact that you don't need to
     deter -- worry about deterring that kind of conduct
     because that's the FDA's job now.
          What else about the FDA?  Remember the
     oversight?  They can regulate, manufacturing,
     packaging, marketing.  They can regulate nicotine
     yields.  They can regulated yields of harmful and
     potentially harmful constituents.  They can
     regulate additives.  They can do all that.  If the
     FDA mandated that R.J. Reynolds provide a list of ingredients at every cash register where cigarettes
     are sold, the FDA could order them to do that.
          If the FDA ordered them to print all the
     ingredients or all the harmful constituents on the
     pack of cigarettes, if they decided that would
     actually enhance the public health, the FDA has the
     power to do that.
          What else does the FDA have the power to do?
     Close plants, seize products, stop product sales.
     It's not a paper tire.  And remember, who's paying
     for all of the FDA work that's being done?  The
     tobacco industry is paying the cost of all of this
     regulation, not the American taxpayer.  And it's
     hundreds of million of dollars and it will continue
     indefinitely into the future.
          We talked about deterrents.  Let me talk to
     you about punishment.  Reynolds has been punished.
     You've heard about it.  Just in the state of
     Florida, just in the Engle cases that have been
     tried so far, R.J. Reynolds has paid out over
     $100 million in punitive damages.  But plaintiffs
     want you to think all the sudden if you add to
     that, it will make a difference that those prior
     judgments didn't make.  Does that make any sense?
     R.J. Reynolds has been receiving messages.  You're message delivered on the compensatory damages of
     $17 million would make anyone sit up and take
     notice.  Do you need $100 million more?
          If the first $100 million didn't make any
     sense, do you think the second hundred would?  But
     the point was Reynolds' conduct has changed long
     before you sat down in jury selection two weeks
     ago.  In fact, decades ago in the earlier 2000.
          So 14 years of a changed company and they want
     to you add another $100 million on to because they
     think it's this case that's special.  Only you have
     the power.
          Well, you do have the power.  You have the
     power to do what is just and right in this case.
     And that's enormous power, and I'm glad our country
     gives it to you.  But it is a power that is not to
     be abused by thinking that you are to solve the
     world's problems because they tell you a bigger
     number would solve everything else.  That you have
     the power to change the world.
          You have the power to do justice.  And you
     have the power to think about in 2014 is what
     they're asking because they want a big pile of
     money, or because it would really make a difference
     in R.J. Reynolds' conduct? It's not just that $100 million.  Reynolds
     pays a lot of money to other areas.  Let's talk
     about Florida.  Oh, the master settlement
     agreement.  The master settlement agreement,
     payments to Florida have amounted to about
     $2 billion.
          THE COURT:  Two minutes.
          MR. BARINGER:  Thank you.
          So they're paying through the MSA as well as
     the judgments that you've talked about.  I want to
     you think about their $100 million that they're
     asking for.  Multiply $100 million times 5,000 and
     see what number you come up with.  Like $500
     billion is what they're saying.
          If it was $100 million and all 5,000 of those
     cases, they're talking about $500 billion is what
     they think is fair and just and what's necessary to
     deter R.J. Reynolds.  But it's not true.
          2014, do you need to award anything remotely
     similar to that?  Even $500,000 times 5,000 is a
     billion and a half dollars, and that's with a
     $50,000 award.  Do you need to award it to change
     R.J. Reynolds' conduct?
          Are they concealing information today about
     the health effects of smoking or the addictive nature of nicotine?  They tell smokers it causes
     serious disease, they tell them it's addictive,
     they tell them quitting reduces their risk, they
     tell them that other products reduces their risk,
     they tell them that they have products can help
     them quit if that's what they want to do.
          What is R.J. Reynolds withholding today?  What
     would your verdict do tomorrow to change their
     conduct?  Would it make a difference?  Is R.J.
     Reynolds' conduct anything but open and transparent
     today?  That's the question you have to ask.
          And all I can ask and all R.J. Reynolds can
     ask is that you give it careful, honest, thoughtful
     consideration about what difference would it make.
     Would it make Reynolds do anything differently than
     it does today?  If the answer to that question is
     no, that should tell you how to fill out the
     verdict form.
          Ladies and gentlemen, it's been a pleasure
     seeing you every day working hard.  We thank you.
     And that's all we have to say.
