MR. KAISER: May it please the court.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. KAISER: Counsel, Miss Ruffo, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning.
What I'm going to do in my closing argument is discuss with you basically the verdict form, and we're going to start with the Engle class membership. I'll discuss the facts relating to that.
We're going to go and we're going to talk about the statute of limitations defense that has been raised by the defense in this case.
We're going to talk about the Engle findings.
That is why this case is about Lorillard Tobacco. It's about Philip Morris. And that is why we talk about them.
Number 1, as I track the verdict form,
Engle class membership, and the judge is going to instruct you. Class membership, was Mrs. Ruffo addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked and did the addiction cause her disease? That is class membership.
Let's talk about addiction. In this case, we brought you Dr. Barry Reed, who was the treating physician for Mrs. Ruffo for many, many years and continues to be her treating physician today. He diagnosed her with COPD in 1990, and he has seen her as recently as January of this year.
Now, there was a brief period of time where she saw someone else, but, by and large, he has been her treating physician for years.
Dr. Barry Reed is a specialist in pulmonology, lung diseases. Barry Reed deals with patients on a daily basis that smoke.
Barry Reed deals with people on a daily basis that have COPD. Dr. Reed deals with patients on a daily basis that have addiction based on
We're going to talk about the legal causation in this case.
We're going to talk about reliance in this case. We're going to talk about comparative fault in this case. And then, most importantly, we're going to talk about damages.
Now, at the outset, if you recall during counsel for Philip Morris' opening statement, he noted that I spent 11 minutes talking about Dorothy Ruffo.
If you remember during the opening statements by counsel for both defendants, they spent zero talking about themselves.
Now, this case is, indeed, about Philip Morris and Lorillard Tobacco Company.
Mrs. Ruffo brought this case against the defendants here.
It is our obligation to prove that the defendants in this case caused the injuries for Mrs. Ruffo's smoking. We have to prove that to you by a greater weight of the evidence, and I will show you.
It is our obligation to show that the defendants in this case must pay damages to Mrs. Ruffo for the injuries that they caused.
their smoking and their disease.
Barry Reed, as you will see in his medical records, spoke hours upon hours upon hours with Mrs. Ruffo, as you could look in the medical records and see, because his medical records, after each note, talks about the amount of face time he had with Dorothy Ruffo.
And if you go through those medical records, you can see, from 1990 up until 2013, there have been hours that Dr. Reed has had the ability to talk with his patient about her smoking, about her health, about everything of her condition. And what did he do? On numerous occasions in his medical records, he made a medical diagnosis, nicotine addiction.
Now, this is a person who has had the chance for 15 years or so to talk to Dorothy Ruffo, to examine Dorothy Ruffo, to listen to Dorothy Ruffo, and to understand her condition about her smoking. And if you want to, you can go through the medical records and you can see instance after instance after instance of Dr. Reed's medical diagnosis of cigarette addiction.
So that's one witness we brought you to
prove to you, by a greater weight of the evidence, that Mrs. Ruffo was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked, the Benson & Hedges and the Kents manufactured by Philip Morris and Lorillard.
Greater weight of the evidence. Are we more likely right than wrong? Simple.
Now, Dr. Goldman testified. Dr. Goldman never met Mrs. Ruffo. Dr. Goldman is an expert witness. He's an associate dean at the University of South Florida, been practicing for over 40 years. He's Board-certified in pulmonology and internal medicine. Ran a smoking cessation clinic for a number of years, has trained others to be able to recognize and treat addiction.
And Dr. Goldman said he relied on the deposition testimony of Mrs. Ruffo and the medical records, and what he did tell you? She was, indeed, addicted, and he had many reasons to support that.
Number 1, Dr. Goldman told you, just generally, generally, people like Mrs. Ruffo that are chronic, heavy smokers that smoke anywhere from a pack a day and more for 30 or
And Dr. Goldman said that's addiction. That's addiction, especially when the first thing you do in the morning, because you haven't smoked in a long time, is to grab a cigarette. And when you smoke when you're sick and you're going to die, that is an indicator of addiction.
And Dr. Goldman also was aware of certain statements that Dorothy Ruffo made, I like smoking. I enjoy smoking. I'm not ready to quit. I don't want to quit. And what did he tell you? That is denial. That is what an addict says. That's the way addicts talk.
Mrs. Ruffo, herself, said, when I would say, I don't want to quit, I'm not ready to quit, the reason she said that was because, on the times that she did try, she knew what it felt like and didn't want to go through that feeling. That's why she was saying that.
That's addiction. And that's what Dr. Goldman said.
Dr. Goldman also said that he was aware of quit attempts. That was very important. That was very important when he had the facts about an individual. And what he said was that there
40 years, just knowing that fact alone means what? Addiction.
Just on that. Just a general observation on chronic, heavy smokers can lead Dr. Goldman to testify to a degree of medical probability that Dorothy Ruffo was addicted.
Now, he had the medical records. He had the deposition testimony, so he was able to understand the smoking routine of Dorothy Ruffo. And so he relied on those facts.
For example, he relied on the fact that Mrs. Ruffo, when she was a regular smoker, the first thing she would do when she got up out of bed in the morning was to get that cigarette.
Before she got dressed, before she brushed her teeth, before she went in and cooked a meal, she had already smoked a cigarette.
She would then go in and fix breakfast for her son Marshall at the time, and she would already have smoked a cigarette. And, according to Mrs. Ruffo, by the time she left the house to go to work, she had smoked two or three cigarettes and continued to smoke throughout the day. Smoked at nighttime.
Smoked in bed. And smoked while she was dying.
were numerous instances when she tried to quit, cold turkey, unsuccessful. Nicoderm, unsuccessful. The patch, unsuccessful.
Finally, sometime in 2010, she tried Chantix, after resisting it because of the side effects, and she was fortunately successful.
She tried. She was unsuccessful until 2010.
Dr. Goldman told you based upon all of those facts, on the basis of the facts he knew about Mrs. Ruffo, she was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked. That's two witnesses.
Number 3, we had Dorothy Ruffo herself, the smoker, on the stand testifying about her addiction, and she said she was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes.
She explained that she had to have a cigarette. She told you that when she -- that she could not go long periods of time without a cigarette, maybe a couple of hours.
She explained the feeling that she got when she tried to quit and, indeed, Mrs. Ruffo said she was addicted.
So we brought you three separate witnesses who all said the same thing, Mrs. Ruffo was
addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes, and, if you're not convinced, let's do the math.
Now, Mrs. Ruffo said she got her money's worth smoking cigarettes. She smoked them until the end. How many puffs do you think that was? Do you think one puff, that's enough, you take that cigarette and you stamp it out? No. Common sense says it's more than one puff.
How about two? Do you think two puffs and that cigarette is down to the end? Of course not. You think three, puff, puff, puff, that cigarette is done? Of course not. Maybe eight to ten. Let's be conservative and take five.
Let's take five puffs.
We know when Miss Ruffo was smoking Kent cigarettes for a period of seven years, that she smoked from a half a pack to a pack. Let's be conservative and say a half a pack, ten cigarettes. If she's taking five puffs on ten cigarette, that's 50 puffs in a day.
50 puffs in a day times 365 is going to give us a yearly rate times seven years is going to give us the number of doses of
was addicted to the cigarettes she smoked.
The next step, did that addiction cause her disease? You bet it did. The addiction caused Mrs. Ruffo's disease because, as Dr. Goldman said, she had the inability to quit and that's why she got sick.
Now, there's no dispute. Mrs. Ruffo got sick because of cigarettes. Cigarettes caused her COPD. Nobody disputes that.
The fact that we have proven to you that Mrs. Ruffo was addicted and that her illness was a result of smoking, it follows that that was a legal cause, her addiction caused her disease.
Now, once we prove addiction and once we prove that she was sick because of her cigarettes, we've proven what we need to do. There is no instruction that's going to tell you, if you prove addiction, despite addiction, it might be other reasons why Mrs. Ruffo became ill. Maybe she enjoyed cigarettes. No, you're not going to see that in the instructions.
The only time that addiction wouldn't cause someone to be ill, the only time that would be would be in the case where, no,
nicotine she got. And if you put that on the screen, we'll see 127,750 doses of nicotine just on Kent cigarettes alone over seven years.
When she switched to Benson & Hedges, that she smoked for 40 more years, she is now up to two to three packs a day, let's be conservative and go to two packs.
If we're conservative with five puffs for each cigarette she smoked with 40 cigarettes, which represents two packs a day, we're talking about 200 doses of nicotine per year {sic} times 365 times 44 years is 3,212,000 doses of nicotine every time she took a puff, conservatively based on five puffs on a cigarette.
So if you add it up, you got about 3.4 million doses of nicotine Mrs. Ruffo ingested over the course of her smoking history.
We know that the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. Does it take 3.5 to make someone addicted?
Based on the math and the three witnesses that we presented to you, we have proven, by a greater weight of the evidence, that Mrs. Ruffo
Mrs. Ruffo didn't get sick from the cigarettes she smoked. She got sick from something else. That's why she got the disease.
The evidence we put on in this case, by a greater weight of the evidence, has demonstrated Mrs. Ruffo's addiction and that she has become ill because of her addiction and nothing else.
So that when you get the verdict form, number 1, you're going to ask, was Dorothy Ruffo a member of the Engle class? Now, the answer is yes.
Now, number 2, the issue of statute of limitations. That, ladies and gentlemen, is the burden -- the burden is on the defense. We don't have to do anything. That's a matter of proof that the defendant has to show you.
Same burden of proof that we have to prove our case, by a greater weight of the evidence.
It is the obligation of the defendants, by a greater weight of the evidence, to demonstrate that on or before May 5th of 1990, Mrs. Ruffo knew or had reason to know that she had COPD and there was a causal connection between the COPD and her smoking.
Now, let's talk about that. We know in
1988,	Mrs. Ruffo, according to her testimony, developed shortness of breath. That was gradual and that came on, but Mrs. Ruffo never gave it a second thought and never attributed it to smoking and never even believed it was a breathing problem.
This was not a situation where Mrs. Ruffo woke up one morning and, all of a sudden, couldn't walk a few steps without getting short of breath. This is not shortness of breath that occurred the first time Mrs. Ruffo woke up and all of a sudden realized she couldn't make a bed.
This is a disease that progressed to the point that finally, two years later, Mrs. Ruffo realized she had some problems, didn't know what they were, but when she got the pain -and she pointed, when she got that pain along with the shortness of breath, that's the time she decided she better go see a doctor.
And she did. And she went to her treating physician, Dr. Rice. And Dr. Rice is a man who is a professional. He has a medical degree.
He is Mrs. Ruffo's internist. He was her
Ruffo on May 21, 1990, in his note, Dorothy Ruffo tells him -- not honestly, but tells him she's cut down from two packs a day to five cigarettes.
Well, if you remember the date in that note -- can we put that up, 381.
According to Mrs. Ruffo's testimony, it was on May 14, 1990 that Dr. Rice told her that because that's when she went a week later and saw Dr. Reed, on the 21st, 1990, and that's why she recalls.
That's when she said she cut down because it was on that date that Dr. Rice said, you've got to go see Dr. Reed, a lung doctor, that she realized, this might be a problem with my lungs.
And so she went to Dr. Reed. She had never been to Dr. Reed. Dr. Reed did all sorts of tests. Took a history, did the lung tests where she blows into the tube, and made his diagnosis, emphysema, and told her what that was. She had COPD with emphysema being the primary component of that.
So she found out and she was diagnosed on May 21st of 1990 that she had COPD. Mrs. Ruffo
treating physician.
And Dr. Rice's observation, after talking to Mrs. Ruffo, was to send her to Baptist Hospital for an upper GI to rule out any digestive tract illness.
Now, we know Mrs. Ruffo left high school at the age of 16 after her junior year. We know Mrs. Ruffo is not a professional. We know Mrs. Ruffo doesn't have a medical degree. We know Dr. Rice did.
Now, if Dr. Rice, the medical doctor, the treating physician, after hearing about the symptoms, sent Mrs. Ruffo for a gastrointestinal test, does it follow that Mrs. Ruffo would have known she had COPD? That's silly. Of course not.
Her own doctor didn't know at the time. And he sent her for an upper GI and it came back negative, and at that point, Dr. Rice said, I'm sending you to Dr. Reed, he's a lung expert. And it was at that point that Dorothy Ruffo finally realized, I might have something wrong with my lungs.
And that's why, if you remember from the note, Dr. Reed's first meeting with Dorothy
said prior to 1990, she had no idea what COPD was. She had no idea what chronic bronchitis was. She had no idea what emphysema was. And the only reason she knew what those terms meant was after she was diagnosed by Dr. Reed.
So what has the defense done? Well, they've shown you some forms that were filled out by Mrs. Ruffo. Those are red herrings.
Those forms somehow suggest that she knew in 1988 or before that she had COPD. Of course not. Of course not.
So if we pick, for example, the disability report that you've seen several times where Mrs. Ruffo, in 2004, November, almost 15 years -- we see the disability form -- almost 15 years after she's been diagnosed, she is asked questions.
One of which is, when did you first develop the symptoms. Well, that's what the defense has shown her. That's what the defense has shown Mrs. Ruffo on the next page, when is the date your symptoms first bothered you?
No, another page.
And she wrote down a specific date 14 or
15	years after the fact, after she had been
diagnosed with COPD, she wrote March 15th of
1989.	That's the only page they wanted to show Mrs. Ruffo. That date. We know that date is wrong.
Now, if we look on the preceding page, it asks, when did you first see a doctor? And we know her doctor was Dr. Reed. And her date that she said she saw Dr. Reed was March of
1989.	We know that's wrong.
We have verifiable proof that that date is wrong, that Mrs. Ruffo, 14 years later, made a mistake and didn't remember the year she saw Dr. Reed.
Dr. Reed remembers the year. The medical record bears out the year, and we have those for your perusal, and we know the date is May 21st of 1990. That's when she saw Dr. Reed, May 21st of 1990.
Now, you see there she put March, and in the preceding page she put March. And you see there she put '89, and on the preceding page she put '89. And on the other page, she put the 15th.
Remember we looked at that record from Dr. Reed on May 21st. Let's look at that
of them from 15 years and see if you come across a word "rattle." There ain't such a word for wheezing and bronchitis. Check it.
And so they rely on the ex-daughter-in-law as their professional, as their diagnostician to say that Mrs. Ruffo had chronic bronchitis and she was going to doctors, and she couldn't even talk because she was wheezing so bad.
And yet Marshall Ruffo, when he was talking about his mother in the '80s, said we were very active, she was taking me places when I was a kid. She didn't have any problem, not a cough.
And Mrs. Ruffo said, no, I was very active in the '80s. I was working at the toll booth,
I wasn't coughing, I wasn't having problems.
And Dr. Reed, his medical records, you can see, any diagnosis he made always said COPD, emphysema. You will not see COPD, chronic bronchitis.
And finally, Dr. Bernstein, via deposition that we read, what did he say? When he reviewed the records in 1990, there was no evidence of chronic bronchitis, none.
And he said that didn't develop until
again.
On the second page where she told Dr. Reed the date, 14 years earlier, it's pretty close, isn't it, it's not March, it's May. It's not the 15th, it's the 14th, and it's 1990. Do you think maybe she was trying to remember 14 years later that date?
And so what did the defense do? The defense, in their case, called one witness to support their defense on the statute of limitations, one, Connie Cooper, the ex-daughter-in-law of Dorothy Ruffo, by way of deposition.
And so what did the ex-daughter-in-law say? The ex-daughter-in-law said that Dorothy Ruffo at one point, she thought she said she had chronic bronchitis, wasn't sure. At another portion, she said Dorothy told her she had chronic bronchitis. At another point, she said that she really didn't see her much, but used to talk to her over the phone and was able to diagnose her over the phone as wheezing with a rattle sound.
I ask you, I implore you, I urge you, look at Barry Reed's records. Go through every one
later, like 2010, 2011, and, to that extent, he agreed with Dr. Reed.
So the professionals say, no, there is no chronic bronchitis, at least beginning in 1990.
So if there is no chronic bronchitis beginning in 1990, there certainly wasn't chronic bronchitis in '89, '88, '87, that magically got better and she was healed.
So the professionals tell you there is no chronic bronchitis. That comes later. The ex-daughter-in-law says otherwise. Who do you believe, the ex-daughter-in-law or professionals?
Remember, the ex-daughter-in-law at some point said, I rarely saw her, and all the times that I saw her in Perry, Florida, when she was visiting her mother, I don't remember a cough.
When I stayed at her house in Miami, I don't remember a cough.
When she was asked, is your memory good 25 years later? Well, not really. Just think about it. How would a person 25 years after the fact relate back and remember specific days where a specific person was coughing? You think that's really possible?
So that's their evidence of statute of limitations. That's their one witness via deposition, the ex-daughter-in-law.
They cannot meet their burden that Miss Ruffo knew, on or before May 5th of 1990, that she had COPD. She didn't know what COPD was.
And remember, when the defense played their Public Service Announcement, and the person on the Public Service Announcement is saying how people don't know what chronic bronchitis is. That was in the '80s.
Remember the newsletter that we showed you that were sent out by the hundreds of thousands? If we can get the poster.
This was the newsletter that the tobacco industry was sending out by the hundreds of thousands, and what were they saying? They were denying that smoking was causing COPD, and this is in the '80s. This is February of 1984, and they're saying, no, there is no cause of COPD related to smoking.
So ladies and gentlemen, there is no question that Mrs. Ruffo at the time of her diagnosis by Dr. Reed had no clue what COPD was, had no chronic bronchitis.
follow them.
Number 1, that smoking cigarettes causes certain named diseases including COPD. That's a given, that's a fact that has been established.
That nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. That is a fact that has been established.
That defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. That is a fact. That's what they did.
That defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false and misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
So on those occasions when the defense tells you, Mrs. Ruffo knew smoking was bad and she saw the warnings, the findings says they knew more than Mrs. Ruffo did and didn't tell her about material facts.
That defendants agreed with other Engle defendants to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or
The only experience Mrs. Ruffo had with coughing prior to that was bronchitis that Dr. Reed told you that's just a term from a common cold that develops into a cough and you get what is called bronchitis. And that is the only incidence of cough that Mrs. Ruffo told you about and that you'll see in any records, bronchitis. That's it.
So when you're asked, ladies and gentlemen, on the verdict form, number 2, "Did Dorothy Ruffo's COPD manifest itself such that she knew or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, on or before May 5, 1990, both that she had COPD and that there was a causal connection between her smoking and her COPD," the answer is no. No proof.
Causation. Simple. Simple. After we prove to you class membership, you are going to have the benefit of the Engle findings. And if we can put the Engle findings up, please.
And you're going to be told, you know these findings are binding on you. You know you need no more proof to establish these findings. It's as if they have already been proven. You have no obligation other than to
their addictive nature with the intention that the smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment.
And finally, that defendants were negligent. That defendants were negligent.
So what do we need to show you? We need to show you that Mrs. Ruffo's smoking the cigarettes by Lorillard and Philip Morris caused her disease.
Well, there was nothing else it did.
There is no dispute that her disease was caused by cigarettes, and it was the cigarettes that they produced, the defendants, that caused her disease. We have proven legal causation.
That's simple.
So when it says, "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or more of the defendants a legal cause of the injuries of Dorothy Ruffo," the answer is a resounding yes.
"Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendants Philip Morris a legal cause of Mrs. Ruffo's injuries?" Of course, yes.
"Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Lorillard a legal cause of injuries?" Of course, yes. Because those are the only
cigarettes on which she relied her smoking.
Now, let's talk about reliance. Reliance, ladies and gentlemen, does not entail Mrs. Ruffo having to remember 50 years ago hearing a statement made by any of these tobacco companies, a statement made about advertising, about anything about their products and remembering it and relying on it and doing something because of a statement that she heard that she has to remember 50 years ago.
That would be impossible to ask anyone to remember 50 years ago, what was the statement that we said on which you relied to act? You can't do it.
What reliance means and what you're going to be told is this. It is the climate that was created by the defendants. It was the climate by which they created this glamorization of the cigarettes. It is the climate that they created through their advertising. It is the climate that they created through mass media.
What did I tell you in opening statement? The sky writing, the billboards, the media, the television, the radio, the buses, the human
this courtroom and smoke. You could go to a bank and smoke. You could go to a prison and smoke. You could go to college and smoke. You could go on an elevator and smoke. You could go to a maternity ward and smoke.
Mrs. Ruffo, in '77, was smoking in her room after she gave birth. You could go to a doctor's office and smoke, and likely your doctor would be smoking, too.
You could go on an airplane and smoke.
You get it. You could go anywhere during that time and smoke because that's the climate they created.
So if the cigarette companies had been truthful with the material information, if they had disclosed what they knew in the '50s about the material information of which Dorothy did not know, the question then becomes, if maybe the climate was such that people realized how bad smoking was because the tobacco companies were forthright and they shared the information, and instead of the millions and millions of millions of messages going to consumers that smoking is glamorous, try our product, they would say, it's going to kill
trademarks; everything that we talked about.
Examples of mass media to get their message out to millions and millions and millions of people. People go into movie theaters seeing actors and actresses smoke cigarettes because it was the cigarette companies that had them put these cigarettes in as props. It was the cigarette companies sitting here who made sure when you went into a store, you saw their products.
It was the cigarette companies who made sure that when you watched a television program, you saw cigarette ads.
And it's the '67 Federal Trade Commission report that you can look at that says, so pervasive was this advertising that you could not help but see ad after ad after ad.
And so it was because of what they did to glamorize cigarette smoking to a point so that when Mrs. Ruffo was offered that first cigarette back in 1959, she knew exactly what to do.
Because at that point in time, due to the cigarette companies, you could go virtually anywhere and smoke. You could be sitting in
you, perhaps if the climate was such that everybody knew instead of the glamorization of cigarettes, that it's really bad, that when Mrs. Ruffo, in 1959, was offered that first cigarette, she would have said, no.
And that's for you to decide. Based on the evidence in this case, all it is, is if the climate changed and Philip Morris and Lorillard and everybody else was honest and forthright about material information of which they were aware, and she wasn't, would it have been different?
Would Mrs. Ruffo have acted differently and not be sitting here with oxygen? That's simple. That's reliance, and that's up to you based on the evidence in this case.
Let's talk about comparative fault, because we demonstrated that the tobacco companies here, Philip Morris and Lorillard, are responsible for causing the injuries to Mrs. Ruffo.
Let's talk about fault, because that's what we're here to do. It is a comparative fault situation.
Who is to blame more? And I told you in
the opening statement, the evidence was going to show that Philip Morris and Lorillard are far more responsible than Dorothy Ruffo. And by way of illustration, let me show you how.
If you can put up the comparative fault
chart.
Number one, Lorillard and Philip Morris knew privately, in the '50s, that cigarettes caused disease, but publicly denied the health hazards of smoking.
When defense counsel speaks to you, you need to ask questions. You need to think in your mind, well, why, if you knew privately, in the '50s, how bad cigarettes were, why didn't you tell people? They need to answer that question. They won't, but they need to address it.
And you know what, they won't. You know why? Because if they're going to be honest with you, they're going to tell you. And to be honest, why do you think, if they knew privately how bad cigarettes were, why do you think they didn't tell Dorothy Ruffo?
You think it might be because they took money over health? Do you think that might be
plain and simple, because they knew it would addict people.
You need to ask, why on earth were you not honest back then and we're sitting here today?
Despite knowledge of the health risks and addiction, what did they do? They didn't tell folks about what they knew. They created this controversy, and they continued with their perversive advertising, with their pervasive advertising, despite knowing -- we know privately this stuff is bad, but we're going to continue to advertise our product and continue to sell cigarettes and not tell people.
You need to know why they were doing that back then. You need answers. You're not going to get one, but you need it.
They concealed material information, not ordinary information, they concealed material information about addiction and health not known or available to Dorothy Ruffo, knowing the information was false.
They concealed false and misleading information from this woman. They knew more than Mrs. Ruffo did. Mrs. Ruffo might have known at some point smoking is bad. They knew
a consideration, they were more interested in profit over health, and that's why they will not be able to respond to the question that you're going to wait for them to answer?
Why on earth, if you knew, in the '50s, it was bad, you didn't tell it?
They knew privately, in the '50s, that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive, but publicly denied the addictive nature of nicotine. You need to ask them, when they speak to you, hey, fellows, why, if your clients knew, in the '50s, that nicotine was bad and addictive, you didn't tell someone like Dorothy Ruffo?
You think it might be that they considered money over health? Do you think they're going to tell you they did?
And we know why they sold cigarettes. We know that cigarettes were not sold because they tasted wonderfully. We know that people weren't interested in the great smoke going down into their lungs and that wonderful taste.
We knew that the cigarette companies, back in the '50s, were well aware their cigarettes were being sold as a nicotine delivery device,
more. Mrs. Ruffo might have known smoking might be dangerous. They knew more. It was their obligation, was it not, for them to tell her what they knew, and they didn't.
They concealed. They mislead. And the question has to be, why didn't you all tell her? Why didn't you tell her, when you knew in the '50s, and maybe she wouldn't have started.
They agreed with others, Lorillard, Philip Morris and others, to conceal or omit information regarding health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that Dorothy Ruffo would rely on the information to her detriment.
And what did she do? She relied on the information to her detriment.
You know, it's not just relying on the controversy. It's not just relying on the climate. We have actual evidence that Mrs. Ruffo relied on advertising, because when she switched from Kents to Benson & Hedges, remember, she went into a store and she was enamored with that nice, pretty package. And from that day forward, boom, she stopped those Kents and bought that pretty package of
cigarettes that was displayed in the store.
And from the Lorillard, from their own expert witness, in her deposition, she admitted, yes, that's advertising, that's marketing. The packaging is marketing. The point of sale is advertising.
Mrs. Ruffo told you that's why she switched. Yet, they agreed with others to conceal this information. They agreed. Why?
You think maybe it's putting profit over health to her detriment on which she relied?
They had the ability, folks, and you heard this from Dr. Proctor, they had the ability, the defendants, to take nicotine out of cigarettes so as not to sustain addiction, and they chose not to.
Why did they make that choice? You should have an answer to that. After all, this is apportioning fault. Is Mrs. Ruffo at fault because she smoked cigarettes and they didn't tell her it was addictive, and they didn't tell her, we can sell you a product that doesn't have nicotine, but you won't get addicted and we won't make money because you won't continue to smoke. Why didn't they tell her?
that.
It took 50 years for Lorillard and Philip Morris to say to the public, yes, our products are dangerous. It took 50 years for them to say, yes, our products, the nicotine, is addictive.
Do you think maybe if they had not waited 50 years, Mrs. Ruffo might not be in this position today?
Why did it take them 50 years to do that? Maybe they'll answer that question. That's something you need to know. After all, you're apportioning fault.
And what's Mrs. Ruffo's fault in this case? What did she do? How did she mislead people? How did she lie to people? How did she conceal from people? How did she create controversy that didn't exist?
No, we accept some measure of fault, and we told you that from day one. They don't. We accept some fault. And I'm going to tell you what fault you should put on Mrs. Ruffo.
When they finally -- when the defendants finally admitted fault sometime in 2000, then it's on Mrs. Ruffo. Then she has no excuse.
Do you think maybe because they were interested in smokers being addicted so they would continue to buy their products? Well, maybe they'll tell you.
What they did, when it became known by the scientific community, in the '50s, when it became known, when there was a consensus that, you know what, cigarettes, according to science, are dangerous, that cigarettes are addictive, that's the first time the cigarette companies publicly responded to the public.
And what did they say?
They said that we're not sure. We're going to do some research, you all. We're going to form these companies. And we're going to do this tobacco research. And we're going to fund research. And it was a front.
So what they did, for the next 50 years, what they did is created a controversy that didn't exist so that smokers, like Mrs. Ruffo, wouldn't quit. That's what they did.
You should ask, why did you do that? Why did you create a controversy that didn't exist?
Is Mrs. Ruffo at fault for that? Surely not.
They are. They have to take the blame for
They have told the public, our products are dangerous, our products cause illness. She's still smoking. That's her problem, then. Put it on her.
From 2000 until she stopped in 2010, that's her fault. That's 10 percent. Put the 90 as any way you want to put it on them, but that's how it should be distributed. Because you can't find fault with Mrs. Ruffo during the time period that they're still concealing, misleading, lying. That doesn't make sense.
Mrs. Ruffo should have known it was bad, but we're telling you all it's not. Mrs. Ruffo should have known it's addictive, but we're telling you all it's not.
So she can't be at fault for that, because each time they're telling people information, they know more than her.
That's how you should attribute fault, 10 percent to her, and 90 to them, however you want to divvy it up.
Most importantly, I want to talk about damages. And in this particular case, you've heard about the progression from this disease. You've heard about COPD and what it can do.
She's not going to recover from it. She's going to die.
And we showed you, by way of, if we can, a chart. What I've done here, you can see there's been ten-year periods, a second ten-year period, and now from 2010 -- no, no, let's take that down. There's a whole list here of symptoms.
And you can see when Mrs. Ruffo was first diagnosed in 1990, for the first ten-year period, yeah, she was sick. She had symptoms. She was short of breath on exertion, but there were times where her short of breath became more difficult on minimal exertion.
And there were times, during that first period, where Mrs. Ruffo was unable to work because she was sick with her illness. She took days off.
And, finally, it got to the point where she had to take the entire summers off from her employment so that, in 1999, she was no longer able to work, because she thought, I'm missing too much work from being sick, I can't do it.
So she retired.
So during that time frame, you can see the
right now has a 14-year life expectancy. We know she doesn't now.
We know that life expectancy has been deprived because of the cigarettes she smoked that were manufactured and sold by the defendants. That's a consideration to determine whether or not she's going through some mental anguish.
As you can see now, the decline from 2010, we know, in 2010, in October, she had pneumonia that lasted for several months, and we know that it's very dangerous for a person with COPD, especially at the stage Mrs. Ruffo is in, to get pneumonia.
We know that she has shortness of breath even at times when she's sitting down. We know that she's now on oxygen for 24 hours a day, and sometimes that doesn't help, and she has exacerbations. She has times when she can't breathe.
She has times when she wakes up at night and she's gasping for air.
She now says she can't walk from room to room without holding onto something, without getting very short of breath to where she has
gradual decline in Mrs. Ruffo's health. That's for the first ten years.
The second ten-year period, from 2000 to
2009,	you see it's getting a little bit worse.
She now has instances of respiratory distress, and you can check the medical records and verify that. She has more chronic coughing. She's now unable to do routine household chores.
She can't walk only but short distances before getting shortness of breath. She now needs oxygen when getting around the house during the daytime, and she has a power scooter and a wheelchair to help her ambulate around either outside or inside.
So you can see, during this period of time, she has gotten far worse.
And finally, from 2010 until we don't know when Mrs. Ruffo is going to die and succumb to this disease. Dr. Reed said it could be two years, it could be longer. We hope it's longer.
But, you know, the outside chance, we've said maybe six years, maybe five years. The mortality tables say a lady of Mrs. Ruffo's age
to sit down and rest before she can take any steps.
We know now she needs naps from 2:00 to 4:00 every day, or else she's going to be sick.
We also know that, at some point, recently Dr. Reed broached the subject of end of life.
He wanted to talk to her and see if she was ready to talk about her end of life, and she said, I'm not ready to do it. She said, I really have other things I want to do with my family. She wasn't ready to give up yet.
We know, at this point, she finally got on prednisone, despite the side effects, because that's the last thing they can do for her, is give her prednisone. There's nothing left.
She is at end stage COPD with 24 hours of oxygen, who can hardly move around, and is aware that if she gets a cold now, or if she gets the flu now, it could be dire.
So she has lived with this disease not for a year or two. This is 23 years that she has had this disease. So you see these symptoms, and the question is: How do you assign a value to her progression, her decline, how do you quantify it?
And you know what? It's not hard. It's not hard. And you know why? We deal with increments of time every day of the week.
That's all we deal with is time increments.
For example, you wake up in the morning. You've slept eight hours. You go to work and come home, you've worked ten hours. You eat lunch and dinner, an hour apiece.
You have an appointment during the day at a certain time. Airports all over the country, planes take off at 12:16 and land at 1:13.
Time is very important.
You can look at everybody wearing watches and see that everyone is beholding to time.
In the workplace, everyone is beholding to time. People are paid hourly.
Take a nurse. A nurse might make $50 an hour, work ten hours, make $500 in a day.
They've earned that money.
A plumber comes to your house to fix a leak, might cost you $125 an hour, but that plumber, while expensive, has done his job and has earned his money.
You might have a corporate lawyer that charges a client $750 an hour to do work, ten
Now, who, in their right mind, would want a job that Mrs. Ruffo was given? It didn't take training. It didn't take education. It didn't take skill. No one, in their right mind, working now, making whatever they're making, would trade places in a million years with Mrs. Ruffo for what they're making, whether it's the athlete making $30 million a year or a nurse making $50 an hour. No one would want that job to die.
Yet, that's her lot in life. And it hasn't been for a year. It hasn't been for ten. It's been for 23 years. And, hopefully, at least, hopefully, she'll be here a little longer.
And so it's not difficult to assign a wage, an hourly rate for Mrs. Ruffo's suffering. Just like any other person who gladly has a job and gets paid, Mrs. Ruffo has a job she doesn't want, but, nevertheless, should get paid.
And so what I've done for you is to assign different rates per hour based on a 24-hour-a-day for the damages that Mrs. Ruffo should be entitled to from these defenses over
hours of work. That's $7,500 earned.
And then you get really over-the-top money. There's professional athletes in sports making 25 to $30 million a year for something they enjoy.
And then you've got these outliers, like Howard Stern, and Shock Radio and Sirius radio, makes a hundred million a year.
And the thing about it is that these people in the workforce, oftentimes, they are educated and trained for their job. They are professionals and have specific jobs for their training and people want jobs. People enjoy their jobs. People get time off from their job, and they get vacation from their jobs.
And the problem here is that Dorothy Ruffo is in a similar situation. She had a job. She got a job from the tobacco company, from Philip Morris and Lorillard, and her job is to die.
Now, she didn't want that job. She didn't ask for that job. She didn't train for that job. She doesn't get time off from that job.
That is an everyday, 24-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week job that she gets no time to take off.
a 26-year period.
So, for example, I'm going to show you a chart, and we're going to start off with an income of $25 an hour on the low side. $25 an hour, times 24 hours in a day, times 365 days a year, times ten years, and that's for the first phase of her decline from 1990 to 1999.
And the medium level is $50 an hour, same rate, $50 an hour, times 24 hours a day, times 365, times ten years. And the high level is $75 an hour, times 24 hours a day, times 365 days in a year, times ten years.
And so if you can see the chart, this is what we end up with for her first year of decline at the age of 46, when she got this disease.
Based on low rate of $25 an hour, you see that's $2,190,000 for ten years with this disease.
And you see the middle rate at $50 an hour amounts to $4,380,000 for ten years of suffering.
And you see the $75 an hour for $6,570,000.
That represents the middle, the high and
the low rates for Mrs. Ruffo's suffering for the first decade after she got her disease.
Now, you're free to do whatever you want with the numbers. You might make them higher. You might make them lower. You can change anything you want, but that is a guidepost for you to consider.
That is the first ten years, and you've already seen the decline in that first ten years.
The second ten-year period, you see a further decline where she has the wheelchair, the scooter, the oxygen, and now the rate goes from a low of a $100 an hour to a middle range of $200 to a high range of $300, and you can see, by the same calculations, based on 24 hours a day that this woman suffers, 365 days a year for that ten-year period that she has suffered to the age of 56, the low rate is $8,760,000, the middle range of $200 an hour is $17,520,00 for her suffering, and the higher rate is $26,280,000. That's for the second ten-year decline from the progression with COPD.
MR. FASI: Your Honor, I need to object at
each period of decline, the total is $26,718,000. That's for 26 years of suffering with this disease. Not one year, $25 million a year like some athletes make. This is for 26 years.
If you take the medium range, it's a total of $42,924,000.
If you take the high range, it's a total of $59,130,000.
You are free to do what you want with the numbers. You can go higher. You can go lower. You can go less than 24 hours. You're free to do that, but that's just a guidepost based on our importance of time that everyone attributes.
Now, we know what Mrs. Ruffo can do. You've heard. Mrs. Ruffo can walk very slowly from one room to another holding onto things and resting until she gets to her couch, and sit on her couch and watch television. We know she can do that.
We know Mrs. Ruffo can get into a bed because she takes a nap from 2:00 to 4:00. So we know she can do that.
We know she can get in bed at night and
this point. This is in violation of Samuels versus Torres, damage-related issues improperly set forth.
THE COURT: I'll note your objection for the record. It's overruled.
MR. KAISER: Finally, we have the last period of decline, and we've assigned a six-year period. You might assign a two-year period or a longer period, but it's going to be -- she's 69 right now.
This is for the time period from 2010, and we've taken it for six years, and now the rate is higher, because Mrs. Ruffo could barely do anything.
And so the low rate here is $300 an hour for a total of $15,768,000.
The middle rate is $400 an hour for a total of $21,024,000.
The high rate is $500 an hour for a total of $26,280,000.
So, by way of summary, we can show you, for the ten-year period, for the ten-year period, and for the six-year period, from the low to the medium to the high, it totals, for the very low, if you take the low numbers for
sleep, sometimes gasping, but we know she can get to bed.
We know Mrs. Ruffo can see. We know she can hear. We know she can taste. We know she can feel. But that's about all she can do.
And there are a lot of things she can't do because of this disease.
What can't she do that you've heard? We know she can't do gardening, which she loved to do. Can't do it anymore. We know she can't clean the house. Can't do it anymore. We know she can't do laundry. Can't do in anymore. We know she can't do dishes. We know that she can't walk a dog around the block. We know she can't walk outside with her husband. We know she can't do any of those things.
We know she can't cook a meal for her family like she used to do. And what bothers her the most is not being able to do that at Christmas and at Thanksgiving, when it was Mrs. Ruffo that was cooking all the time, and now all she can is watch as her son, Marshall, tries to do it. And Mrs. Ruffo feels she's outside this family just watching them, because she just can't do it. She just can't.
I want you to indulge me for just 30 seconds as I stand here. That's 30 seconds. Seems like an inordinate amount of time that I stood up here and not said a word.
In those 30 seconds, how many times do you think she takes a breath? Who knows, but she's breathing during that time. It's not just a 30-second increment in which she's breathing.
This goes on for a day, 24 hours a day. It might go on for a year. It might go on for two years. And we know the amount of suffering that she's going through every time she takes a breath.
Dr. Reed said, with her illness, it's almost like taking a straw and that straw gets narrower and narrower to where it's hard to breathe out, and you can't expel all your air, and then you have to breathe in, and you can't do that either. It gets to the point where it's almost like a cocktail straw.
The time I just stood here seemed inordinate, and that was only 30 seconds. We don't know how much time Mrs. Ruffo has, but that seems like an eternity, knowing what she's going through as she takes her breaths.
What that case says, Your Honor, the Fifth DCA case concluded that a request in a closing argument to award the plaintiff $1,000 per year for the rest of her 34-year life expectancy was improper because, in quotes, "There is absolutely no evidentiary support for such an award."
They also cite Werneck versus Worral at 918 So.2d 383 cited at page 388, Fifth DCA case. Werneck stated that -- stating the fact that counsel should have suggested -- it stated that the fact that counsel could have suggested a wholly-arbitrary number to the jury does not give counsel carte blanche to mislead the jury by knowingly urging it to imply methodology.
That's right from that case. That's exactly what Mr. Kaiser did.
MR. BIDEAU: That's why we objected right away. Lorillard joins in the request.
MR. KAISER: Mine was based totally on the evidence and what her rate of decline showed.
It was totally proper.
THE COURT: Let me reserve on it. Let me read the case law, and I'll let you know. In the meantime, Mr. Fasi.
And there's something else I left out that we know she can do, and that is to feel the pain and the suffering from the cigarettes she smoked that they sold her.
Thank you.



MR. KAISER: What I want to do is just respond to the arguments that you heard by defense counsel. I will be more brief than I was in my initial argument to you.
We'll start with the verdict form.
Number one, legal cause, Engle class. Now, what you didn't hear from defense counsel, other than Ms. Ruffo smoked because she enjoyed it, it was her choice, and they don't comment on something that's very important. All they want to say for the Engle class is, it was her choice, but they forget something very important, addiction.
They forgot about that. Addiction. That's what you need to show, whether she was addicted.
They don't comment on that because they know it was beyond any doubt that she was addicted. Remember, I don't want to go
with choices that she made, it is whether or not her addiction caused her disease.
Do they dispute addiction? No.
It's not a question as: Well, we say she's addicted; they said she's not.
They have never said that. They agree, she was addicted. They know they can't argue choice, but they have done it, so we can resolve this in short shrift. She was addicted, her disease was a result of her addiction, and so it's class membership, the answer is, of course she was.
Secondly, the statute of limitations argument. Now, let's dispense real quickly with the exhibits they wanted to show you, the after-the-fact exhibits where Dorothy Ruffo filled out this information. It is really sophomoric to have to discuss it with you because we know, after 1990, Dorothy Ruffo knew what she had.
Dr. Reed told her: You've got COPD, you've got emphysema.
Prior to that time she'd never heard of it. She'd never heard of COPD. Now,
15 years later, when she's filling out these
through it again, Dr. Reed, Dr. Goldman, the medical records. They know that Dr. Reed is a caring, competent physician. They don't dispute that. That is an issue that is already decided. It is simple. It is addiction; not choice, it's addiction. They didn't say one word about it because they know they can't argue it.
Something interesting, you remember Dr. Proctor's testimony, there was a question: Dr. Proctor, why didn't the defendants, the tobacco industry, why didn't they argue addiction?
They said they couldn't for many reasons. They explained the reasons, one of which, if they admit addiction, they will have a difficult time during litigation because you can't argue choice. If they admit choice, they can't argue choice.
That's exactly what they did here, despite knowing full well you can't. That's why they don't say anything about addiction.
We have proven addiction. The question is: Did the addiction cause her illness?
Absolutely it did. It has nothing to do
forms, she knows what her disease is.
Dr. Reed's told her. She's seen Dr. Reed countless times. She can fill out a piece of paper and indicate she has COPD. She can, without any problems, put on a form that she's had symptoms for X number of years.
Why? Because after 1990 she knew.
That's not to say, in 1988, she knew. After the fact, it's a no-brainer, of course she knew. How difficult is it for her to realize that: You know what, my short of breath in '88, when I learned I had COPD in '90, I could put two and two together and realize my problem was COPD.
Didn't know it then, but knows it in 2004, knows it in 1997. So those documents are really meaningless. All it shows is that Dorothy Ruffo, after she knew of her diagnosis, can sit and write on a piece of paper: Had these symptoms for a long time, but I now know what they are.
Here's the other question: Did Dorothy Ruffo -- and Mr. Bideau conveniently forgot. He wants you to believe that all she has to do is realize that there's a connection to
her smoking. There's more to it than that.
What you have to find, what they have to prove to you, that they have not done, is that prior to May 5, 1990, Dorothy Ruffo had reason to believe or knew, not that she had a cough, not that she had a bronchitis, but she had COPD. You had to know it.
Who knew what COPD was at the time?
MR. FASI: Your Honor, I object to misstatement of the law by counsel.
THE COURT: Overruled. Thank you.
MR. KAISER: Who knew at that time?
Did she know or have reason to believe, before May 5 of 1990, that she had COPD, and, and, that the COPD was -- there was a causal connection between that and smoking?
Now, the fact that she might have attributed a cough to a smoker's cough, that's not a qualifying disease that gets you in court here, a smoker's cough. Remember, her symptoms was not a cough. The symptoms that caused her to go see a doctor was shortness of breath and a pain in her midchest.
Now, what you have heard from the
read it and you will see, on or before May 5 of 1990, knew or should have known that she had COPD, reasonable belief, and that there was a causal connection between the COPD and the smoking.
Now, not only does she have to know that, "I've got COPD," or should know "I've got COPD," but it comes from smoking, and Dorothy Ruffo told you: I didn't get short of breath from smoking cigarettes. I didn't get the pain in my chest from smoking cigarettes.
So how on earth was she to know that this shortness of breath, yep, it's got to be from cigarettes.
Now, counsel from Philip Morris made a very good point, great point. If she had seen -- if she had gone to the doctors in the '80s, she would have been told. It would have been a no-brainer.
We know she did go to the doctors in the '80s. That is what they said also.
What are we going to believe?
On the one hand, on one side of her mouth, they're saying that she went to
doctor, what you have heard from the experts, is shortness of breath can be a symptom in a whole bunch of other cases, in a whole bunch of other diseases, unrelated to the lungs.
So what they are suggesting to you with their proof is that on or before May 5 of
1990,	when Dorothy Ruffo had short of breath, Dorothy Ruffo at that point should have realized: You know, this short of breath is COPD, I better get to a doctor.
This is a woman who left high school after her junior year, who was an elevator operator, a bartender, and worked for the State of Florida as a toll operator, and they want you to believe that Dorothy Ruffo knew, before May 5th of 1990, that the short-of-breath symptom, which could be symptoms for a whole host of diseases, she knew she had COPD.
MR. FASI: Your Honor, I object, continued mischaracterization of the law, misstatement of the law.
THE COURT: All right. I will note your objection. Overruled.
MR. KAISER: You will get the law and
doctors in the '80s. And then they're saying: Well, had she gone, she would have known.
Well, she did go. They put up that slide. She had told Dr. Rice of her full history.
Dr. Rice didn't say anything in the '80s, did he?
That's because she wasn't exhibiting symptoms for which anyone would have been able to say: You've got a breathing disease.
Otherwise, as they said, when she was going to these doctors in the '80s, they would have told her, but they didn't because no one knew.
And then when she did go to Dr. Rice because she had the symptoms, he knew her history, he knew about her smoking, what did he do?
With his training, his expertise, his medical degree: I need you to get an upper GI.
Well, certainly, if he didn't have the wherewithal to know that she had a smoking-related disease, COPD, that Dorothy
Ruffo didn't know.
They have not met their burden to prove to you that she was untimely in bringing her lawsuit. They have failed miserably in that regard.
They keep telling you that she had these stop signs, that she knew all of this information. That is a great argument under one condition: If PM and Lorillard don't exist, that's when that is a good argument. Because again, they didn't comment on their own behavior. They didn't mention their clients. They didn't talk about the Engle findings. They couldn't answer the questions I suggested on the comparative fault issue. They didn't tell you why, when they knew about the information in the '50s about the health risks, they didn't tell anybody. They didn't address that question.
Why, when they knew it was addictive, they didn't tell people?
They didn't address it. Why?
Because an honest response would be: Because we put money over health.
That's why they couldn't get up here and
news, no doubt about it. You saw their last clip, where the newspeople broke into programming, and they talked about what had been found. And this was big news.
And yet from that, important information, we get the first warnings on the packs, and the first warnings are not endorsed by the Surgeon General, they don't tell you that smoking will cause disease or lung cancer, and they don't tell you there's a definitive risk.
What do they tell you? Smoking may be hazardous.
What does that mean? Smoking may not be hazardous.
Now, that's the warning that people look at and they're going to say: This is really bad.
The Surgeon General report comes out with this unbelievable information in the packs of cigarettes, and two years it is merely caution that says nothing. And we know from the 1967 FTC report, nobody paid attention to those warnings, they were terribly ineffective. That was the
honestly tell you why they didn't do that.
But instead, what did they do?
They created this controversy. They created this controversy.
Now, they want to take you through this field, Dorothy Ruffo, every step of the way, knew about this information. She was warned.
Remember one thing: Every time they tell you that Dorothy Ruffo knew about the information, they knew more. Because they concealed material information from her.
They wanted her to detrimentally rely on the information.
So every time Dorothy Ruffo, it is suggested that she knew about information, she knew about something about smoking, they knew more and didn't tell it.
But alas, they talk about the warnings on the packs of cigarettes; in 1966, the first warnings. Remember, the Surgeon General's report came out, they want you to believe she read the report, although I showed it to her and she said, "I didn't read this."
And the Surgeon General's report was big
conclusion reached by the FTC report in 1967.
When the defendant showed you a slide of the public service announcement where the lady's taking out the cigarette, she didn't look at the warnings on the pack. People didn't look do that. People every day when they smoke, they don't look at the warnings on the cigarette pack.
Dorothy Ruffo, on occasion, might have known about the warnings on the cigarette pack, but do you think she took that with her for 50 years, "Oh, I remember this warning every time I smoke this cigarette," of course not.
When she's receiving any type of information like this, the blast by the tobacco industry is so much, it's significantly more informative. They are blasting information to people like Dorothy Ruffo and the consumers. They are responding. They do exist. They are the ones who originally created this climate.
And remember when defense counsel said: Dorothy Ruffo made the choice to smoke.
Well, the problem was, it was an
ill-informed choice to smoke. You could make a choice to smoke, and you could be held responsible for smoking, if it is the product of a well-informed choice. But the deposition of Kristy Leung of Lorillard, what did she tell you: Yes, we agree that adolescents can't make those decisions to start smoking.
They agreed, they admitted. That is their own admission. They knew that smoking initiation by people Mrs. Ruffo's age couldn't make those decisions. So her initial decision to start smoking was an ill-informed decision, it was an ill-informed choice, and it was ill informed because of the information that had been put out there in the public by the tobacco industry.
Now, let's talk about reliance. And again, there doesn't have to be any one statement made by Lorillard or any one statement made by Philip Morris. It's this climate. And of course, defense counsel can't talk about that. It's the climate that the tobacco industry created. And I don't need to go through every step. But it was
THE COURT: All right. I will reserve it at this time.
Mr. Kaiser, go ahead.
MR. KAISER: One thing that the defendants all did together was, they agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. So they all got together, and they wanted this plan to work together.
And so it's not so much that Mrs. Ruffo didn't see a Kent ad, the fact remains that Kents were being advertised, and Benson & Hedges were being advertised, and all sorts of cigarette brands were being advertised.
And all sorts of information was being given to the public so that that's how the climate was created. It doesn't matter if Mrs. Ruffo didn't see a Kent ad.
What Mrs. Ruffo did tell you was, "I saw ads on television."
So the message did get to her. She saw plenty of messages on television. Now, she
such a climate that was created by Kent, by Benson & Hedges, by all of the tobacco industry, such that when Dorothy Ruffo picked up that first cigarette that was given to her, regardless of whether she had ever thought about it, she knew that she wanted to do it because everybody was smoking. And everybody was smoking because of the information that was being put out there by the defendants and others.
And when Mr. Bideau says, "Well, Lorillard, Ms. Ruffo never relied on a Kent ad," it doesn't matter. She smoked Kents.
It doesn't matter if she relied on their ad or anyone else's ad. What does matter is that they all agreed. And you will see on one of the findings, they all agreed.
The one thing that I can't find -MR. BIDEAU: Objection. Can we go sidebar for a second?
THE COURT: Let Mr. Kaiser finish, all right. I'll preserve your objection for the record.
MR. BIDEAU: Then the objection is he's misusing the findings.
could remember Marlboro and Camel, and she couldn't remember the specific other brands. But what she could say was: Yeah, I saw the ads on television, I saw the billboards, I saw the buses, I saw the movies, I saw people smoking to where it was such a normal behavior, everybody was doing it.
When the defense counsel talk about the warnings like that's the end-all here because now Mrs. Ruffo is on notice, that was in 1966. Okay?
We know that Philip Morris and Lorillard knew about the health risks of smoking in the '50s. We know they knew about the addictive nature of nicotine in the '50s, all right?
Well, then, prior to Mrs. Ruffo smoking, when she picked up that cigarette, had they ever warned her then, on a cigarette pack or on anything, that this was going to cause danger and you're going to get addicted; no.
After she started smoking in 1960, did they tell her: This is going to cause you harm, you're going to get addicted; no.
In '61, did they tell Mrs. Ruffo: This is going to cause you harm, you're going to
get addicted; no.
In '62 did they tell her: This is going to cause you harm, you are going to get addicted; no.
Same in '63, same in '64, and same in '65. The only reason '66 it changed is because they had to.
And Kristy Leung from Lorillard told you in the deposition, that's the only reason they started advertising, because the -- the warnings on the packs, because the government told them: You have to do it.
And despite all this knowledge that came out about the health risks of cigarettes, despite all this knowledge about the addictive nature of the nicotine in cigarettes, Mrs. Leung was asked: Did you continue to advertise the same pervasive way that you have advertised in the past?
Her answer was: Yes, yes we did.
Why did they continue to advertise in that way, knowing full well about the disease that could be caused and the addiction from the nicotine in the cigarettes?
That was their choice. See, choices go
in 2007: This causes disease, this causes addiction.
The only reason they came clean is because they had absolutely zero credibility because nobody believed the controversy at that point.
Here's something else. They want you to believe that Dorothy Ruffo should have known about the dangers of smoking because of the cautions that came out and because of all of this information, and yet remember Dr. Proctor, there was a scientific community, a consensus in the '50s, in the mid-'50s, the scientific community was aware.
He said the medical community, the consensus wasn't until maybe the '70s or the '80s. That's how long it took. That's the last time before the medical community was in agreement about the dangers of health risks of smoking.
Remember, according to Dr. Proctor, in the 1960s, 50 percent of all doctors in the United States were smoking cigarettes.
And then Dr. Proctor said: The lag time is even further before the public recognizes
both ways. It was the tobacco defendants here, it was Philip Morris and Lorillard's choice not to tell Mrs. Ruffo and others about how bad smoking could be before she started. It was their choice not to tell Mrs. Ruffo that if you smoke, you might get addicted. It was their choice that they decided they didn't want to take out that nicotine in the cigarettes because they couldn't get people to be addicted. That was their choice, not Mrs. Ruffo's, it was their choice to conceal the information, material information about the health risks of smoking and the addiction in nicotine. That was their choice, not Mrs. Ruffo's choice.
It was their choice to agree with each other, to conceal information, so that Dorothy Ruffo would rely on that information to her detriment. It was their choice to create this controversy when they knew full well that one didn't exist. They prolonged this controversy by creating doubt for 50 years. That was their choice. It was their choice that they didn't tell anyone until 50 years, and they finally came clean
the dangers and the addictive nature in smoking.
So if it's doctors that don't know until the '70s, what about the public and people like Mrs. Ruffo?
When did Mrs. Ruffo know that smoking caused COPD; when did she know that smoking was addictive?
All they have been able to say: Well, at some point she knew it was bad.
What was bad; it was going to stunt her growth?
They knew it and didn't tell her.
That's their choice, not Mrs. Ruffo's.
So as far as the statute of limitations argument, that fails miserably. As far as legal cause in this case, we know the addiction caused the injury, and we know that the cigarettes that Mrs. Ruffo smoked, whether they were Lorillard or Philip Morris, caused her injury because she didn't smoke any other cigarettes.
And you don't take it in isolation, as Mr. Bideau would want you to believe. There is not a question of: There's only five pack
years of Lorillard, so it can't possibly be that we're liable.
Let me explain what I mean by that. You have heard Dr. Goldman testify about dose response. And we know, from the chart that you saw here, there's about 124,000 doses of nicotine, 127,750 doses of nicotine in that seven-year period that Dorothy Ruffo inhaled.
Don't you think that might contribute substantially to her disease in the seven years that she was smoking a half a pack of those Kent cigarettes?
You can't erase the 127,750 of nicotine doses of nicotine. You have to consider that those doses contributed to her disease.
No doctor can tell you at what point the disease was caused. No doctor can pinpoint what number of cigarettes caused her disease. No doctor can pinpoint how many years it took before her disease manifested. But what they can tell you is, it's the combination of the cigarettes that she smoked that caused damage. So it's not a matter that one didn't and the other one did.
If Mr. Bideau is saying: If our
sick person would not be able to file a lawsuit because, individually, none of those cigarette companies would be liable because they didn't get up to that threshold of ten pack years.
Well, they did. Because you consider five pack years for one, five pack years for another, five pack years for another, that's 15 years. In combination, they all contributed to disease. And that's what we have here. This is not a single-defendant case, where Lorillard were the only cigarettes that Dorothy Ruffo smoked. No.
So that's why it is in combination. It is not an individual finding. It is in combination with each other, so that the 127,000 doses, combined with the 3,212,000 doses, all contributed to Mrs. Ruffo's illness.
One little thing real quick, I forgot to mention about statute of limitations. And that is the argument that, well, these doctors all agree that Mrs. Ruffo's illness, her emphysema must have occurred in at least 1985. I mean, the doctors will tell you, the
cigarettes didn't cause damage, it must have been Philip Morris.
But here it is, they are both liable for the injuries. Here's why.
If you take Mr. Bideau's logic, that it is a five pack-year cigarette, five pack years, five pack years of cigarettes, and we know and we can accept the figure that it takes at least ten before you can get disease. So if there is a five pack year of smoking, you quit, you don't get disease. We accept that.
So if you have three brands of cigarettes with five pack years per cigarette, that's 15 years. So we know someone who smokes a brand for five pack years, a second brand for five pack years, a third brand for five pack years, there's a chance that person can get sick.
What happens if someone does get sick, three cigarette brands, five pack years, five pack years, five pack years, under Mr. Bideau's logic, none of those cigarette companies would be liable because there is not enough pack years to cause disease. So a
doctors, especially Dr. Reed, after he made a diagnosis based on X-rays, based on pulmonary function study, based on history, based on blood tests, with his skilled knowledge, he was able to make a diagnosis of COPD. And because of that diagnosis, and because of chest films, he could look and he could say:
This is severe enough that I could go back and I could figure out, she must have had this disease by 1985 or 1988.
Doctors can do that. Professionals can do that.
And so what does that mean?
It means nothing other than doctors knew that Mrs. Ruffo, when she got diagnosed, must have had the condition prior to 1990.
Interestingly, though, you didn't hear one word from any them who said, "And, of course, Dorothy Ruffo would have known at that same time that she had COPD," because that's silly, because no one can say that.
MR. FASI: Objection, your Honor, misstatement of the law.
THE COURT: It is overruled.
MR. KAISER: No one could say that, no
one opined on that, no one testified that.
Of course, Mrs. Ruffo would have been familiar with those) symptoms in '85. So the fact that doctors would have known that Mrs. Ruffo, after they knew of her illness, go backwards and say it must have been in 1985 that she had it. That means nothing as to whether Mrs. Ruffo knew or should have known that she had COPD prior to May 5th of 1990.
Now, I want to just talk for a minute about comparative fault. And in this case, what defense counsel has failed to do is to really discuss comparative fault. They want to say willy nilly, it is all on Mrs. Ruffo a hundred percent, because they don't want you to believe that it exists.
That's why they can't answer the questions that I posed that you have a right to have answers. That's why you should not consider it, in the least, their argument about what percentage of fault Mrs. Ruffo has. Because they didn't compare their own. They didn't compare their own.
And I submit to you, you can't put any blame on Mrs. Ruffo at the same time when the
seriousness with which we met the report, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
Now, that was their choice, not Mrs. Ruffo's choice, so that you can't put blame on Mrs. Ruffo for not quitting smoking when the tobacco companies are trying to give her a psychological crutch to continue.
Like I said before, put blame on Mrs. Ruffo where blame is due. Put blame in Mrs. Ruffo after 2000, when the tobacco companies were honest and said: We believe it does cause disease, and we agree that the nicotine is addictive.
Then it was on Mrs. Ruffo, from 2000 until she quit in 2010.
And I just want to get into one more area and I will sit down. And that is, you heard all about these statements. And Mrs. Ruffo, at one time or another, had said she wasn't interested in quitting, she didn't want to quit, she didn't want help quitting.
Remember her testimony. She didn't take
cigarette companies are still putting out information that's untrue. Can't put blame on her for that. You can't put blame on her when the tobacco companies are still denying that cigarettes are dangerous. You can't put blame on her when they're still denying that it is not addictive. You can't put blame on her when they're trying to give her a psychological crutch so that she won't stop smoking.
Remember, in 1972, almost 20 years after their controversy that they created, in 1972, it is called The Roper Proposal, and that came out -- and The Roper Proposal was in 1972, and they talked about their strategy here. And they said it was brilliantly conceived and executed. So they knew their controversy that they created was well executed and successful. They knew after the Surgeon General's report in 1964, one of their concerns after the Surgeon General's report was: We've got to put out some information to give a psychological crutch to the smoker, like Mrs. Ruffo.
At some point, reflecting the same
Dr. Reed up on his invitation to quit smoking because, she said, "I wanted to do it on my own."
And she also said she wasn't interested in quitting smoking because she knew what it felt like when she had tried in the past, and contrary to what defense counsel said to you, she had tried in the past. Her son said she had quit more than a day. On many occasions she had tried to quit.
As Dr. Goldman told you, the people that make these statements, it is not surprising, that is the addiction talking.
They don't want to talk about addiction here because they argue choice, but that is what is talked about here, that's the addicted person saying, rationalizing with that crutch, that they can't quit smoking, they don't want to quit smoking.
If Mrs. Ruffo really liked smoking, if she really enjoyed smoking, number one, do you think she would have still smoked when her disease hit her?
Do you think she really wanted to smoke at that point?
Do you think she could say, "I really wanted to smoke because I enjoyed it once I knew from Dr. Reed that I was going to die from this disease"?
Who in their right mind would do that?
If she really enjoyed smoking, if she really wanted to smoke -- and Dr. Goldman said, "It's not that they enjoy smoking, what they enjoy is not getting the withdrawal symptoms if they don't go without smoking." What they are doing is smoking to get the feeling back, to get rid of the edginess, the nerves. Mrs. Ruffo described it as the stress that it relieves. It relieves her withdrawal symptoms. When she gets up from sleeping for eight hours and she has these symptoms, she gets that cigarette, and ah.
If she really enjoyed smoking, why would she have a need to lie to her friends, and Dr. Reed, and anyone else about smoking?
If she really enjoyed smoking she could say to the doctor: Pound sand, I enjoy my smoking, I am going to smoke until I die, and I don't care what you say, or you say, or anybody says, because it is my choice.
put on her is 10 percent. Because from 2000 to 2010, she did quit. And when she was on that Chantix, Mrs. Ruffo testified, it was at least a week that she took it, but it upset her stomach and she stopped, and she was still able to quit. She didn't have side effects because that's what the medicine is for. Chantix was a relatively new drug that was only given by prescription. Before that time, there weren't real successful techniques to stop smoking.
And so she told you, she used it. She was supposed to smoke that first week with it, and she did, and she used it, and after the first week stopped. And she was able to be successful without the withdrawal symptoms because of the medicine.
Certainly in the past, when she had tried to quit, she had not been successful.
That was her frame of reference as to why she did not want to quit any more. And it was the pneumonia that triggered her finally quitting. Something powerful triggered her:
I have to try harder.
This idea that, at one point, Mrs. Ruffo
And she could say the same thing to her friends: If I like smoking, I have no hesitation in telling my friends and family, leave me alone, it is my choice.
But the reason she lied to those people, the reason she lied to her doctors about her smoking, the reason she lied to her friends about her smoking, is because she knew she had to quit, she knew she wanted to quit, she knew she couldn't quit because she had tried. She knew she was embarrassed, and that's why she lied, because she knew what they were going to tell her.
And that's the distinction. The fact that she would lie to her doctors who wanted her to quit, to her friends and family who wanted her to quit, indicates one thing: She knew she had to quit, she had tried and couldn't do it.
And hold her at fault for that, hold her at fault for not trying hard enough. Blame her for that, blame her after 2000: You didn't try hard enough, you should have tried ten times instead of nine. Put that on her.
But I submit to you that what you could
early on said something about 15 percent, that the tobacco industry was 15 percent, what you didn't hear was: Who has the other percent?
You see, it is all irrelevant. Because as she sat in the courtroom, she goes: No, I wouldn't say that now, I know much more now than I did then.
She didn't have to have the information about the tobacco companies' lies and misstatements and concealment. That's what lawyers are for, when they filed this lawsuit. The lawyers have the knowledge, the client doesn't have to.
And so when she's learned along the way what's happened when she has a chance to listen in this courtroom what's happened, now she says: Of course it wouldn't be 15 percent.
But you know what, if she had said anything, if she had said 75 percent on them, 80 percent on them, you can bet they would be up here saying: Can you believe the gall of that woman to say that? That's a self-serving statement.
The most powerful statement she said was: I just don't know, it is a tough question.
You know why; because it is irrelevant what she thinks. What is relevant is what you think. What you think is relevant to the evidence and the testimony. She's leaving it in your hands.
And I'm going to sit down now, ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to ask, recall the testimony, recall the questions that were never answered in this case about their fault, not our fault. And recall the damages to compensate Mrs. Ruffo for her mental pain, for her physical pain and suffering based on her progression of her COPD over the years. Thank you.
