MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please this honorable court, counsel, Mr. Ryan, Mrs. Ryan. Members of the jury, good morning.
(Jury responds, "Good morning.)
MR. PERSONS: We've been together a while now, but this is the last time I'll get a chance to address you. I have not enjoyed all aspects of this trial, but I certainly have enjoyed presenting the Reynolds case to you, and I thank you for the attention that you've shown throughout this proceeding. And I thank you for your time, and so I wanted to make sure I said that before I said anything else.
Now based on what you've just heard you would think that it's a forgone conclusion that punitive damages be awarded, that it's automatic
because you checked that they may be warranted on the verdict form last Friday. But "may be warranted" and "shall be warranted," or "should be warranted" are different things. If it were a foregone conclusion, we wouldn't be having this part of the trial. We wouldn't have had Phase II. You wouldn't have had different evidence in Phase II, different laws in Phase II from the evidence and the laws that were presented in Phase I.
I strongly urge you to read the jury instructions. Please read the jury instructions. The judge gave them to you, and I know you'll read them. But in so many places the jury instructions say punitive damages, "if any," "if any." So it's not automatic. "If any." That's what it says. And in many places, and those jury instructions, it says that punitive damages may not be necessary, that you may decline to award punitive damages. The law gives you that option. And I encourage you to do so.
This case isn't about youth smoking. It's not about advertising. It's not about whether nicotine can be in these products, because, as
you heard, nicotine, it's lawful. What you have to do is warn people that it's addictive.
But the FDA can do a whole lot of things.
But one thing Congress told the FDA they couldn't do is to ban nicotine altogether. The FDA can come in and say you have to lower the amount of nicotine in a product. They can do that. But Congress and the bill that President Obama signed on June the 22nd, 2009, some six months after he took office in January 2009 after being elected in 2008, that law does not say that the FDA can come in and just ban the nicotine altogether. And so please keep -please keep that in mind.
And so with that I want to start with -- and in these slides when I put them up, it will have a reference to the page number of the jury instructions, which is the law that governs the case. And I would encourage you to look at those instructions, look at that part of the instruction as we go along.
Let's start with the first thing. "R.J. Reynolds cannot be punished for selling and advertising cigarettes."
No matter how much money they spend on
advertising, they can't be punished for advertising. Can't be punished for selling cigarettes.
"The manufacture --" And this is the jury instruction. This is the law that the judge has given you. "The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity protected by federal law. Therefore, you may not impose punitive damages to punish R.J. Reynolds for simply manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes."
So punitive damages would be inappropriate simply for selling these products.
You heard a lot about nicotine and the risks associated with several of these products, including the migratory products. And I'm going to talk about that in a minute. But I want to share this with you. At no time did Dr. Garner ever say that these tobacco products were safe. He said some were less dangerous than the others. At no time did he say that these things were safe.
And with the e-cigarette it hasn't been around long enough for them to do enough studies to determine whether it's safe or not. And all
of that has been shared with the FDA, the government. There's no secret about it. That's in the literature. That's the science.
Cigarettes cannot be made safe. There's just no way to do it. That's the bottom line despite all the money that's been spent on research and developing new products, new types of cigarettes. It's still dangerous. Some are more dangerous than others, but they're still dangerous.
Dr. Proctor told you that, and Dr. Jack Henningfield told you that as well. They're dangerous. There's just no way around it.
Punitive damages cannot be awarded because tobacco products contain nicotine or because nicotine is addictive. It just can't. Congress decided, recognized that nicotine is part of tobacco products and cannot be banned. So the nicotine is there. It's going to be there in some level. The FDA can prescribe the level, but the FDA can't ban it altogether, can't say reduce it to zero, just can't do it. That's not the law.
Now what you heard was a broad-ranging attack on the tobacco industry. But this case
isn't about that.
You checked "yes" to questions number 5 and 6 on the verdict form last Friday. And in that you determined that what was the legal cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD was the concealment and the agreement to conceal, the dangers and the addictive properties of smoking. And that was the legal cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD. So it was the concealing of the fact that it's dangerous and concealing the fact that it was addictive from Mr. Ryan. That was the legal cause of his COPD. That was your determination.
And so what Reynolds can be punished for, and this is in the jury instruction, and it's very important, the word "only." The jury instruction says, and this is at the bottom of page 1 and continues at the top of page 2, it says, "Reynolds can only be punished for concealing information and agreeing to conceal information that was a cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD."
And so we're not talking about Joe Camel. We're not talking about whether there's nicotine in the product. We're talking about denying that it's dangerous, and we're talking about
denying that it's addictive, because Mr. Ryan told you when he was testifying on this witness stand, if I had known that it was dangerous, if I had known that it was addictive, I wouldn't have taken up smoking.
And so that's what you determined. That's what you determined was the cause of his COPD.
Punitive damages can only go to Mr. and Mrs. Ryan. So this request for an additional $21.5 million is a request for more money. It can't go to anyone else. It can't go to smoking cessation. It doesn't go to the cancer society. It doesn't go to public health. It goes to Mr. and Mrs. Ryan.
Now any amount would be in addition to the $21.5 million damages you previously awarded.
You have fully compensated Mr. and Mrs. Ryan.
In fact, their lawyer came before you last Friday and said that $20 million would fully compensate them, and they were awarded 1 1/2 million dollars more than that. So they have been fully, fully compensated.
Now you may -- your prior verdict doesn't require you to render punitive damages in this phase.
"You may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages," as I mentioned before. And that's on page 2 of the verdict form. You may decline to assess punitive damages. And the reason you can decline to assess punitive damages is because this is a different phase with different evidence and different rules of law that apply. And that will be the first sentence after the fourth bullet point on page 2 of your instructions that you will have with you in the jury room.
The prior verdict does not require you to award punitive damages. "You are not required to award any punitive damages. It is up to you whether or not to award any punitive damages." And in doing so, you take into account various things that are in those instructions. And I'm going to go through them with you, various things you take into account.
The law, in many ways, exercises a lot of common sense. And the law recognizes that people can change, and the law recognizes that circumstances change. And that's part of what's in those jury instructions that you have, you'll have out there with you.
As I said before, the punitive damages can't go to public health agencies, can't go to smoking cessation clinics, can't go to charities, can't go to other smokers, can't go to anyone other than Mr. and Mrs. Ryan. Now Reynolds can only be punished for the conduct that caused Mr. Ryan's COPD.
Now you may not seek to punish R.J. Reynolds for any harms suffered by any persons other than Mr. Ryan. And you heard the number. I think it was 3,800 other Engle lawsuits where those people will have their opportunity to come into court and get compensatory and punitive damages.
Let's talk about the conduct. "Punitive damages must be based solely on conduct you found to have caused Mr. Ryan's COPD."
"Reynolds can only be punished for concealing information and agreeing to conceal information that was a cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD." That's the issue, concealment and agreement to conceal.
Now let's talk about the 21 and a half million dollars that you awarded. You should not award punitive damages if you conclude that those purposes, the purposes of punishment and
deterrence, were served by the award that you already made. The law recognizes this, and the law says, the law recognizes that your award of 16 1/2 million dollars to Mr. Ryan and 5 million to Mrs. Ryan has the effect of punishment and deterrence to Reynolds. It's compensatory to the Ryans, but to the company that has to pay it out, that's punitive. That's punishment. It's certainly not a reward.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
Compensatory -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. PERSONS: The effect of that award, from Reynolds' perspective, is punishment.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: And the instructions -- the instructions tell you that that award, from Reynolds' perspective, can be considered punishment enough.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Now in awarding the $21.5 million, on the verdict form you found that 35 percent of the responsibility for Mr. Ryan's COPD was Mr. Ryan's fault. But under the law there is no deduction for that 35 percent. So if it's 21 and a half million dollars to fully compensate for what he suffered in the past, what he's suffering now and what he's suffering into the future, seven and a half million dollars of that was damage that he did to himself. But Reynolds as part of the $21.5 million will pay that seven and a half million dollars. That's part of the award. And I submit to you, from Reynolds' perspective, that's punishment.
Now there is no claim that Reynolds conspired to conceal any information since 2000, none.
And let's talk about the past. The past is gone. The Tobacco Institute is gone. The Council For Tobacco Research is gone. The Tobacco Industry Research Committee is gone. Helmut Wakeham is dead. James Bowling is dead. Walker Merryman is dead. Ann Browder is still living, but she's gone. Howard and
Joseph Cullman are both deceased. They're gone.
MR. ALVAREZ: I would object to this.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Claude Teague is gone.
Alan Rodgman is gone. Diane Burrows is gone.
Jim Johnston is gone. Ed Horrigan is gone. Robert Heimann is gone. In fact, he passed away a few years after he gave that deposition.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: More to strike.
THE COURT: The jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. PERSONS: There are no secret documents anymore. They're available everywhere now for anybody any time, day or night, to see. You can search them. They're searchable. Anybody who has access to a computer can get any of those documents, the largest business archive in the world online and text searchable. 85 million pages of documents, all available for the world to see. They can search day or night, seven days a week, 3 65 days a year.
The company has new owners, has new executives and new scientists.
The law requires you to consider evidence that Reynolds is a changed company. And that's on page 2 of your instructions. That's the law that you have -- the instructions you're to follow. And you take into account the fact that Reynolds is a changed company. That's something you take into account in deciding, in determining whether to award punitive damages and if so, how much. You can be rewarded for changing.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
MR. PERSONS: Recognition.
THE COURT: Excuse me. Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Recognition that people can change. You can get credit for changing.
"You should consider -- " And this is what the instruction says, "You should consider whether there is a continuing need for deterrence in light of any changes in the conduct of R.J. Reynolds from the conduct on which you based your determination that punitive damages were warranted."
And what you heard last week in the first phase of the case was all about the concealment of information, not sharing things with the rest
of the scientific community, conducting secret experiments, denying that smoking is dangerous, denying that nicotine is addictive. Well, look at the changed company, which admits that smoking is dangerous, admits using tobacco products is dangerous, admits that nicotine is addictive. So that's change. That represents change. It's a changed company. And the law allows you to take that into account in determining whether to award punitive damages and if so, how much.
Are punitive damages needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing and agreeing to conceal information in 2015? That's what you ask yourself. That's the question. Are punitive damages needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing and agreeing to conceal information in 2 015? I submit to you, it's not. They are not.
R.J. Reynolds informs smokers in 2015, unlike in the past. They got the website. They've got reduced risk products. I didn't say safe products. Reduced risk. Less risky than a conventional cigarette. And they've got cessation products. If you want to quit,
they'll sell you something to help you quit smoking and get away from tobacco products altogether. How much more can you do than provide somebody with a product that will enable them to quit using your product?
Here's something from the website. They tell smokers right on the website site that "Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States, that cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer, heart disease, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases and health conditions."
Nobody is up there now saying, well, it's not dangerous. They're telling you about some of the dangers associated with using the product, telling you in black and white, telling you that it's dangerous.
Also on the website telling smokers that "Quitting cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk for serious diseases," telling them upfront. Tells them no tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risk. And that includes the e-cigarette, any tobacco product. That's a tobacco product. So the
website tells them none of these things have been shown to be safe and without risk whatsoever.
Someone wants to find out what's in a cigarette they're smoking, they can get all the ingredients. No longer is that a secret that somebody is hiding from the public. You can go on the website and look up Camel and then click on this, what kind or brand or style of Camel, and then it will -- all of the ingredients will show up down there so people know what they're putting into their bodies, they know what additives they're getting, they know what chemicals they're getting that are coming out of the smoke.
R.J. Reynolds informs smokers about the availability of reduced risk products and cessation aids.
And here's that product switching, product migration that we spent so much time with Dr. Garner on yesterday. And he walked us through that, this migration strategy, migration away from the most harmful of tobacco products that are cigarettes that are inhaled to smokeless tobacco, that is not inhaled, and
other nicotine products. And as you migrate from cigarettes to these other products, they are less risky, but they're all risky. It says, "Relative risk for chronic disease." Nowhere on that chart does it say it's safe. Nowhere on the website does it say these things are safe. They're just less risky than the cigarette.
And then here's what Reynolds tells smokers. "The best course of action for tobacco consumers concerned about their health is to quit," not just smokers but anybody using a tobacco product. They say the best thing you can do for your health is to quit using them. Whether it's an e-cigarette, whether it's an Eclipse, whether it's a Premier, whether it's conventional cigarette, whether it's snuff, whether it's snus, quit. That's the best thing you can do for your help. That's what they tell you.
They say, "Adults who continue to use tobacco products should consider the reductions of risk for serious diseases associated with moving from cigarettes to the use of smoke-free tobacco or nicotine products." In other words, if you're not going to quit consider using something that's not as dangerous as a
conventional cigarette. That's what they're telling me on the website.
And then they have developed through innovation and research and development these less risky products. High risk on this end. On the left-hand side of this are the cigarettes, things that burn tobacco, combustible.
Remember, Dr. Garner said yesterday when you burn tobacco, you get 7,000 chemicals released. When you heat it, there's still deadly chemicals released, not as many and not as in as high concentration as you have with a conventional cigarette.
And then the heat-not-burn, then there's the smoke-free, which has nicotine but doesn't burn -- it has no tobacco in it. The VUSE has no tobacco in it, but it has nicotine extracted from the tobacco plant but no tobacco in it, so you're not burning the tobacco or even heating it and generating all of those harmful chemicals.
And then there's the snus that he talked about, which is smoke-free because you're not burning the tobacco, but you're still putting tobacco in your body, and there can be
consequences, health consequences. And he talked about some of those on yesterday.
And then the nicotine replacement therapy, the ZONNIC, then quitting, cessation, that's what's risk-free. Everything else has some risk associated with it.
Here's what he says about reduced tar and products. He said, "So we've -- you know, and it fits with what we've talked about before, that risk continuing, right? So you've got cigarettes, very high level of risk; nicotine products, very low or no level of risk. So we want to offer products sort of across that whole spectrum."
And that's what that illustration or this illustrates here. Starting in 1988 they came out with the Premier. It failed in the marketplace. He told you about Eclipse that came out in 1994 which heats but doesn't burn tobacco, which is less dangerous. It's not a conventional cigarette.
And then the snus they got that is being developed, I believe it was Switzerland or Sweden, in 2007, 2008 and then the VUSE in 2 014, and then they came up with the REVO, which is an
Eclipse, they repackaged it trying to see if they can encourage people to use the Eclipse because it's not as dangerous as a conventional cigarette.
But not giving up, continually -continually researching and developing new products for decades, striving to get things, bring things to market that are less -- less and less and less risky, recognizing there's going to be some risk associated with tobacco but less risky.
R.J. Reynolds worked to develop a heat-not-burn product in the 1980s, spent hundreds of millions of dollars to develop Premier. It was less mutagenic, in other words, had less cancer-causing chemicals. Premier was safer than a conventional cigarette. Here's the Eclipse and REVO, available since 1996, still available nationwide and available in Florida. Research surrounding this product was published in more than 50 peer-reviewed publications. Of course, Reynolds is rebranding the Eclipse to generate consumer interest. R.J. Reynolds loses money on every pack but is committed to making that product available to people who want to buy
it who want something less risky than a regular cigarette.
You can't see this, and I don't expect you to remember it, but he put it up yesterday when he was talking about the different chemicals and how it's reduced from what's in the regular cigarette. Let's see if I can point that out.
I think that's hydrogen cyanide was this particular chemical and said in the Premier it was like 0.4. It was a 99.9 percent reduction, in other words, virtually eliminated from the smoke coming from the Premier as opposed to compared to the smoke from a conventional cigarette.
And it was -- that was true for a number of these harmful compounds that they were reduced, 95 percent. And in some cases, like in ammonia, which he said was less -- not in the category of the most harmful, it was like a 5.6 reduction because any time you burn tobacco, you're going to have a release of ammonia because that's just part of that process, any time you heat it.
And then you've got these compounds over here, and the percentage reductions are, a tremendous amount of reduction in the chemicals
constituents in the smoke, the dangerous cancer-causing chemicals in the smoke, a significant reduction, but not a reduction of all of them. In some instances it's a virtual elimination when you eliminate 99.9 percent.
But in some of the others it's not an elimination. They're still there.
And then with the Eclipse, a similar thing in terms of these reductions.
Now you'll notice on here nowhere does it talk about reducing the amount of the nicotine, because the nicotine in and of itself isn't what causes -- isn't the chemical that is carcinogenic that causes the cancer. It's the chemicals that are released as a result of combustion or heating of the tobacco.
Here's snus. Reynolds spent about $50 million to develop snus, dramatically lowering smoking-related disease rates because it's not inhaled. Carries a warning label. The warning label tells the consumer, "Smokeless tobacco is addictive because it has tobacco in it. Snus is a tobacco product so it is addictive. And snus carries certain risks for oral cancer."
Dr. Garner told you that yesterday. He said
it carries risk for oral cancer, but it doesn't carry as much risk for oral cancer as a conventional cigarette does.
And then here's the VUSE, and the VUSE delivers a nicotine aerosol. No tobacco is burned because it doesn't contain any tobacco. There is no tobacco smoke, so you don't have those 7,000 harmful chemicals that you would with a conventional cigarette and much safer than a conventional cigarettes. The research has shown that much, but the research hasn't shown that it's completely safe.
And he said that. And with the VUSE, voluntary warning label. Even though the VUSE isn't regulated by the FDA, the company voluntarily put a warning label on it. The law doesn't require a warning label on VUSE, but the company put a warning label on VUSE so people will be informed what they're getting themselves into when they use these products.
The warning label says, "VUSE is a tobacco product because the nicotine used in this product is extracted from the tobacco plant. No tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risks."
No tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risk. It's on the side so people can read it and they'll know.
"This tobacco product contains nicotine, which is addictive."
Now in the past they would have been denying that. They showed you the picture of the people standing up in Congress, well, nicotine is not addictive. Well, here they're telling people, it's addictive, so you know what you're getting yourself into.
It says, "This product is intended for use only by adult tobacco consumers and is not intended for persons who are pregnant or breastfeeding; persons who have an unstable heart condition, high blood pressure or diabetes; or persons who are at risk for heart disease or are taking medicine for depression or asthma."
And it says, "Keep out of the reach of children" and then a further warning that says, "This product contains nicotine, a chemical known to the State of California to cause birth defects or other reproductive harm."
That's the warning on the product. That's
the warning. So nobody said that VUSE was safe.
And then Reynolds is in the business of helping people quit smoke. You heard about Dr. Garner talk about that product, Niconovum, marketed to make nicotine replacement therapy more accessible to smokers. It's not in these big containers that some of these like Nicorette comes in where you have to spend $4 0 to get it. It's in a much smaller pack, a pack similar in size to a cigarette pack, and it costs about same as a pack of cigarettes. So somebody if they have a problem with the cost, it's about $6, closer to the price of a pack of cigarettes.
And the way they put it on the shelf, it's displayed and sold where tobacco is sold. It's put right there next to the cigarettes behind the counter, so if you go into the 7-Eleven and behind the counter say, I want a pack of Marlboros in the hard box, we will -- right there will be this product, right there will be this product, ZONNIC. It's sold in smaller quantities. It's cheaper than cigarettes, and you don't have to go to the drugstore to get it. In fact, it's the only type of nicotine replacement therapy that you can get at the
convenience store. Why the convenience store? Because that's where most people buy their cigarettes, so it's placed right there at the convenience store where most people are going to buy their cigarettes. They can see it, and it's available to them.
Back to the jury instructions. Jury instructions on page 4 says, "You should also take into consideration any mitigating evidence when considering punitive damages which may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages. You should also take into consideration any mitigating evidence when considering punitive damages which may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages." So it's anything but a foregone conclusion.
Take into account evidence in Phase II. That's what this instruction is telling you, you should take it into account because it may demonstrate there is no need for punitive damages.
It says, "Mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate there is no need to impose punitive damages or that a reduced amount of
punitive damages should be imposed." But, in any event, you should take into account mitigating evidence.
Let's talk about youth smoking. Youth smoking is at an all-time low. Smoking among junior high and high school students has declined by 66 percent since 1966. In the past four years smoking among junior high and high school students has declined by 25 percent.
Teen smoking is a continuously undergoing process of demobilization. What that means is that it's stigmatized. In other words, there's a stigma associated with smoking teens, so smoking among teens has dramatically declined.
Now let's talk about the Food & Drug Administration. You heard a fair amount of that on yesterday from Dr. Garner. And essentially it's basically this. The FDA has the tobacco companies, including R.J. Reynolds, on lockdown. They've got them on lockdown. Every aspect of their business is subject to FDA regulation when it comes to these tobacco products. The FDA has regulated the manufacture, marketing and sale of tobacco products since 2009. June of 2009 they started that process, and it's continued. They
regulate everything that they do.
All the research that they do related to smoking and health is subject to FDA inspection and regulation, so none of this business about holding -- conducting secret studies and secret experiments and not sharing the science or the research with the public health community, the FDA has access to it. Any research related to smoking and addiction that they do is subject to FDA inspection. Product ingredients by brand, the FDA regulates that, all the ingredients, regulated by the FDA, the content and the nicotine delivery by brand. That's subject to FDA regulation.
The quantities of carcinogens and other harmful constituents in tobacco products and tobacco smoke, all that information is to be known, has to be shared with the FDA. They have access to all of that information. You got harmful constituents in the smoke? The FDA knows what it is and in what quantities.
And the FDA has strong enforcement powers, as Dr. Garner told you on yesterday. They can come in and shut down the plant. He said they had two plant inspections last week where the
FDA shows up. And they don't call you in advance and say they're coming. They show up unannounced so they can catch you by surprise so you can't get ready for them. And then they have access to whatever is there, all the records, everything. The condition of plant, the cleanliness, everything is subject to their inspection. They can seize products. They can stop you from selling products or if they find that you're not in compliance.
And you have to pay them to regulate you. It's like paying the police not to guard your house but to guard you to make sure you're not stepping out of line. And then you got to pay them. And that's what these fees are for.
Starting in 2009, and that's just for half a year, because, remember, this took effect in June of 2009. So we're talking June to December of 2009 that was $21 million. And then it goes up every year. And just in the first six years it's already $565 million that Reynolds has had to pay the FDA to regulate them. And that's something that you can take into account in mitigation, in mitigation, in determining, deciding whether punitive damages should be
awarded at all. This is mitigation. This is mitigation evidence.
The Master Settlement Agreement, 50 states, payments to Florida, $4 billion thus far, total payments $66 billion. You can take that into account as mitigation evidence. The law permits you to do that. In fact, the law says you should take into account, that's what the jury instruction says, mitigating evidence. This is mitigating evidence.
And it's not as though anybody held a gun to the head of the tobacco accounts of companies.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: It's argument.
It's not as though somebody held a gun to the head of tobacco companies and made them sign this agreement. They negotiated the agreement. And when you negotiate, it's give and take. And so you give some; you take some, but this is what they ended up paying, $66 billion, with a B.
Now the 3,800 cases are still pending. You can take that into account. You can take that into account. There are other cases. There
will be other people coming and having their day in court. There will be other people, Engle plaintiffs who will be coming to get their compensation and who will be coming if they want to to seek punitive damages. You can take that into account as mitigating evidence.
"Now you may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages." That's what the law says, and that's on page 2 of your instructions that the judge gave you on yesterday. And you'll have them with you. You may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages. You don't have to do it. It's not a foregone conclusion. But as you deliberate, take into account the 21 and a half million dollars that's already been awarded to the plaintiffs in this case.
And take into account the fact that 35 percent of the damage that plaintiff suffered, you determined he brought it on himself. He brought it on himself. So, please, be mindful of that.
"Are punitive damages needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing information in 2015?" The answer is no. The answer is no.
Members of the jury, I submit to you there's really no valid purpose to a punitive damage award in this case because they aren't needed. Reynolds, they can't conceal anything anymore. They can't conceal anything about the dangers of smoking anymore even if they wanted to. They're subject to the FDA oversight inspect. They're subject to FDA lockdown. They can't conceal anything.
They can't agree with anyone to conceal because the other tobacco companies are subject to the same kind of scrutiny, the same kind of inspection as R.J. Reynolds is. So I would encourage you to exercise your discretion, please, and decline to award punitive damages against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Mr. Guest is going to come now and deliver the remainder of our closing arguments. But, again, this is my last opportunity to address you, and I thank you for the attention you've shown this process and the work that you've done in this case.
On behalf of everyone, our system couldn't function without you, and I thank you for that.



MR. GUEST: I am. May it please the Court, counsel.
THE COURT: Ladies, please show the same courtesy you showed Mr. Persons, Mr. Paige,
Mr. Alvarez.
Counsel, you may proceed.
MR. GUEST: Ladies of the jury, good morning.
I do thank you for your continued attention and patience. We're obviously almost done here. I will say that even though this phase of the trial has been much shorter than the first phase, it's no less important. And, in fact, I think it's even more important. And I think you need to listen carefully to what the instructions are, as I said yesterday, during the defense opening statement, and I think you need to pay close attention to the evidence that you've seen from Dr. Garner and that Mr. Persons just went over with you right now.
And Mr. Persons just concluded his remarks by telling you that punitive damages are not
awarded based on the instructions that you've been given and based on the evidence that you've been shown. And, of course, I agree with Mr. Persons because he went over the FDA regulations, the laws that Reynolds is subject to. He went over the fact that Reynolds is, in fact, a changed company. And he went over the fact that what has happened in the past is gone.
Because you have the discretion to not award punitive damages in this case, I think the evidence in the instructions should lead you to conclude that that is what you should do that when you see the verdict form after your deliberations on the line you put a zero, because the evidence has shown you that Reynolds is different. And the evidence has shown you that there is no need to punish and there is no need to deter Reynolds in 2002 (sic).
I want to show you one instruction, though, that's on page 2 of your jury instructions.
And Mr. Smith is going to pull this up for us. I want you to be clear this instruction on page 2 states that, "You should impose punitive damages only if you conclude that monetary liability beyond your award of compensatory
damages is necessary to accomplish punishment and deterrence. You should not award punitive damages if you conclude that those purposes will be satisfied by Reynolds's compensatory liability."
And, ladies and gentlemen of -- excuse me -ladies of the jury, as I said yesterday, your compensatory award was $21.5 million, $21.5 million. And if you conclude based on this instruction that your compensatory award served the purposes that Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Paige talked about, then there is no need to award further damages in this case, then your job is done, and there is nothing else to do.
And, of course, that's my position. That's Mr. Persons's position, that's Mr. Monde's position based on the instructions that the Court has given you and the evidence that you've seen. And, of course, I understand that you may disagree with that, that you may decide that you want to put something on that verdict form that is not a zero. And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to talk to you about that and what a common sense award would be in this case.
MR. SMITH: Hold on one second.
MR. GUEST: While Mr. Smith is getting us situated let me break this down for you. Now Mr. Persons mentioned that coming into this courthouse, Mr. Ryan acknowledged some fault for causing his COPD. And the evidence you heard in Phase I was that Mr. Ryan could have tried a little harder to quit, that he could have done different things to quit, and he could have quit sooner.
And let me just be clear. This is no criticism of Mr. Ryan whatsoever. I hope you don't think we've criticized Mr. Ryan at all in this trial because that's not the point of this evidence. The point is that Mr. Ryan admitted that he had some responsibility, and based on the evidence you saw in Phase I you found that he was 35 percent at fault for his COPD.
And the reason why I point that out is because of your $21.5 million award. 35 percent of that is a bit over $7.5 million.
And as Mr. Persons suggested, as he told you, because you said yes to question 5 and question 6, R.J. Reynolds is responsible -- R.J. Reynolds is responsible for the $7.5 million that you found Mr. Ryan to be at fault for. And
let me make this clear. The $21.5 million that you have awarded last week to Mr. Ryan will make Mr. Ryan and Miss Ryan a very, very wealthy family.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. GUEST: And Mr. Alvarez has asked you to double that award. He has asked you for an additional $21.5 million. And let me walk through a couple of other aspects that your verdict told us about. Mr. Alvarez at the close of the case last week asked you to award Mr. Ryan $15 million. And he asked you for $15 million to compensate, to fully compensate Mr. Ryan for his COPD-related injuries back to the past to when he first started having problems with COPD and began having shortness of breath and coughing and things that were affecting his health, and he also asked you for $15 million to cover anything, anything that may happen to Mr. Ryan going into the future.
So what that $15 million request was was to
cover both the past and the future of Mr. Ryan's COPD-related injuries.
And when you rendered your verdict last week, you gave Mr. Ryan, $16.5 million. And when Mr. Alvarez asked for $15 million, you awarded 16.5, so you essentially gave Mr. Ryan $1.5 million in addition to what Mr. Alvarez said would make Mr. Ryan fully compensated.
MR. ALVAREZ: I object, Your Honor. That misstates the argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GUEST: Ladies of the jury, the point of all this is that under the law and how you awarded the verdict last week that R.J. Reynolds is responsible for $21.5 million, that includes what would have been the fault of Mr. Ryan at 35 percent, which is $7.5 million, and that includes the $1.5 million you awarded above the $15 million that Mr. Alvarez requested last week. So that's basically $9 million that Reynolds is responsible for based on the verdict that you awarded last week.
And before I move on I want to reiterate something I mentioned yesterday. And what that is is that the $21.5 million that you awarded
last week is a powerful, powerful message.
Nobody -- I don't care who you are -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection. Violates the Golden Rule.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GUEST: 21.5 million is an immense amount of money. And I don't think there's anyone out there who's going to laugh at that.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection. Excuse me. Objection as to "I don't think."
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUEST: Thank you, Your Honor.
I don't think that there is anyone who is going to laugh at that or think that that is not a significant amount of money, because it is.
It is. There's no person, no company who's out there who's going to just shake that off.
Now, as I mentioned, as I mentioned with the instruction that Mr. Smith just had on the screen that you can consider your compensatory award as punishment to R.J. Reynolds, I'll break it down to you in three ways. I submit to you it does. Number one, that award in and of itself, as I just mentioned, is a huge amount of money.
Number two, that award includes the $7.5 million that was related to Mr. Ryan's 35-percent fault that you awarded.
MR. ALVAREZ: Your Honor, I object to this.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GUEST: I'll move on.
THE COURT: Counsel, that's an improper argument. Move on.
MR. GUEST: Okay. I'll move on. But please consider that instruction when you're deliberating today to determine whether that $21.5 million is, under the instructions, something that includes the punishment that you're asked to determine today.
But getting to the point, I understand that you may not want to put zero on the verdict form. And if you want to put another number other than zero, I submit to you that a common sense number in this case based on the instructions and based on the evidence you have heard is $500,000. $500,000 would be a reasonable amount to award in this phase if you decide to award something over zero.
And let me explain to you why that is. Compared to the numbers that you've heard in
this case and compared to the number you awarded last week, you may not think this means much of anything, but what it does mean is that if you award $500,000, what your total award will be in this case is $22 million.
So what I'm asking you to do is think about your verdict on the whole. And, again,
$22 million is no less a powerful message than the one you sent last week. It is a huge amount of money. It reflects the punishment to Reynolds, and it reflects that you did send a message last week and that $500,000 is reasonable.
Now there was some suggestion that Reynolds has to feel this all the way up in North Carolina in Winston-Salem where Reynolds is based. Ladies of the jury, I will submit that Reynolds awarding $500,000, if you choose to do so in bringing your award up to $22 million, that Reynolds will feel every single penny of this award and that the purposes of punitive damages will be accomplished.
So let me put this in context before I wrap up. You heard that there are 3,800 Engle cases pending today. And if you award $500,000 in
each of these cases, the total result just in punitive damages would be $2 billion, $2 billion. And I'm not talking about compensatory damages like pain and suffering, like medical expenses, like lost wages, like funeral bills. I'm not talking about those types of damages. Some were in this case and some were not. I'm talking about punitive damages. And that total amount if you awarded 50 0,00 0 in each of those cases would be $2 billion.
And if you consider Mr. Alvarez's request that you award $21.5 million in punitive damages in this case, the total amount of punitive damages that would be awarded in each of the 3,800 pending Engle cases would be $82 billion.
And the bottom line is, and as the instructions tell you, you cannot financially destroy -MR. ALVAREZ: You know, Judge, this is inappropriate argument.
MR. GUEST: Your Honor, this is in the instructions.
THE COURT: Excuse me.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
(The following proceedings were had before the
Court outside the presence of the jury:)
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. ALVAREZ: I object, Judge. What he just told this jury is that that award that would be speculative in the future would destroy the company. And that's an inappropriate argument.
MR. GUEST: Your Honor, I was simply trying to tie this all back. I was about to move on -all I was -- I was simply moving on. I was getting off of this topic moving on to another topic talking about how they cannot financially destroy with a large punitive damages award, and I was going to wrap up.
THE COURT: There's no evidence as to what income they generate. I didn't hear any evidence as to what they generated, what the company is worth or anything like that. You can argue that it's a -- an award can't bankrupt the company or can't bankrupt the company. But there's no testimony those amounts would. So I don't know where you're going.
MR. GUEST: It was just an instruction. I was just reiterating the instruction and about to move on.
THE COURT: So move on. Your objection is
sustained.
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
(The following proceedings were had before the Court and jury:)
MR. GUEST: I'm about to wrap up on these jury instructions. But you could see putting in context the different amounts, the different amount of the awards, bringing your award up to $22 million or considering the implications for Reynolds if the award -- of a large punitive damages award.
And we've been talking about messages and what awards mean in terms of messages. And I've been telling you that your message of $21.5 million is, in fact, a powerful message, and it's a message that I think everybody has been talking about as being loud and clear.
Now think about what a message of a large punitive damages award would mean. Think about that message, because you've heard that Reynolds is a changed company over the past 2 0 years. You've heard from Dr. Garner and the types of changes that Reynolds has been undergoing and the type of regulatory environment that Reynolds is now operating in. So when you think about
what a large punitive damages award would do, and you would think about to Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Paige's suggestion about whether that would motivate other corporations today, would awarding a large punitive damages award today after a company has changed over the past two decades, after the company is regulated, after what the company was doing was gone, would it send a positive message to other corporations considering doing the same thing that Reynolds is now going to be punished after having made all these changes with a large award?
The message that a large punitive award would send is that it's okay to punish a company over and over and over and again and again -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. GUEST: After Reynolds has changed, a large punitive damages award would simply not make sense, because Reynolds has changed, and the evidence has shown you that.
Now your compensatory award of $21.5
million, we've talked about it. You can look at the instructions. You can think about whether that was punishment. You can consider the fact that the past is now gone.
MR. ALVAREZ: Your Honor, objection.
MR. GUEST: Your Honor, this is simply argument.
THE COURT: Excuse me. You want to talk about it sidebar? Otherwise, I just rule. I don't want a speaking objection or you responding to it.
There's an objection. I sustained it. Move
on.
MR. GUEST: Thank you, Your Honor.
There is simply no need to punish Reynolds. The company has changed, and the company is regulated, and there's no need to deter.
Now given today and where we are now in 2 015 I submit to you, ladies of the jury, you should decline to award punitive damages. But if you do choose to write something other than zero, I would submit to you a reasonable amount, maximum amount of additional money you should award to bring your total award up to $22 million would be $500,000.
Now, as I said at the beginning, this is a short phase of the trial. This only two took days, but it's no less important. And I would respectfully request of you, ladies of the jury, to please consider the instructions; to please think carefully about this decision; and to please use your common sense.
Thank you again for your continued time and your attention on behalf of myself, Mr. Persons, Mr. Monde and R.J. Reynolds. Thank you very much.
THE COURT: Mr. Guest, thank you.
MR. GUEST: Thank you, Your Honor.
