MR. ALVAREZ: May it please this Honorable Court, Counsel, Mr. Ryan.
MR. ALVAREZ: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE PANEL: Good morning.
MR. ALVAREZ: First of all, I want to
thank you all for participating in this process. It's an important day, it's an important process.
When you guys came in here last Wednesday and we spoke to you on last Thursday, I said that I was looking for the lucky six. And a lot of people laughed out there at me and said, I don't want to do this, this is not where I want to be. And I said, listen, you know, if you're chosen as one of the lucky six, I promise you at the end of this trial, you may feel a little bit differently. You may feel that the process worked, that you learned something, that it enriched you as a human being, that you were part of something in our community as part of the process, and I just hope that you feel that way. I really do.
And we appreciate all your kind attention to all of us. We can tell that you were all paying attention; and on behalf of my client, I want to thank you.
I'm going to go for about an hour and 15 minutes. If something -- if you need a break or something, just let the judge know and we'll be happy to -- read you some instructions
and I'm going to go for an hour and 15 minutes and then we're going to take a break. But if something happens that you need one before, just let us know, okay?
All right. So the first thing I would like to do is talk about the very first question on the verdict form, which is about class membership. Remember I told you that class membership is we have to establish first that he was a member of the Engle class and that's someone who was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that that addiction was the legal cause of his COPD.
But let me tell you class membership is not about fault. Okay? It's not about fault. There will be another question on that verdict form, which I'm going to show you, that you could assess responsibilities to the parties. Okay? The class membership is not about whose fault it is. And it's not about awareness.
It's not about whether he knew that smoking was bad. Class membership is simply, was that person addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and was that addiction a legal cause of his COPD. That's it. That's all it's
about.
That's -- this is the -- actually, this is the question -- the very first question, it's Question Number 1 on your verdict form. And it says: Was Thomas Ryan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema?
And if you answer no to that, we go home. That's it, the case is over. Okay? But I would suggest to you that we have proven our case by more than just the greater weight of the evidence. We have proven our case by the overwhelming amount of evidence that was presented to you, and let me tell you what that is.
First of all, let's talk about what's not at issue in this case. What is not at issue in this case is that smoking cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds was the medical cause of Tom Ryan's COPD. What I mean by that is that last part of the question, which is did he have COPD caused from smoking, that's not an issue in this case.
The Court has already instructed you on that, you heard that, they're not disputing
that. They are saying and the Court has instructed you that his COPD was caused by smoking their cigarettes. So that's not even an issue in this case. Okay? No one is going to doubt that, no one is going to dispute that. That's one less thing you have to decide.
Okay?
Again, it's not about fault of a party. It's not whether addicts can quit because anybody can quit. You know, cocaine addicts can quit. Heroin addicts can quit. It doesn't mean they weren't addicted to begin with. Anybody who has an addiction can quit. It doesn't -- because you quit does not mean you weren't addicted to begin with. Okay?
And it's not about whether the smoker shares some responsibility. That's another question on the verdict form. We're going to get to that. The class membership question is simply -- in this case is, was that person addicted. Because the last part of the answer to that question has already been answered. Okay?
And reliance on any statement from the tobacco industry, we're going to talk about
that. That's another question too. What he knew, what he believed, what they told him, how that influenced him, that's all related. The very first question is very, very simple, so let's talk about that.
What is legal cause? Legal cause -addiction is a legal cause of his COPD if it directly, and in a natural and continuous sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing such COPD so that it can be reasonably said that but for addiction, the COPD would not have occurred. Okay? Think about that for a second.
What does that mean? What do those words, "produce or contribute substantially to producing but for the addiction the COPD would not have occurred."
But for the addiction, if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked between two to four packs a day for over 4 0 years and develop his COPD? Think about that. What caused him to continue to smoke three or four packs a day? The addiction. That's what this instruction means. But for, but for that addiction, would he have continued
to smoke and would he have developed COPD.
Okay.
What's missing from that whole instruction? The word "choice" or "fault," it's nowhere in that instruction. And I'm going to show it to you when we get to that question where it's appropriate for you to decide the responsibilities and assess the responsibilities of each side. But it's not here. Okay? It's just not here.
So let's talk about the medical records. September 1st, 1998, this patient has a history of smoking up to four packs of cigarettes a day from age 14 to 55, stopping a year ago. Okay?
The patient was told three years ago that he has emphysema. The patient smoked up to four packs for 41 years, stopping a year ago. That is a significant, a significant smoking history. Think about that. Between the ages of 14 and 55, smoking up to four packs a day for all those years. That is addiction. That is addiction.
I want to put it to you in numbers so that you can understand what it means to smoke between two to four packs a day, how much time
that actually takes out of your life, so that you understand that this isn't something he does because he wants to spend a little bit of time smoking and enjoying himself. Look at the amount of time it actually takes him.
This is what we know. He smoked for
4	0 years, assuming 4 0 years. He smoked for a little bit more, but assuming 40 years, okay, he smoked between two to four packs a day, so let's do an average of three packs a day.
Okay? Let's average it out to three.
Cigarettes per year is about 21 -- he smoked around 21,000, almost 22,000 cigarettes a year. Over his lifetime, that's over 800,000 cigarettes. It takes between 10 to 15 minutes to smoke a cigarette, so let's do an average of 12 and a half minutes. That's 10,950 minutes. That equals 182,500 hours. That's 11,406 days. That's 31.25 years. Okay? 78 percent of his waking day is spent smoking. That means 12 and a half hours out of his 16 hours that you're awake, what's he doing? Smoking. Why would someone spend all that time doing that unless he was addicted?
Now, let's talk about him in particular.
Let's focus in on him. What is the evidence of his smoking history and addiction? He started at 13. He smoked an average of 12 and a half hours a day. Smoked first thing in the morning. Why is that important? We know from Dr. Henningfield that that is the most important -- one of the most important factors when you look at someone's addiction because when you're asleep, obviously you can't smoke. But when you wake up, you're in withdrawal. So what's the very first thing you want? A cigarette.
So how closely from the time you wake up until you have your first cigarette is a very indicative factor in deciding addiction. He did it the first thing. Before his feet hit the ground off the bed, he's grabbing a pack of cigarettes. That's evidence of addiction.
He smoked two to four packs a day for about 42 years. He's a classic chain smoker, meaning he's lighting one while he still has the other one. He doesn't want any downtime. Think about that.
When he ran out of cigarettes for some reason, he's going through dirty ashtrays to
line up the longest ones so he can get his fix of nicotine. That's addiction.
When he was on an airplane -- think about this. When this man was taking a flight, he went to a bathroom of an airplane that's usually very, very small, gets down on his hands and knees, bends over, on the toilet, and starts puffing away with the other hand, flushing the toilet and making sure the smoke goes through. That's addiction.
He couldn't sit through a church service or movie without smoking. He would smoke in bed and sometimes he would fall asleep and burn the mattress. More than one time. He would wake up in the middle of the night to smoke.
If he ran out of cigarettes in the middle of the night, he would get dressed, he'd go to the store to get them. That's the level of -- he wasn't mildly addicted, he was severely addicted.
He tried to quit numerous times cold turkey. He tried the gum. He tried the patch. And in 1997, he finally tried Zyban and with medication, he was finally able to quit smoking.
And thank God for that medication. Thank God for that medication for him.
And defense will have you believe that he smoked enough to cause his COPD -- they're not going to dispute, hey, look, he got COPD, this smoking -- our cigarettes was enough to cause his COPD, but it's not enough to be addictive? How is that possible? How does that make sense? One of the instructions you got was use your, what, common sense. How does that make any sense?
You know, but they've known -- when I say "they," I don't mean these gentlemen. These are the lawyers. I'm referring to the company. I'm referring to R.J. Reynolds and the tobacco industry. I have a lot of respect for the lawyers. So if I -- during the course of this presentation, I get edgy about some of the things that we saw and I talk sternly about some of the evidence in this case, it's about the defendant, who is R.J. Reynolds, and not these gentlemen here. Okay?
So please don't take anything I say against them. I have a lot of respect for all of them. They're great lawyers and good
people. Okay?
Let me tell you, the companies knew that nicotine was an addictive drug and what they were selling, they were in the business of selling nicotine, the effects of releasing of stress mechanism.
In the design of any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be the delivery of nicotine. You know, this is '63, '72. Again in '72, nicotine, a potent drug.
Our industry is based upon the design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine.
1977, we provide a product that is an essential commodity in a habitual act.
There's no doubt that they knew what they were doing. There's no doubt they knew that nicotine in cigarettes was an addictive drug.
Addiction is a disease, not a free choice. They knew that, 1967 an internal document, there is no indication in any advertisement that after a person smokes a cigarette regularly for a while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him but becomes a matter of need.
He needed to sit -- he needed to get down on all fours, bend over in front of toilet, smoke a cigarette when he's on a plane. That's the need that they're talking about.
Cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoked.
We cannot continue to defend smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted.
1989, these two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. Most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted. In their own words.
Let's talk about the public health authorities in this country. 1988, that was the first time the Surgeon General recognized officially that -- what they had known from those documents that you saw from the '60s and '70s, you know, way before that. For decades before, they knew that this was the people -the reason that people smoke was for the nicotine, nicotine was an addictive drug and they knew that people couldn't quit or found it hard to quit and that the reason that they were
smoking was because of nicotine. They knew it.
But the government in 1998 -- 1988 finally came to that conclusion, cigarette and other forms of tobacco are addicting. Nicotine is a drug in tobacco that causes addiction. The pharmacologic and behavioral process that determines tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
So for the first time in 1988, the Surgeon General recognizes how important the nicotine in cigarettes is to being addicted.
And the reasons people smoke, this is from the Surgeon General, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report.
The main reason people smoke is for the nicotine, which causes their addiction. And this is important because in this same report, this is what they recognize. Okay? They recognize that another prominent instrument researchers have used to determine the degree or severity of dependence in smokers is the
Fagerstrom Test for nicotine addiction.
I think you heard Dr. Henningfield, who is a well-recognized addiction -- nicotine addiction expert, helped write the Surgeon General Report, he's authored over 400 peer-review articles and journals, medical journals about nicotine addiction. We played his video.
And he says, look, the Fagerstrom Test is how I teach medical doctors about nicotine addiction. This is a test that you want to give to your patients to see how highly addicted they are.
And I don't know if you remember, but I asked Mr. Ryan the very same questions on the Fagerstrom Test. And let's go through them so you can see that I asked him -- those are the very same questions. He gave certain answers, and let's see where he scored out.
So the very first question: How soon after you wake do you have your first cigarette? He says within five minutes, which is three points.
Do you find it difficult to refrain from smoking in places where it's forbidden? He
says yes. That's a point.
Which cigarette would you hate to give up most, the first in the morning or any other?
He says the first in the morning. That's one point.
How many cigarettes per day do you smoke? And he smoked the most, over 31, which is three.
Do you smoke more frequently during the first hours of awakening than the rest of the day? He says yes. He got a point for that.
Do you smoke even if you are so ill that you are in bed most of the day? He said yes.
And he scored ten points. He scored ten points. If you look at the level of dependency, ten is very high. Eight to ten is very high dependence. He scored ten, which is the most you can get on the test.
And the Surgeon General -- let me tell you about this schematic in 2004. This is very important because the Surgeon General recognized that there was a link between nicotine addiction and disease; that people, once they become addicted, that's what continues the cycle to keep them smoking, that
causes this disease. That's what it says here, that nicotine addiction causes smoking and then causes all these mutations in your DNA that end up causing lung cancer and other disease.
That's what the Surgeon General says.
So they recognized the link, the legal cause, the link between addiction and disease. Nothing there about choice. Nothing there about free will. Right? Nothing.
TECHNICIAN PHILIPSON: Do you want the video in?
MR. ALVAREZ: Yes, please.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
We should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: That's the Surgeon General in 1988. Now, nicotine addiction is the most substantial ingredient in their business, and they understand that.
"Without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees."
They recognized that the essential ingredient in cigarettes is the nicotine; that if they take nicotine out or put it in levels that isn't sufficient for people to become addicted that people wouldn't smoke as much.
And if they don't smoke as much, what happens? They don't sell as much. And if they don't sell as much, what happens? They don't make as much. And if they don't make as much, they can't pay them more.
"However, we cannot ever feel comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to say, if the exit gates from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight."
Because that's what they cared about.
That's what they cared about.
The legal cause, we discussed it. There's no issue about his disease. It was caused by smoking, it was caused by smoking their cigarettes. There's no dispute about that.
The only question is: Was he addicted. The legal cause, it's not about fault, not about choice. He smoked because he was addicted, and
that caused him to continue to smoke, and that caused his COPD.
And so we only have to prove it to you by the greater weight of the evidence. More than 50.111 -- you know, 011 percent, that's all we have to prove it to you by. And I think we've proved it way beyond that in this particular case.
So, when the question is -- Question 1 is a resounding yes. And then we continue to Question Number 2. And I told you that in Question Number 2, we're going to talk about apportionment of fault. Okay?
And there it is. State the percentage of any -- what's the word there? -- fault. For the first time, you hear the word or read the word "fault." And that's in Question Number 2, not in Question Number 1.
What is the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD that you charge to Reynolds and Mr. Ryan?
And now once we've established that he's -- once you establish by answering Question Number 1 yes, we've met our burden of proof, and now he becomes, what? A class
member. Right. Now the findings apply.
And these findings that are regarding to this particular question are that R.J.R. placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. Not may be. Not could be. They are defective and they are unreasonably dangerous.
Those findings now apply, they can't be disputed. You've got to follow the law.
That's what the judge said that you have to do. You all swore to do that. You all raised your hand and said you would follow the law. This is the law of the case.
Once you've established that he's a class member, you must embrace these findings, and these findings say that Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and that Reynolds was negligent. That is the law of the case.
So they are negligent, and now what we've got to do is apportion responsibility. Now it's time. Now it's time to say, okay, well, how much is their fault and how much is Mr. Ryan's fault. Now is the time to do it.
So that's the Engle jury finding. So
let's talk about that. Let's talk about some of the things that you learned in this trial that you probably didn't know about cigarettes, because everybody probably thought, hey, they grow some tobacco, they cultivate the tobacco, they take it to a plant, they put it together, they get some paper, they seal it off and they sell it. That's what people thought. That's what everybody thought. But you've learned in this trial a lot more. You've learned a lot more, more than 99 percent of the population of the United States know. And I wish we could give you college credits for all the stuff you learned in this trial, because you learned a lot. Learned a lot.
Lucky Strike and Vantage had a fatal flaw design. This was Dr. Proctor's testimony, he talked about processing. Flue curing process traps the sugar and makes the smoke more inhalable. The cigarettes that were made, you know, centuries ago were that process that we just talked about, right, they air dried them, and they were so harsh that you just blew them out of your mouth. You didn't inhale.
They developed flue curing that traps the
sugar. And what happens? Makes it more sugary, and the pH level is at a certain percentage where people can inhale it into the lungs, and they found it more palatable. If you inhale it into the lungs, what are you also getting into your lungs other than carcinogens? You get the nicotine, and that's what keeps people coming back to smoking.
What have you learned? They do additives to adjust the pH level. They wanted to find that sweet spot. They negotiate these things by blending, leaf blending. They want to know exactly what that sweet spot is so that they can maintain the cigarette addictive. This is a highly designed product. This is not, let's throw some tobacco leaves together, chop them up, wrap them in paper and sell them. That's not what this is.
They add bronchodilators, chemicals that are bronchodilators that decrease the resistance in the respiratory airway and increase the air flow to the lungs, helping nicotine to be absorbed deeper into the lungs. They put additives in there to make it easier for it to go down and go into your lungs so
they can get absorbed so they can go more quickly to the brain. They do it purposely. They do it purposely. Their actions had a purpose.
They add flavoring. They make the tobacco taste a certain way so it's more palatable so you could smoke more, so you don't reject it.
The leaf blending, leaf selection and genetic modification manipulate the levels of nicotine. They know that on top of the leaf, the nicotine level is much, much higher. And they can blend -- so what do they do? They know within a tenth of a percentage point how much nicotine is in every cigarette. That's how closely they monitor it. That's how closely they monitor.
Ammoniation. They ad ammonia to the tobacco for one purpose, and one purpose only: To make the impact of nicotine more powerful. Okay? They add that in there. That's not something that's natural. They add it in there so they can freebase the nicotine. Because by freebasing, it goes into the brain much faster, has more of a potent effect on the smoker.
And Vantage ingredients. If you look at
the Vantage ingredients, it has all those things, the flavoring, the ammonia -- the diammonia phosphate, that's the ammonia. They have all those things that we talked about.
This is in evidence. You're going to see that.
There you go. He's telling me click it so you can see it. There it is.
That's the flavoring, the ammonia, the bronchodilators. They have all these things. This is from their website.
You know, when you look at it, you don't know what they mean. This is what it means. This is what it means. This is what they're doing.
And the Vantage filter. Present technology -- this is from 1961.
"Present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulated smoke."
So they knew that filters, even back in
1961,	were a sham. They knew it. Since 1961, they knew it. Right? That filters did nothing. A filter actually is more dangerous. One of the things Dr. Proctor explained to us. Actually, filters are more dangerous because what they do is there's a resistance to the
draw. It makes it more difficult for the smoker to get a draw.
So what does the smoker have to do? Has to draw stronger, deeper. And when that happens, the carcinogens get into the lungs deeper and more of it. So, actually, filters make cigarettes more dangerous. And you see an upside to even certain cancers that we didn't see before because of these filters.
Filters do not remove any of the -- do not remove carcinogens. What's the word "filter" mean? Why do you think they had this whole thing? The filter's a filter. If it's not filtering the carcinogens, what's it doing, other than creating an illusion in the smoker's mind that it's safer? And they did that, they knew it, and they did it with a purpose.
So, when you're asked to apportion fault -- both people have to have the same information, right? For something to be 50/50, both people got to get into it with the same amount of information. Right? Like a marriage. Both people come in, both people know -- I know you, you know me, we're in it together.
Both people did not know the same information. So this is not 50/50. And we've accepted certain responsibility in this case. But I will tell you that their responsibility far exceeds, far exceeds Mr. Ryan, who started smoking at 13, and what he knew compared to what they knew; to what they did, compared to what he knew.
So, when you want to apportion fault, this is -- by the way, you can put whatever figures and numbers on that you want. It's up to you. You know, I give you a recommendation and then it's up to you to decide within the province of the jury what you think is fair and right.
This is what we suggest: 95 percent for them and 5 percent for Mr. Ryan. Because they didn't go into this knowing the same information.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, just rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: He didn't know that the filters were a fraud. He didn't know all those things that they were putting in cigarettes.
He didn't know any of those things. They did.
We're going to talk about concealment in a minute. So that's Question 2.
Let's go -- the next question is Question 3 and 4 about damages. I'm going to talk about those at the end. I want to skip right to what this case should be about, and it's the path to punitive damages.
This is about punishing this company for what they did to this man and his wife. Okay? And so the next two questions are about that. And the next two questions are: Did Thomas Ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on R.J. Reynolds' concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Thomas Ryan's COPD?
This is a case about concealing information. When you make a product, when you make a product, you are under a legal obligation that if you know something about the health effects of that product, you can't -you have to say something. You have to say.
That's the law. You can't hide it. You can't subvert it. You can't suppress it. You have to tell people about it. And that's what this count is about. This count is about what they didn't tell, what they didn't say in public, and how that affected him and millions of other people.
And there is a finding -- now that he's a class member, there's a finding that they did it, that they omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. They did it. You have to follow the law. The law says they did it. The only question was, did they conceal it from him. Right?
Let's talk about -MR. PERSONS: Objection, that's misstatement of the legal standard.
THE COURT: Thank you. Sustained. Rephrase. Ladies, you follow the instructions that I gave you. Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: Right. Legal cause, the
same instruction you got on legal cause for addiction is the same one that you're going to get, exactly the same one you're going to get for this, for the -MR. PERSONS: Objection, misstatement of the instruction.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: The next question, Question Number 6 is the conspiracy to conceal. Did Thomas Ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on any act or omission taken by R.J. Reynolds in furtherance of an agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance the legal cause of Tom Ryan's COPD?
So let me tell you what the conspiracy is. I'll put it to you in simple terms that I use to lecture my kids on. Okay? If you're with somebody and you're up to no good, okay, and your buddy picks up a rock and throws it at a car as it's driving by, well, you're just as responsible as if you picked up that rock and
threw it yourself. The same. Because you agreed to participate in it. And whether you threw the rock or you were there because you knew it was going to happen and you participated in it, you're just as responsible as the person who threw it. Right?
They are responsible for acts done in furtherance of this conspiracy, by all of the other tobacco industry representatives from all the other companies that were identified in the jury instructions, for the TIRC, the CTR, the TI, all those people. They're responsible for any act done in furtherance of the conspiracy that he relied on. That's what this count means.
Let's go through the evidence.
Reynolds -- remember I told that you there were really -- Reynolds is really three companies in one because American Tobacco Company was bought out by Brown & Williamson in 1994 and then Reynolds bought Brown & Williamson in 2004, so it's really three companies in one. Okay?
It's really three companies in one. Okay?
So, any act done by those three companies, done by Philip Morris, Lorillard, Liggett, CTR,
they're all responsible. That's the rock. That's the rock. Okay? That's the other little guy with a rock who's throwing the rock. That's them. And what the law tells you and the judge instructed you is they are responsible for that if it was an act done in furtherance of a conspiracy.
What did they conceal? What did they not tell you people? What did they not tell him that I asked him about? Did they tell him that they formed a conspiracy to conceal in 1953 the health effects and addictive nature of smoking?
Did they conceal that they were hiring scientists and doctors to mislead the public, that whole thing about, you know, all these respected doctors sending out these newsletters to the doctors, you know, going on TV and saying the doctors say that -- you know, many doctors in the United States have proved -- say it's not been proven. All that was was paid by industry money.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor, misstates the evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you rely -- ladies, please, sorry
about the gentleman. But in any event, you rely on your recollection of the evidence.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: Look at the evidence, look at all the documents, remember all the statements.
They misled the Surgeon General. You saw the documents that show that what they knew and how they lied to the Surgeon General. In fact, attacked the Surgeon General and called him all sorts of things saying he wasn't being responsible.
That they studied nicotine and they knew it was a highly addictive drug when the whole time they went in front of Congress and said guess what, it's not addictive, when their internal documents as early as the '60s, they knew how addictive it was.
They knew -- they studied teenagers, that 90 percent of all smokers start as teenagers. They knew that. That was their market. They knew that 50 percent of every regular smoker,
50 percent of every person who smokes regularly, will die of a smoking-related disease.
Think about that for a second. That if you're a regular smoker, you got a 50 percent chance that you're going to die from a smoking-related disease. They concealed that. In fact, they said the opposite.
They knew that smoking was killing 500,000 Americans a year. They knew that and they withheld that. They said it doesn't cause harm, it hasn't been proven, no -- not one death, not one death they would attribute to smoking. Not one. When in actuality, they knew that it was killing more than 500,000 Americans a year. That's concealment.
That they manipulated the levels of nicotine. He didn't know that. That there were 70 cancer-causing agents in smoke. He didn't know. That there were chemicals arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium 210 in cigarettes. That's not something that's on their website. They didn't have a website until 2000 and something, you know, way after this man stopped smoking. Okay? They weren't telling people that.
And they sold this whole filter as a fraud. They were telling people that filters
were safe when in actuality, they knew it wasn't. They concealed that. They knew that -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor, misstatement of the evidence.
THE COURT: Ladies, again, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed. This is argument.
MR. ALVAREZ: That R.J. Reynolds and the coconspirators knew that low-tar cigarettes, that means cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine levels, were safer when they knew it wasn't. And they purposely misled the public about safety and low tars.
MR. PERSONS: Same objection.
THE COURT: Proceed, Counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: Now, this started in 1953, in December of 1953 . And a lot happened after that. But a lot of things could have been different. A lot of things could have been different. And look at the Forwarding Memo in 1953. It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit that they can't break.
They know that. They know that.
Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our
company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette.
This is 1953. They knew it in 1953. And they denied it until when? 2000. Well over 40 years they concealed it.
And then they go out and they put out this full-page ad in every newspaper in the United States with a readership of over 50,000 people that reached over 43 million Americans. And they told people that there is no proof that smoking causes lung cancer and we accept the interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. That was a lie. The one before that was a lie. The records -the records we showed you tells you it's a lie.
And we believe the products we are making are not injurious to health. That is a lie.
We always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public. Calling the Surgeon General irresponsible? Attacking the Surgeon General? Not coming forward with the truth?
Internal documents. There was no doubt or confusion internally that cigarettes caused
cancer. 1958, the individuals we met with believe that smoking causes lung cancer.
This was the British American Tobacco executives that came to the United States in 1958 and went to the TIRC, went to all the major tobacco companies, spoke to their scientific people, their scientists, researchers and they wrote that the individuals we met with believe that smoking causes lung cancer.
1961,	carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke.
1962,	obviously the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming. The evidence challenging such indictment is scant.
Did tell him that? Did they tell the American people in 1968 [sic] that it's overwhelming and the evidence is scant against it? No. What did they do, the reverse.
Why did they do that? One thing and one thing only, to keep selling cigarettes to make money because that's all they understand and that's all they cared about. So when they said it was paramount to the health of all the
smokers, that was a lie. And that's why they have to be punished. Because corporations can't act like that. They can't. That's not right.
Cigarettes have certain unintended side effects, they cause cancer. This is their executive that testified. You heard his video deposition. We're going to play a little bit of it.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
Q. You agree that it would be wrong to use confusion to the advantage of the tobacco industry to the detriment of the smoking public?
A. I would.
Q. And if the tobacco industry is talking about us using confusion to their advantage, you agree that would be highly improper?
A. I don't think it would be proper, no. (Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: That's what they're saying now in 2 014, but what they were doing, their actions were very, very different. Let's look at their actions.
1957, if this committee had not been
formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. The TIRC has been a successful defensive operation.
1964, we must, in the near future, provide answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
Why? Why would you do that? Why would you do that? If you didn't want to hurt people. Obviously the key word here is what? "Confusion." And anything we can do to confirm such a situation would work to our advantage.
Does it look like they want to help people, that their health is paramount? Is that what they're saying internally compared to what they're saying to the world? And why are they doing it?
1969, doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the minds of the general public. It is also the means of establishing a controversy.
Why would you want to establish a controversy when you know the product that you are producing causes death, harm and disease to
people and you know it and you want to establish a controversy for what purpose?
That's it.
Tobacco and Health procedural memo, this is that -- this is the newsletter they sent to every single doctor in the United States of America. Every single doctor in the United States of America got it. The most important story is that which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking. Criteria for selection, for example, a report indicating some factor or factors other than smoking may be involved.
So they just don't want to get the public, they want to get the doctors to doubt it. Because remember, even in the early '60s,
6 0 percent of doctors smoked.
Let's go ahead and play this video.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
MR. CULLMAN: We want to be the detectives just as much as the Surgeon General or the AMA. We'll cooperate in every way.
Well, obviously a filter cigarette takes out tar and nicotine. I don't think the
industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed.
We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
MR. MINTZ: Do you believe that cigarettes are safe? Have they been proved to be safe,
Mr. Cullman?
MR. CULLMAN: I believe they have not been proved to be unsafe.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Every one of those executives for the tobacco industry were lying when they made those statements. They did it purposely with one intent, is to keep people believing that smoking had not been proven to
be dangerous so that they continued to sell cigarettes at record levels and continue that rise in consumption; and people like Mr. Ryan got hurt. They did it purposely.
And look at their documents. 1972, "For nearly 20 years, the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics and public opinion. While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed" -- they're patting themselves on the back. They're patting themselves on the back. This is the level they stooped to. They're killing hundreds of people each year and they're patting themselves on the back for doing it.
"While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us with important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it ever intended to be, a vehicle for victory. On the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it."
CTR began an organization called the Tobacco Research Council, TIRC, it was set up
as an industry shield in 1954.
"Bill Shinn feels that 'special projects' are the best way that monies are spent. On these projects, CTR acted as a 'front.'"
The special projects were they would take money and pay off experts and cultivate experts to testify.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: Tobacco monies -- look at this, when they realize that, you know -tobacco money ain't so dirty anymore. CTR is the "best and cheapest insurance the tobacco industry can buy and without it, the industry would have to invent CTR or would be dead."
Look at what they spent on those. Okay? R.J. Reynolds, Brown & Williamson, American Tobacco spent $548 million on these organizations. That's just them. That's not including Philip Morris, Liggett, Lorillard. That's just them. That's just them. Okay?
If everyone knew, like they claim, everybody knew, why are these smart guys spending half a billion dollars on these organizations if everybody knew? Why would
they throw away money like that?
They used their power and influence to create a false controversy. 1969, who ain't for money? There's not one document you're going to see where it talks about, hey, let's help people, let's tell the truth.
What you hear and what you see is who ain't for money.
"Do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? It is, of course, but there are dangerous FDA implications."
1972, "In the cigarette controversy, the public - especially those who are present and potential supporters (e.g., tobacco state congressman)" -- they went and spent a lot of money of buying influence in Congress. Lots of money.
1988, "Our contacts with the Congress, which have been good, are now even better. Through a systematic program" on Hill -- "of the Hill coverage, we can now count nearly 300 representatives and 75 senators as up to grade A contacts."
Think of that. If there's only a hundred senators, they've got 75 of them. Okay?
"Which means that we know them, but more importantly, they know us." That's the power and the influence that this money bought.
Doubt and confusion and deceit continues. This is 1976. This is an executive for Philip Morris, another one of the guys that was throwing rocks.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
I certainly wouldn't be in the business if I thought cigarettes were harmful to people. I think it's important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open.
Take the controversy about cigarettes. In the 91st Congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. The record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenge anti-cigarette claims.
And I have to disagree with you in that we don't know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
All right, sir.
It has not been causally established.
Cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
It may not be harmful, you're not convinced?
It may be or it may not be, we don't know.
Do cigarettes cause cancer?
I don't know if they do or not.
I'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer.
They agree that smoking causes lung cancer. Do you agree?
It may.
Do you know whether it does?
I do not. We don't know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find
out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: You heard the representative, you heard their CEOs. Every single one of them, when they made those statements, was a lie. They did it for a purpose. They did it for a purpose. This is again Dr. Figlar, that addicted smokers rely on industry lies. Let's talk about that.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
Q. They wanted people to be able to believe them and rely upon them, did they not?
A. I believe in general, yes.
Q. As late as ‘88 or ‘89 or ‘90, The Tobacco Institute was saying they still didn‘t know whether smoking causes cancer, correct? That‘s what they were telling the public, correct?
A. They did not know, they could not make that determination, is what they said in the video.
Q. And they wanted the people to believe them, correct?
A. I would say they would, yes.
Q. And if they were lying about it while
people were smoking and dying, that would be the wrong thing to do, correct?
A. It would.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: They wanted smokers to believe them. And when smokers like Tom Ryan believed them, they have to be held responsible, because that's what the law is about. When you do something wrong, and someone gets hurt, you have to be held accountable.
And in the simplest terms, that's what this is about. You can't lie about a product that you sell that you know is dangerous and that you know that the people that you're selling to, that you're selling lies, deceit, controversy, and if they believe you and they rely on you and they later get hurt, you are responsible. That is the law.
Let me set this up. This is the applesauce guy. Go ahead.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
HELMUT WAKEHAM: None of the things which have been found in tobacco smoke are at
concentrations which can be considered harmful.
THE INTERVIEWER: But the components themselves can be considered harmful, can they not?
MR. WAKEHAM: Anything can be considered harmful. Applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it.
THE INTERVIEWER: I don't think many people are dying from applesauce.
MR. WAKEHAM: They're not eating that
much.
THE INTERVIEWER: People are smoking a lot of cigarettes.
MR. WAKEHAM: Well, let me say it this way. The people who eat applesauce die. The people who eat sugar die. The people who smoke cigarettes die. Does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that the smoking is the cause? There are polycyclic hydrocarbons in smoke.
THE INTERVIEWER: And they are carcinogenic?
MR. WAKEHAM: Under certain circumstances with test animals, some have been identified as so-called carcinogens.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: So let me tell you, that guy that we just saw, Mr. Wakeham -- that's -- by the way, that's 1976. That was 1976. This is a document that he wrote in 1961. Okay. 1961.
He says, carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. And present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulates of smoke. Fifteen years before. All right?
Then the very two years before that -after that, in 1963, this same guy, the applesauce guy, writes to the Surgeon General on behalf all the tobacco companies, American, Brown & Williamson, Reynolds, writes to them and says:
"None of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of smokers in the amounts reported in smoke."
And then it says:
"It is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters. Present technology does not permit selective filtration."
It was a lie. He lied to the Surgeon General. He lied to the public.
1968.
"Our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
That's 1968. Do you know what that is? That's a cold, calculated confession. That's a confession right there.
"We may be subject to finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
1968. They knew what they were doing.
For a purpose. To harm people so that they could profit from it, because they didn't care about people.
Filters and low-tar cigarettes are a fraud. Let's talk about the evidence now.
This is a graph that Dr. Proctor showed you.
And this is the filter-tip cigarettes. You saw in 1950, there was almost none of them and how it grew. These are the filtered cigarettes.
These are the low tars. Low tars started
coming out in 1967, and look how they've skyrocketed.
First they did the filters, and they're making traction with that, and they say, now we're going to do this thing low tar, we're going to tell people that low-tar cigarettes are better for you. They're better for you. This is what they do.
So 1981, that's the evidence in this case, that's when Tom Ryan switched to Vantage, which was a low-tar, filtered cigarette. It's the first peak -- notice it is the first peak, in 1981, is when he switched. They got exactly what they wanted. Their campaign of fraud and deceit worked on millions and millions of Americans, including Tom Ryan. They got what they wanted. They targeted, they marketed, and they got what they wanted.
Tobacco industry mislead the public about the safety of filters. The industry does not believe that there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, they would remove it.
"(We say) here is our triple, or quadruple or quintuple filter, capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently
suspect."
"The smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette."
This is 1976. They know that low tar and filtered cigarettes, smokers were getting more because they had to smoke deeper and stronger drag to fill that nicotine crave.
THE COURT: Fifteen minutes, Counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: The FTC report in 1967.
Thus, smoking cigarettes was a deceptive -talks about the word "filters."
"This impression of relative safety can be enhanced."
They recognized that this whole filter thing was being sold for that purpose.
Vantage and health-concerned smokers.
Their own documents talk about who do we want to sell these Vantage cigarettes to? Who is it? Him. Look what they said.
"He is a concerned smoker. His concern has to do with health. Vantage will be positioned as the product which has achieved a revolutionary scientific breakthrough."
And those were the -- some of the ads that
we showed you. That's exactly why he smoked it. He had those concerns. He switched. He thought he was doing something safer, when all the time, they knew it wasn't true.
Vantage is as much or more deadly than any other regular cigarette.
When we asked Tom -- and this is his testimony:
"Question: Let me ask you, why did you switch to Vantage cigarettes?
"Answer: Advertisers were saying, number one, that they were -- this was a revolutionary -- there were filters out before, I realize, but this was a revolutionary filter cigarette. It was really -- really going to make smoking safe. So I tried it, I stayed with it, and I believed what they had -- they were saying.
"Question: When you say 'they,' who are you referring to?
"Answer: The advertisers.
"Question: Did you believe those statements?
"Answer: I sure did.
"Question: Is there any doubt in your
mind that the reason that you switched to Vantage is because you thought they were safer? "Answer: No, no doubt in my mind."
They got exactly what they wanted. They went and marketed this particular person, they got him, he smoked them, and now they want to deny him.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
Q. You agree though, Doctor, that the manufacturer does have a duty to know its product?
A. I do.
Q. Why do you think it's important for a tobacco manufacturer to know more about the components of their product than anyone else?
A. Because we make it.
Q. Most companies that make deadly products know they shouldn't lie about it, right?
A. Well, would think so. I should hope so. (Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: But that's exactly what they were doing. They knew it, and that's exactly what they were doing. They lied about Vantage to consumers. By the way, this is interesting because they get this letter in 1976 from a
concerned person.
"Does nicotine have habit-forming properties and is the chemical nicotine poisonous?"
And then internally, they discuss among themselves, this is the Reynolds people, saying:
"I suggest we make no attempt to answer the two questions. I doubt whether we at R.J.R. want to be on the record with the answers."
And then they answer, finally they answer, and they say:
"The tobacco industry is virtually interested in questions concerning smoking and health. If conclusive laboratory proof should substantiate that any element is causative of disease, we believe it would be possible to remove the offending element from the product."
When they know that's not true. That's how they're responding. They continue to lie.
The Surgeon General Report in 2010 talks about how public health officials had little basis to anticipate the degree to which the manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow
smokers to draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes than was represented by machine-measured yields of tar and nicotine.
New designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts.
It wasn't until 2010 that the Surgeon General started catching on to what they were doing, because they realized that the machine smoking yields from the FTC isn't how people smoked, because if you lower the tar and the nicotine, people are just going to puff longer or smoke more, and they end up getting more tar and nicotine.
And it wasn't until 2001 that they finally -- they finally -- this low-tar thing came to light and the fraud came to light.
These are the conclusions of the National Cancer Institute, a governmental agency.
"Advertisements of filters and low-tar cigarettes were intended to reassure smokers. Advertising and promotional efforts were successful in getting smokers to use filters and low-yielding cigarette brands. Internal tobacco company documents demonstrate that the
cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent deception of advertising the offending cigarettes as 'light' or 'ultra lights' as having the lowest tar and nicotine yields."
2008 Federal Trade Commission:
"FTC will not be a smoke screen for tobacco companies' shameful marketing practices."
So eventually it all came undone, but it came undone too late for him, when it should have been undone decades before, when they knew it.
The manipulations.
"Happily, for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habitualizing and unique."
I'm going to go through these. They chose profits over public health. When they funded researchers like Leo Abood, who said, hey, listen, you know, I think I can find an antagonist. An antagonist is a drug that you give that will prevent people from smoking, to nicotine. This is what they say internally.
It says:
"It is my strong feeling that with the progress that has been claimed, we are in the
process of digging our own grave. I believe that the program, as set up, has the potential of great damage to the industry. Dr. Seligman brought up the grant by Dr. Abood in which stated claims was to make a clinically acceptable antagonist to nicotine. The goal would have the potential of putting the tobacco manufacturers out of business."
They didn't care about people. If you wanted people just to smoke, just to get the feel of the smoke and have something to do when they're having a drink, you can make it without nicotine. But they chose not to do that. Because that's not profitable to them.
And this lasted from 1953 to 1994.
Decades. Lasted longer than that, but in 1994, they went in front of Congress and lied.
Let's -- this is a -TECHNICIAN PHILIPSON: Do you have enough
time?
MR. ALVAREZ: I don't think we have enough
time .
You know, I only have a limited amount of time. There's a lot I wanted to show you, but I'm just going to go through it. This is some
of the testimony by Tom that he reasonably relied on the ads.
"Question: And what gave you the impression that smoking was cool? I mean, how did you get that impression growing up?
"Answer: Through advertisements, and myself and my friends would see the advertisements and try to emulate the advertisements.
"Question: Did cigarette advertisements impact your view of smoking?
"Answer: They sure did.
"Question: Was it seen as normal?
"Answer: Oh, yes."
They got what they wanted. You know, they spent $250 billion from the 1940s to 2004 on advertising. They spent more -- they spent -the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day, in one day, than the National Clearinghouse on Smoking, who's charged with public health and smoking in this country, in all the year, in the whole year. They spent more in one day than they did in a whole year.
That's the fight. So when they say, hey,
he should have known, it was out there, well, it wasn't out there. It wasn't the same. And they concealed important information about what the product maker knew.
And this is the consumption rate that we talked about. This is the consumption rate and this is the death rate, right.
Let's -- this is 1986. This is 1986.
This is the president of American Tobacco Company which is now part of Reynolds.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
Q. Throughout your tenure with American, it was not only American's position, but your position, that cigarettes weren't injurious to health. Is that accurate?
A. Through my tenure?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, that is so.
Q. That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. It's a statement that American Tobacco placed great reliance on?
A. We issued that statement, yes. Certainly
we wanted them to believe it.
Q. As far as you‘re concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
A. Yes.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
NARRATOR: Truck driver Dennis Gaines, a grandfather, says he's been smoking for 30 years and is still not convinced cigarettes are dangerous.
THE REPORTER: You know, they say it causes cancer and heart disease. Do you believe that?
MR. GAINES: No, I don't. I -- not in my heart, I can't believe it.
REPORTER: You can't believe that it's bad for you?
MR. GAINES: No.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: And the same for Tom Ryan because when you're an addicted smoker and you hear competing messages and you hear from the maker of the product who you are buying it from
saying it hasn't been proven, but if it's bad, use a filter. If it's bad, use low tar. And he does all those things, believing all those things and they were false, well, they're responsible for that.
And this is what he says:
"Question: And what did you believe? Did you believe that smoking was safe, or did you believe that smoking had not been proven?
"Answer: It had not been proven to be dangerous.
"Question: Did you read about the controversy in newspapers?
"Answer: Yes, I did.
"Question: Did you happen to see tobacco company representatives on TV telling viewers that smoking had not been proven to be dangerous?
"Answer: Yes, I did.
"Question: So let me ask you, how did those statements affect you?
"Answer: They made very much sense. They said they had scientists and doctors working in their laboratories and that there was no proof that cigarettes were dangerous to your health."
That's what they wanted the people to believe. When they got somebody to believe it, like millions of other Americans, then they come in and deny it.
So when you're asked these questions, Question Number -- did they conceal, did they conceal that information from him? Did they conceal that information from him? Yes.
Did they -- is there a conspiracy? Did Thomas Ryan rely on, to his detriment, in acts done in furtherance of the conspiracy? Yes.
Now, every one of these questions is important. Every single one of these questions is important because in order to get to punitive damages, you have to answer these questions yes. Okay?
So this brings me now to punitive damages. And this is the question: Please state below whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against Reynolds under the circumstances of this case.
This case screams punitive damages. What they did was wrong. It goes beyond being wrong. And if you look at the studies, 1959 --
1958, when he was 16 years old, when he was 16 years old, boys, young boys, 65 percent of them were smokers. That's who he was. He was in the majority.
Youth smoking. "There is a backlog of youth who have refrained from taking up smoking in the face of the report." They're talking about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report. "A substantial number of these can be expected to join with this year's crop of prospects."
That's how they viewed these kids as crops. That's all they were to them. That's all they were to them.
"Many manufacturers have studied the 14 to 2 0 market in hopes of uncovering the secret of the instant popularity of some brands enjoyed" by almost -- "to almost complete exclusion of others. Creating a fad in this market can be a great bonanza."
In 1960, the young adult market, the 14 to 24 age group, represented 21 percent of the population. They represent tomorrow's cigarette business. As this 14 to 24 age group matures, for at least the next 25 years -- they know that. They know they got to get the kids.
If they don't get the kids, they die. That's why it's important for them to get these kids.
That's why this is wrong. That's why punitive damages are warranted in this case because they harmed him, they got him as a 13-year-old kid and they continue to do it.
1972,	"It may be well to consider another aspect of our business; that is, the factors which induce a pre-smoker or nonsmoker to become a habitual smoker. He does not start to smoke to satisfy a nonexistent craving for nicotine. Rather, he appears to start to smoke for purely psychological reasons - to emulate a valued image."
They know that. They know that. So they want to make smoking cool so that kids would do that. And then they get hooked and then they die .
"Some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for the youth market.
Realistically, if our company to is survive" -that's all they care about. They don't care about him surviving; they care about their company surviving. Look at them.
"Realistically, if our company is to
survive and prosper over the long-term, we must get our share of the youth market." That's what they care about.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Ladies, just rely on your own recollection of the evidence. Remember, this is counsel's take on what the evidence that has been presented, but you are rely on our own recollection of the evidence.
MR. ALVAREZ: And this document is in evidence, PT1040 -- it's in evidence, look for it. If you have a doubt that it's in there, it's there.
Confidential R.J.R. document, "We have deliberately played down the role of nicotine, hence, nonsmokers have little or no knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him and no desire to try it. Instead, we somehow must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking, in the hope that he will for himself then discover the real satisfaction obtainable."
Look at this, you know, age 12, 9 percent. By age 18, 68 percent of all regular smokers are already smoking. They know that. They
study it very closely to a -- to a tenth of a percent. That's how important this it to them.
And they look at the ads -- you know, they look at them as replacement smokers. "For Camel filters is a smash. It would be equally well, if not better, for Camel Regular. It's about as young as you can get and aims right at the young adult smoker Camel needs to attract."
Primarily 13- to 14-[sic]year-old males smoke Marlboros. They know, they're watching. This is -- this is 1987. They're still doing it.
THE COURT: Excuse me. You're about expired now.
MR. ALVAREZ: I'm going to eat into my rebuttal time.
THE COURT: That's fine.
MR. ALVAREZ: Punitive damages are there to punish, to deter companies for the harms that they caused this man and to deter other companies from doing the same. Because if you don't deter companies from doing bad acts like this, other companies will do it. With your verdict you're telling them, this isn't right, we don't stand for this. This is what we have
to do.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and
transcribed as follows:)
Q. The message that you're putting forth, the tobacco industry can choose to put forth a message to help people, correct?
A. They can put forth their position that they think is appropriate.
Q. They can put forth -- they have an opportunity in these press releases to put forth a message to help consumers, can't they, if they wanted to, if they chose to?
A. I would think so, yes.
Q. Dr. Figlar, if the tobacco industry, through the Tobacco Institute or otherwise, was making false statements or was making misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes as this memo suggests, you would agree that would be wrong, don't you?
A. I would.
Q. And that would be highly improper knowing how deadly cigarettes are and knowing how many youth in our society are smoking, collect?
A. Again, I would say it would be improper.
Q. They should not lie to make profits,
correct?
A. Correct, they should not.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Yet they did. But yet they did. And people got hurt. And this man got hurt. And now judgment has come. And it's time .
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor, inflammatory, improper, move to strike.
THE COURT: Thank you. Again, Ladies, this is argument.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: It's time for them to be held accountable for what they did to him.
Let's look at this, 1953. 1953, when the conspiracy started, do you know how old he was? He was 11 years old. And guess what happened, that dip started to happen. Right? That was on opportunity, in 1953, when the same studies that were being published that they already did in secret and they knew that were true, that smoking caused cancer, they could have made a difference. Right?
And this is what they could have done, they could have stopped. And instead of that
line going up like this and the death rate keep going up, if they would have stopped in 1953, two years before this man -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. It's not in evidence. Calls for speculation about what would have happened.
THE COURT: Thank you. Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: So when you're asked, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages were warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company under the circumstances, this case screams for -- this is what justice screams for. The answer to that is yes.
So, this is the last issue I'm going to address with you, and this is the damages question. And you're going to be asked to -what is the total amount of damages sustained by Thomas Ryan as a result of the COPD for his pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life sustained in the past and in the future, and the same for his wife, the damages caused by the loss of her husband's
comfort, society and attentions as a result of his COPD.
And let's talk -- you've heard from him, you've heard from her, you've heard what their life is like now when they retired. A truck driver and a schoolteacher, they deserve to be happy. Just like everybody else, they deserve it. And this is not the future that they thought they were going to have. That's not the future he thought he was going to have when he was 13 and started smoking. That's not what he thought.
But let's look -- you know what his life is like now, and it's going to continue to get worse. It's a progressive disease. You heard from Dr. Burns.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
DR. BURNS: However, as the size of that tube gets smaller, it becomes -- you begin to feel the resistance. You have to work harder to breathe. And then when you get down to the point where you're breathing through a straw, you can't get enough. You really are chronically short of breath. You chronically
feel like you're not getting enough air.
And you then can only move short distances, which requires an increase in the amount that you breathe before that sense of shortness of breath overwhelms you and keeps you from moving further, you have to stop and catch your breath.
So the progression of symptoms is one of increasing shortness of breath usually progressing to the point where someone is chronically short of breath, chronically doesn't get enough air, and that's really a terrible circumstance for individuals because it's the equivalent of chronic pain.
It's chronic misery for those individuals. And obviously that ultimately progresses to the point where they die from either not being able to get enough air in, from not being able to get enough oxygen in, or from infection that occurs as the result of the lung damage.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. ALVAREZ: That's what his life is like and that's what his life is going to be because of what they did. It's not fair and it's not right and we're here for justice. And it's up
to you to decide. There's no book that you can go to and there's no scale that you can go to to decide what that loss is worth.
And you notice that in 2006, his pulmonary function test was 25 percent. And that was in 2 006. And, you know, it's now 2 015, and it's obviously worse. His condition is getting deteriorating and getting worse. And so you have to decide what is -- what is he suffering, what is he going to continue to suffer, how has it affected his wife, how has it affected their marriage and it's a tremendous loss. This is not how they expected their life to end.
And it's tragic and it's terrible, but it was done by them purposely. And they owe this family full, just compensation.
And we think and we suggest -- and you can award whatever you want. It's up to you. And we're going to make a suggestion to you what that award should be and it could be more, it could be less. It could be this. It's completely up to you, and we will abide by whatever you decide. But whatever you decide, they'll live with. Okay?
And this is what we recommend.
$15 million for damages for Mr. Ryan and $5 million damages for Mrs. Ryan.
And we want to thank you very much for your time and patience and I may have some time left over at the very end, but I appreciate your attention in this matter. Thank you very much.



MR. PAIGE: Good afternoon. It's hard to sit there and listen -- actually, Alex was going to do the rebuttal and I said, please let me do the rebuttal, but I only have eight minutes, so I know that basically everything that I'm going to say you probably already know anyway.
But I would like to respond to each and every thing that Mr. Persons said, but it would be impossible, I just don't have the time. But I wish I could, because I could, I really do have responses.
But the one -- and I wrote down some of things he said. He's a great speaker. I tell him all the time, I like listening to his speeches, I like him as he is speaking, he says some really nice things. But one of the things he just said as he sat down is you've got to look in the mirror, you've got to look in the mirror.
And I think that -- and I thought to myself, as we were sitting there, what about
all these executives who were doing what they did, they got to look in the mirror too, right? Right? Because they're killing people and they know what they're doing and they're doing it for money.
And so when Mr. Ryan -- we call him Mr. Ryan, they want to put a spotlight on Mr. Ryan today. We want to put a floodlight on what they did and think about what they did because if Mr. Ryan has to look in the mirror, they have to look in the mirror too, because he wasn't always Mr. Ryan. He was Tom Ryan, the 13-year-old boy in 1955, who deserved better.
And in 19 -- excuse me. At that time, everything could have been different.
Mr. Persons said, why did he keep doing it? He asked that. And I wrote it down. He said, why did he keep doing it? Well, he was an addict. Okay? But why did they keep doing it? Why would they do it? Okay. Because these are grown men who are not addicted.
They're addicted, they're addicted to money and greed. Because they know every night when they go to bed, that they know that -they talk about 3,000 people quit every day.
There is a half a million people dying every year. Those are real people. Real people, who started -- 90 percent of them started as kids.
So, when he talks about his choices, you know, choices it is a two-way street. They have choices that they made that they have to live with. And I don't know how they did it, but they did it, they lived with them.
A lot of those people are here and gone. They're probably dead, a lot of those executives, and they made a lot money and they enjoyed that money and they left behind them people who are addicted and people who are dead and families who are suffering. So when they try to minimize his damages, I wish I could have them -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. If he would take his oxygen off right now and do ten pushups here, what do you think would happen to this man? Okay. He's hurt. Don't minimize what happened to him, what they did to him. He's one of millions that they did this to.
They called it unfortunate. He said, this
is unfortunate, when he talked about all the death. It's unfortunate. It's not unfortunate, it's a tragedy that could have been avoided. 20 million people, 20 million people, 90 percent of them started as teenagers, that's what it's about.
Teenage smoking, he throws up these fancy numbers, I hope we get to the punitive damages phase and we can talk more about that.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: 90 percent of all smokers are starting at kids -MR. PERSONS: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: Addicts who die and they make so much money, so much money doing it. They could go do those other cigarettes that they're so proud of and do it and make less money and God bless them and they'd leave a lot -- a lot of families would be a lot happier.
This is in evidence. It talks about all the -- I don't have the time. I'm sure I have like -THE COURT: Three minutes.
MR. PAIGE: Three minutes.
THE COURT: Four minutes.
MR. PAIGE: Four minutes, okay. Hey, I got half my time left.
So, you know, this is what they knew about. They knew this. It wasn't a secret to them that 20 million of the 70 million teens now smoking smoke -- this was in 1989. They knew that 5 million of these kids are going to grow up and die. They didn't change in 1989. They didn't change. They didn't do anything different. They kept lying. They kept lying until they were forced to.
He said we spent all this time reproving the findings. We brought you evidence and Mr. Persons just stood up and basically disputed everything that we talked about. So, of course we had to bring you that evidence. Because if we didn't, you wouldn't know anything. And I hope and I believe that you do that you can see the whole story, both sides, and understand all the harm they did and why they did it.
They said that we failed to prove concealment. Think about it. In 1955, when he
was 13 years old, he was -- he deserved to know better. Okay? They could blame his dad if they want. They can blame John Wayne if they want or whoever, but they were making the product. They had the responsibility to help people. They had the responsibility to help kids, to help teenagers to prevent the harm that they were going to cause for the decades to follow. And that's what they concealed.
They did it on purpose and they did it for money and they made a lot of money and it's not right. It's not right.
And this is what people thought about the harms in 1953. You know, they said, oh, we have all these newspaper articles, it's harmful, it's harmful. It's not what we believe today; it's not the same thing.
1 percent were talking about lung cancer.
These are the lines.
They didn't reveal -- when did they tell him -- when did he first know -- he probably didn't know it until he got here this week that it was inhaling cyanide and arsenic into his lungs. Who knew that? That would be useful information to tell teenagers and addicts, hey,
by the way, do you know every day you're inhaling 600, 800 doses of cyanide and arsenic into your body?
How addictive nicotine is, it's as addictive as cocaine and heroin. 50 million smokers, 25 million people didn't believe smoking caused lung cancer in 1964 or 1965. That's their poll.
And then he switched to Vantage. And they want to blame the government, you know -you'll see the documents in evidence. And I don't believe that the government -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Even if the government knew that the filters were a fraud -- which they didn't, that's not the evidence -- they knew.
So even if the government was telling people, switch to filters, it's their product. They should stand up and say, listen, it's really not helping people. We still see a half a million of people are dying. Don't do this. Don't do it.
Open the smoking clinics, help people get medications. Don't prevent people from doing
that. That's wrong.
Are we playing this?
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
Q. I would like you to rise and those who will be testifying as well, rise.
If you raise your right hand, do you swear that the testimony you're about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
A. I do.
Q. Please consider yourself to be under oath. Do you or do you not agree with the Surgeon General's estimate of over 400,000 --" (Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. PAIGE: I'm not going to play the whole thing. You all have seen it. We don't need to see it again. It just shows how far they will go, they won't stop at anything, they lied to Congress. Okay. You can't get any worse than that, they can't get any lower than that. And then to now say today in Court -MR. PERSONS: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Mr. Ryan wasn't always Tom -he wasn't always Mr. Ryan with the oxygen. He
was a human -- he is a human being, he is. And his life -- think about it, a third of his life, he spent the first third of his life as a teenager, 20 years old, 25 years old, you know, susceptible to their lies and what they were concealing from him.
The next third of his life he lived as an addict inhaling 600 doses of nicotine to his brain every day. And now the last third of his life, he quit, he overcomes his addiction, and he lives on oxygen, and he gets criticized.
And I submit to you -- he said he's proud that he quit, he should be, but he's just one of the victims, one of the Engle victims that you got to meet today in court, and it's my privilege to have represented him. And I thank you all for your time.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Members of the jury, you have now heard all the evidence, instructions on the law, that you must apply in reaching your verdict and the closing arguments of the attorneys. You will shortly retire to the jury room to decide this case. Before you do so, I have a few last instructions for you.
During deliberations, jurors must communicate about the case only with one another and only when all jurors are present in the jury room. You have -- you will have in the jury room all of the evidence that was received during the trial.
In reaching your decision, do not do any research on your own or as a group. Do not use dictionaries, the Internet or any other reference materials. Do not investigate the case or conduct any experiments.
Do not visit or view the scene of any event involved in this case or look at maps or pictures on the Internet. If you happen to pass by the scene, do not stop or investigate. All jurors must see or hear the same evidence at the same time.
Do not read, listen to or watch any news accounts of this trial. You are not to communicate with any person outside the jury about this case until you have reached a verdict. You must not talk about this case in person or through the telephone, writing or electronic communication such as a blog, Twitter, e-mail, text message or any other
means.
Do not contact anyone to assist you such as a family accountant, doctor or lawyer.
These communication rules apply until I discharge you at the end of the case. If you become aware of any violation of these instructions or any other instruction I've given you in this case, you must tell me by passing a note to the bailiff.
Any notes you have taken during this trial may be taken to the jury room for use during your discussions. Your notes are simply an aid to your own memory and neither your notes, nor those of any other jurors are binding or conclusive. Your notes are not a substitute for your own memory or that of other jurors. Instead, your verdict must result from the collective memory and judgment of all jurors based on the evidence and testimony presented during the trial.
At the conclusion of the trial, the bailiff will collect your notes and immediately destroy them. No one will ever read your notes.
In reaching your verdict, do not let bias,
sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against any party to influence your decision. Your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received and the law on which I have instructed you.
Reaching a verdict is exclusively your job. I cannot participate in that decision in any way, and you should not guess what I think your verdict should be from something I may have said or done. You should not think I prefer one verdict over another. Therefore, in reaching your verdict, you should not consider anything that I may have said or done, except for my specific instructions to you.
Pay careful attention to all the instructions I gave you, for that is the law that you must follow.
You will have a copy of my instructions with you when you go to the jury room to deliberate. All the instructions are important. And you must consider all of them together. There are no other laws that apply to this case. And even if you do not agree with these laws, you must use them in reaching your decision in this case.
When you go to the jury room, the first thing you should do is choose a presiding juror to act as a foreperson during your deliberations. The foreperson should see to it that your discussions are orderly and that everyone has a fair chance to be heard.
It is your duty to talk with one another in the jury room and to consider the views of all the jurors. Each of you must decide the case for yourself. But only after you have considered the evidence with the other members of the jury. Feel free to change your mind if you are convinced that your position should be different. You should all try to agree, but do not give up your honest beliefs just because the others think differently.
Keep an open mind so that you and your fellow jurors can easily share ideas about the case.
I will give you a verdict form with questions you must answer. I have already instructed you on the law that you must use in answering these questions.
You must follow my instructions and the form carefully. You must consider each
question separately. Please answer the questions in the order they appear. After you answer a question, the form tells you what to do next. I will now read to you the verdict form.
Ladies, this is the verdict form. It has the style of the case above this line here.
The style of the case reads as follows: In the Circuit Court of the 17th Judicial Circuit in and for Broward County, Florida, Complex Civil Division Case Number 08-8000, Judge John J. Murphy, In Re Engle Progeny Cases, tobacco litigation, pertains to Thomas Ryan and Bettye Ryan versus R.J. Reynolds.
Verdict: We the jury return the following verdict.
One, we -- 1. Was Thomas Ryan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD (emphysema)?
Then there's a box here. You need to check the appropriate box either yes or no.
Then the form goes further. It says: If your answer to Question 1 is no, your verdict is for the defendant and you should not proceed
further except to date and sign this verdict form and return it to the courtroom.
If your answer to Question 1 is yes, please answer Question 2.
Question 2. State the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of Thomas Ryan's COPD that you charge to, and then it has -- the first line is R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and you fill in the appropriate percentage, if any. Thomas Ryan, you fill in the appropriate percentage. The total must be 100 percent.
Then go on -- the form tells you to go on and please answer Questions 3 through 6.
Question 3. Was -- what is the total amount of damages sustained by Thomas Ryan as a result of his COPD for his pain, suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience and loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life sustained in the past and to be sustained in the future?
And then it has your total damages and you fill in the appropriate amount, if any.
Question 4. What is the total amount of Bettye Ryan's damages caused by the loss of her husband's comfort, society and attention as a
results of his COPD? And again, there's a line that says total damages and you fill in the amount if appropriate.
The form goes on and explains further: In determining the amount of the damages, if any, of the Questions 3 and 4, do not make any reduction because of the fault of Thomas Ryan. The Court will enter judgment based on your verdict and will reduce the total amount of damages by the percentage of fault which you charge to Mr. Ryan. However, if your verdict is for plaintiffs on the fraudulent concealment or conspiracy to fraudulently conceal claims, the Court will not reduce an award of damages by the comparative fault you assign to Mr. Ryan.
Please answer Questions 5 and 6.
Question 5. Did Thomas Ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on R.J. Reynolds' concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Thomas Ryan's COPD? You check the appropriate box either yes or no.
The form continues, Question 6. Did Thomas Ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on any act or omission taken in furtherance of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's agreement with other tobacco companies and organizations to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes? And if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Thomas Ryan's COPD?
Again, check the appropriate box either yes or no.
The form continues, if you answered no to both Questions 5 and 6, you should proceed no further except to sign and date the verdict form and return it to the courtroom. But if you answered yes to either Question 5 or 6, please answer Question 7.
Question 7. Under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find, by clear and convincing evidence, that punitive damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds. And then you check the appropriate box either yes or no.
The form goes and says: So say we all this blank day of April, 2015 and there's a
spot at the end for the foreperson to sign the verdict form.
Ladies, your verdict must be unanimous; that is, your verdict must be agreed to by each of you. When you have agreed on your verdict and finished filling out the verdict form, your foreperson must sign and date and sign it at the bottom and return the verdict form to the bailiff.
If any of you need to communicate with me for any reason, write me a note and give it to bailiff. In your note do not disclose any vote or split or the reasons for the communication.
Ladies, you may now retire to decide your verdict. The evidence will come shortly, along with the verdict form.
I'm going to ask the attorneys to make sure it's all here and it's accounted for and then the evidence will come in, along with the verdict form. And we'll find out the status of your lunch that they brought in for you.
All right. Thank you, ladies. You may retire to consider your verdict. Take your notepads and your instructions with you.
