                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. BASS:  May it please the court,
     counsel, Mr. Sammarco, members of the Sammarco
     family, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good
     morning.
          THE PANEL:  Good morning.
          MR. BASS:  I would like to start by saying
     thank you.  We recognize the effort that it
     takes, the time you take away from your lives,
     your jobs, your other responsibilities to be
     here.  When you came, what seems like probably
     a while ago, I think it was about three, three
     and a half weeks ago, to the initial jury
     selection process, you were one of many,
     probably didn't think that you would get called 3764
     and selected to hear the case, but you did.
          You came in with other potential jurors,
     participated in the process fairly and
     honestly, answered the questions put to you,
     and you were selected.
          And as you did before participating in the
     process, you participated fully in this
     process.  We saw you right here at counsel
     table.  We saw you listening intently, taking
     notes, asking questions of the witnesses, good
     questions, questions that we probably should
     have thought to ask.
          And so for that -- you know, the process
     really does not work and it really depends upon
     you all, quite frankly, the willingness to come
     in and give up your time, the willingness to
     listen, the willingness to be honest in
     answering the initial questions during jury
     selection, and the willingness to be fair.
          And so on behalf of really the process, on
     behalf of Mr. Scarola, myself, Mr. Quinlan, but
     really most importantly on behalf of John
     Sammarco, we say thank you.  We say thank you
     because this is John Sammarco's day in court.
     This is his day in court for himself, for his 3765
     beloved wife Theresa.
          Now, you heard a lot from the family.
     They were here.  As you look out in the
     gallery, it probably doesn't surprise you to
     see a lot of members of the Sammarco family
     here.  What we heard in all the testimony, not
     just from the plaintiff's witnesses, but from
     the defense witnesses that were read in, not a
     bad word can be said about this woman and about
     this family.  All right.
          But I would say this, and I think the
     evidence is clear, on one side we have the
     Sammarcos.  Now, they are in this courtroom
     with Philip Morris, but that is the only thing,
     the only thing that the Sammarcos have in
     common with Philip Morris, the fact that they
     shared this courtroom today.
          And at the end of the case, at the end of
     the case, as you've heard, you're going to be
     weighing responsibility, responsibility for
     what happened here.  And I suggest to you we
     have brought you a mountain of evidence and
     told you the story of Theresa Sammarco, and not
     only Theresa Sammarco, but so many others.  We
     have brought you a mountain of evidence to 3766
     allow you to make that choice in dividing up
     responsibility.
          You heard a lot about Terri and John's
     life together, John Senior.  You heard they
     lived a life of faith, they lived a life of
     family.  Not a bad word was said.  The things
     that were said about Theresa and John are the
     things that people hope to have said about
     them.  Theresa was a daughter, a sister, a
     mother, a wife, a grandmother, a friend.  She
     was a person of faith.
          But unfortunately for her, unfortunately
     for the Sammarco family, Philip Morris and its
     co-conspirators did not see things the same
     way.
          The evidence in this case and has
     proven -- excuse me, the evidence in this case
     has proven that Philip Morris survives and
     profits on selling a highly addictive and
     deadly product that has caused tremendous death
     and destruction, not only Theresa Sammarco's
     death, but so many other Americans.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Williams-State Farm.
          THE COURT:  Objection is overruled. 3767
          MR. BASS:  Staggering, staggering numbers,
     nearly 450,000 Americans each year die
     smoking-related deaths.
          MR. KELLY:  Same objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  The evidence in this case has
     also proven not only that cigarettes are highly
     addictive, but the defendants knew about it,
     that the defendants designed their cigarettes
     to sustain and maintain addiction.
          The defendants knew that it caused death
     and disease, yet what did they do with that
     knowledge?  They kept it to themselves.  They
     kept it to themselves.
          I want you to think about, you know,
     Dr. Cummings testified what seems like a while
     ago, and he was on the stand for quite a while.
     But I know you all recall all of the story that
     he told.
          Through the defendant's own documents --
     you know, the beauty of being a plaintiff's
     lawyer in this case is that we get to prove our
     case not by standing up here and trying to
     convince you all, we get to use the defendant's
     own words to prove most of our case, words, 3768
     statements, feelings, thoughts that they wrote
     thinking that no one else would ever see them.
     Those are when people are at their most open
     and honest.  That's when they really reveal
     themselves, when they are writing something
     that they think no one else is going to see.
     Those are the documents that we brought you.
     And most of this case was proven through Philip
     Morris and its co-conspirators' own mouths.
          For example, you recall Dr. Cummings
     talking about the 50-year coverup, the
     conspiracy, and how it all happened because for
     first time in a long time there was a dip in
     stock.  There was a dip in cigarette stock.
          So what happens on the same day that that
     happens?  A Western Union telegram goes out to
     the heads of the major domestic tobacco
     companies, and an emergency meeting is called.
          And so if you knew nothing else about why
     they did what they did, you would know that it
     was in response to one thing, and for one
     purpose only.  Money.  Profits.  Greed.
          This is a forwarding memorandum, we call
     it that, it's at the top, and this was --
     Hill & Knowlton was the PR firm, you remember, 3769
     that was called in.  Not scientists, not
     doctors, not public health officials, a public
     relations firm had to deal with the tanking
     stock price of cigarettes.
          And in those closed-door meetings, Hill &
     Knowlton did an interview.  And here's some of
     the things they learned from the scientific
     research director:
          "Suppose everybody smoked just one
     cigarette less a day.  That would be maybe
     40 billion a year."
          And again, "The stock market fall is
     terrible when you remember dividends are going
     to be much larger next year with the EPT,"
     which is the excess profit tax.
          If you knew nothing else about why they
     did what they did, you know this, and that's
     all you need to know, that from that moment on,
     and for the next 50 years at least, every
     single day they chose money and greed over the
     health of Theresa Sammarco and the American
     public.
          And so the question -- and really the only
     question is, what are you all going to do about
     it?  That's what today is for.  John Sammarco 3770
     has had his day in court and we have presented
     the evidence.
          I'm going to talk to you for a little
     while, and as you heard, Mr. Scarola is going
     to talk to you, defense counsel and
     Mr. Scarola, and then that's it.
          You all, after hearing all the evidence,
     are going to have the chance to go back in and
     talk about it.
          And the question I have for you is, after
     hearing everything, after hearing the court's
     instructions, after hearing all the evidence,
     what are you going to do about the evidence
     that you've heard?
          Certainly, you know, in closing argument
     we have a limited amount of time.  I'm not
     going to try and cram a discussion of all of
     the evidence that we've seen over three weeks,
     you know, into the hour and a half or so that
     I'm going to talk to you.  Otherwise why would
     we even put on evidence, right?  You saw it,
     you heard it, you were taking notes.
          So I'm just going to talk about a couple
     of things in conjunction with the court's
     instructions, some of the evidence, and how I 3771
     think it fits and some of the things I submit
     we think you should consider.
          But first just kind of some bigger picture
     things.
          You have seen a lot of terrible documents
     from Philip Morris and its co-conspirators,
     okay?  These lawyers here, though, are not
     Philip Morris.  You saw the lawyers in the case
     getting along, okay?  And so what I'm asking
     you not to do is equate Mr. Kelly with Philip
     Morris; Mr. Sexton, Mr. Carpenter with Philip
     Morris.  Okay?
          And the reason I'm telling you that is
     because you saw and you heard some of the
     documents.  We are going to talk about some of
     those things, too.  Okay?  But Mr. Kelly, his
     colleagues, are not Philip Morris.
          You also saw a lot of collegiality among
     the lawyers.  And, you know, maybe you've seen
     television, some of you, I know, have sat on a
     jury before, maybe that was your experience
     before, maybe you saw television, maybe you
     were expecting it, maybe you weren't, but
     certainly there was, you know, cooperation,
     which you may or may not have expected, and 3772
     there was some moments of levity, which you may
     or may not have expected.
          But we often find that in the most serious
     and tragic circumstances there has to even be a
     little bit of levity as we go along.  That
     shouldn't take away, though, from the
     seriousness of this case or the tragic-ness of
     this case.  I know you all know that, but I
     just want to say it.
          Another thing.  Her Honor has given you
     the jury instructions and has read them to you.
     And that's your guide for really, you know, if
     you have a question about how you should apply
     something, you can find everything you need in
     the jury instructions.
          For example, it defines what a sign is.
     It defines what a symptom is.  It tells you
     what you should consider in certain things and
     what you don't have to consider.  So the things
     you can see that you need are in the jury
     instructions.
          But just a couple I want to highlight.
     Our burden of proof.  You heard Her Honor talk
     about it and we talked about it in jury
     selection, as well.  Right?  This is not a 3773
     criminal case where we all have heard and
     talked about the burden of beyond a reasonable
     doubt.  You know, in criminal cases, the
     highest burden in the court system there is.
          Here, preponderance of the evidence or,
     literally, the greater weight of the evidence.
     And that's why we talk about it in scales.  And
     that's the visual you're going to see used
     throughout this presentation, right.  A
     tipping, an ever-so-slight tipping of the
     scales, preponderance of the evidence.  Okay?
     That's the burden of proof.  Simply a tipping
     of the scales.
          Her Honor read Weight of the Evidence.  In
     deciding this case, it is your duty as jurors
     to decide the issues, and only those issues,
     that I submit for your determination."
          So, you must come to an agreement about
     your verdict, you may use reason and common
     sense to reach conclusions, you may draw
     reasonable inferences from the evidence, but
     you should not guess about things that were not
     covered here.
          This, of course, is just part of the
     instructions -- you're going to have the full 3774
     instructions.  But the reason I want to note
     this is reason, common sense.  You don't have
     to check that at the door.  Okay?  Philip
     Morris might want you to, but you don't have
     to.
          You may draw reasonable inferences from
     the evidence.  And, of course, the verdict
     form.  Those are the questions -- there are no
     other questions that you are going to be asked
     to decide except for on the verdict form.  We
     are going to go over that as we go through, but
     those are the questions for your determination.
          And, finally, Believability of Witnesses.
     You heard from both expert and what we call lay
     witnesses, or nonexpert witnesses; the family
     members, for example.  And so this just talks
     about that a little bit.
          "You have heard opinion testimony from
     persons referred to as expert witnesses.  You
     may accept such opinion testimony, reject it,
     or give it the weight you think it deserves,
     considering the knowledge, skill, experience,
     training or education of the witness, the
     reasons given by the witness for the opinion
     expressed, and all the other evidence in 3775
     case".
          And I wanted to highlight this because,
     while we get into it, because it's kind of a
     big-picture issue.  I want you to ask
     yourselves, at least as far as experts, you've
     heard from the family members, of course, who
     did we bring you by the way of expert
     witnesses?
          We brought you the best.  Michael
     Cummings, Dr. Michael Cummings, 30-plus years
     in public health and tobacco control.
     Publishing hundreds of peer-reviewed
     publications, including on addiction, cigarette
     designs, tobacco industry conduct, marketing;
     the things he spoke about.  Researching,
     award-winning addiction research.  NCI, CDC,
     NIH.  He has reviewed for prestigious journals
     and Surgeon General's Reports.
          He's taught medical students and doctors.
     He has treated thousands and thousands of
     patients for nicotine addiction and
     addiction-related disease, counseled thousands.
     Cigarette-design lab, we talked about, remember
     Dr. Cummings talked about the design of the
     cigarette, how it's designed for addiction? 3776
     Well, he knows that because he runs a
     cigarette-design lab.
          And, of course, the Tobacco Document
     Repository.  30-plus years in public health.
     Just like Dr. David Burns, 35-plus years, it
     says here, in nicotine addiction and disease.
     But, you know, the thing about Dr. Burns is, he
     entered the public health sector right out of
     graduating medical school, went to the office
     on smoking and health in 1975, that was
     responsible for Surgeon General's Reports.
     That was one of his first assignments was to
     put together the 1975 Surgeon General's Report.
     Dr. Burns has been a firsthand witness to the
     lies and deceptions and attacks on the public
     health community by Philip Morris and his
     co-conspirators.
          Since 1975 he has been involved in some
     way in virtually all of the Surgeon General's
     Reports.
          Like Dr. Cummings, he's done research on
     the issue that he talked about.  He's reviewed
     for prestigious journals and the Surgeon
     General, he's taught medical students and
     doctors on nicotine addiction and disease.  He 3777
     has treated it.  He's a pulmonologist.  He has
     testified for international groups, Congress,
     State Legislatures.
          Those are some the witnesses that we
     brought you.  Public health authorities,
     leading witnesses in their field.  And so when
     you think about all of the evidence, as the
     court said, you should think about the
     witnesses and who said it.
          Okay.  So enough preliminaries.  Let's
     talk about the verdict form, which are
     ultimately eight questions.  The only eight
     questions that matter in this case.
          The first three questions -- you've heard
     us talk about class membership, Engle class
     membership.  The first three questions on
     verdict form are the class membership
     questions.  And we are going to break them down
     because they are broken down into three
     questions.  But when thinking about class
     membership -- and I'm going to talk a lot about
     this today, you know, what the issues are and
     what they are not.  Okay?
          The issues in class membership is not
     about fault, awareness or choice.  They are 3778
     simply going to be the three questions that are
     asked of you.  Okay?
          Question number 1 -- and the first
     question -- and, really, it's fitting that the
     first question is:  "Was Theresa Sammarco
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?"
          Number 1 is the first question; and it's
     going to be phrased just like that, "yes,"
     "no," when you get the verdict form.
          The issue is not could she have quit?  Did
     she try hard enough to quit?  Did she know it
     was hard to quit?  The issue is not whether she
     was a respectful smoker who didn't smoke around
     her kids, or who went outside to smoke, or
     didn't smoke around children or babies.
          The issue is not whether she was
     strong-willed or whether she had read Reader's
     Digest articles throughout the years about
     whether nicotine was difficult to quit.  That's
     not the issue.  The issue, and the only issue
     here, is was Theresa Sammarco addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine?
          And from our perspective, really, this
     question should not be all that difficult to
     answer.  Why?  Well, because all of 3779
     testimony that was given, and the opinions that
     were given, both by experts and family members,
     was that she was addicted.  All of the
     testimony and the opinions given are
     uncontroverted, unrebutted.
          The defendants could have called a
     witness, whether an expert or nonexpert
     witness, to contest that fact, but they did
     not.  Why?  Because the evidence is
     overwhelming.
          The one witness they did call,
     nonexpert -- they called three if you
     remember -- where we read -- where we had --
     Mr. Kelly read and he had someone playing the
     part of the witness.  One of those they called,
     Edith Martinelli, a niece of Theresa
     Sammarco's.  Who said, "Yes, Theresa Sammarco,
     my aunt, was an addicted chain smoker."  That
     is a defense witness.  They could have called
     somebody to rebut the evidence of addiction,
     but they did not.
          Theresa Sammarco was a woman who referred
     to herself when trying to quit as "feeling like
     a junkie trying to get off drugs."
          Robert, can you switch over to the ELMO, 3780
     please?  Thank you.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Turn the head and press
     the power.  There you go.
          MR. BASS:  This medical record is in
     evidence.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Do you want to zoom?
          MR. BASS:  Yes, please.  Thank you.
          I've taken the liberty of highlighting it.
          February 14th, 1991.  This is from Doctors
     Cunningham and Bates.  Extremely anxious,
     depressed, secondary to quitting smoking and
     family and friends hounding her.  "Feel like a
     junkie trying to get off drugs."
          This was a woman who was addicted to
     nicotine.  And here is the thing, she got it
     wrong.  She was a junkie.  She was a nicotine
     junkie.
          Now, this record does have some
     significance and the statement does have some
     significance later on.  But, see, here's the
     thing.  She felt like a junkie trying to get
     off drugs because she was.  She was.
          Now, like in opening statement, we're not
     sure as the trial goes along if the defense is
     going to contest it or not.  They didn't call 3781
     anyone to contest it, I don't know what they
     are going to get up here and say.  So we do
     need to talk a little bit about what evidence
     there was on this question.  And so who do we
     hear from?
          Dr. David Burns testimony on addiction.
     We just talked about Dr. David Burns.  One of
     the things we didn't highlight was Dr. Burns
     authored the chapter in Harrison's Principles
     of Internal Medicine, which is an internal
     medicine textbook used in medical schools.  He
     wrote the chapter on nicotine addiction.
          And he really, as you recall -- excuse
     me -- that Dr. Burns presented his testimony
     via videotape.  He told you he has a very
     common sense way of looking at it.  He starts
     with the fact that nicotine is addictive.  We
     heard all about various internal documents
     about how nicotine is addictive.  We heard all
     about how once it gets into the brain -- or,
     rather, the cigarette smoke is inhaled, it gets
     into the lungs rapidly, and it's into the brain
     within seven to ten seconds; and then once
     nicotine gets there it binds to receptors and
     neurotransmitters are released.  And that 3782
     happens each and every time.  You heard all
     about that.
          Dr. Cummings, who didn't give a
     case-specific opinion on addiction, talked
     about that process.
          So Dr. Burns starts with the notion that
     nicotine is addictive, which you all know, it's
     unrebutted.  Exposure to nicotine causes brain
     changes.  The evidence in the case is that
     addiction is a brain disease.  Nicotine
     addiction is a brain disease.  It's a chronic
     relapsing brain disease.  Exposure to nicotine
     causes brain changes.
          Theresa Sammarco began smoking early in
     life and she was addicted by 1954.  The
     evidence is, and the testimony, that she
     started smoking in approximately 1952, as a
     15-year-old.
          The reason that matters is because the
     testimony is, and the evidence is, is that the
     earlier somebody starts doing something
     addictive, the likelier they are going to
     become addicted to it.  The earlier they start,
     the more likely that they are also going to
     become powerfully addicted; and that's 3783
     because -- excuse me -- the adolescent brain is
     still developing.  And so when you introduce an
     addictive substance to the adolescent brain,
     it's going to interfere with the development.
     It's going to cause more long-lasting
     connections.  The type of connections that make
     a person more powerfully addicted, the type of
     connections that makes it more difficult to
     quit, the type of connections that causes
     relapse even after someone might not be smoking
     for a while.
          And so, you know, Dr. Burns continues, you
     know, kind of with this common sense notion
     that because cigarettes are addictive, and
     because nicotine gets to the brain and does
     what it does, each -- with each puff of
     cigarette the vast majority of people that
     smoke for a substantial period of time are
     addicted, and that makes sense, right?
          If you use an addictive substance, smoking
     20, 30 cigarettes a day, eight to ten puffs,
     nicotine in every single puff, doing what it
     does to your brain, if you do that for a long
     time you're going to become addicted to it.
     It's logical.  Remember, we can use our common 3784
     sense.
          Let me put that down.  I'm sorry.
          She was a heavy smoker.  The evidence was
     a pack to a pack and a half a day for 45 years.
     That is 20 to 30 cigarettes a day, eight to ten
     puffs, 200 to 300 puffs on a cigarette a day
     for 45 years.
          She smoked from the time she woke up until
     she went to bed.  When she didn't have a
     cigarette, she was anxious and irritable.  She
     tried on multiple occasions to quit, but was
     unsuccessful.  She smoked even after she was
     diagnosed with lung cancer.  Not because she
     wanted to, to keep smoking.  She desperately
     wanted to quit.  Every single witness who took
     the stand said she wanted to quit.  When she
     what's unable to quit, she beat herself up.
     When she was unable to quit, she cried.
          Is that someone who wants to keep smoking?
     No.  That's someone who doesn't want to keep
     smoking.  There's no doubt that she was
     powerfully addicted to nicotine.
          Following up on this, this common sense
     notion.  Theresa Sammarco's addiction to
     nicotine, we talked about it.  A pack and a 3785
     half packs per day, one and a half packs per
     day, we did the math, 10,950 cigarettes a year,
     nearly 500,000 cigarettes in her life, equaling
     3,942,000 hits of nicotine in her brain.
          Do we need to know anymore than that?
          We also heard from Dr. Cummings.  He
     talked generically, key features of cigarette
     addiction.  Very similar to the way that
     Dr. Burns talks about it.  Persistent daily
     use.
          Are you smoking every day?  Amount smoked
     per day.  Of course, that matters.  You're
     using an addictive product, the more you use it
     means the likely you are to be addicted.
          Time to first cigarette after getting up
     in the morning?  Think about it.  Why is that a
     key indicator?  Because you've been without
     while you're sleeping.  Your body needs the
     nicotine.
          Some other criteria.  Early age of
     initiation.  Just like Dr. Burns said.  That
     matters.  And I think you all understand why
     that matters.  Difficulty refraining from
     smoking.  Failed quit attempts.  John Sammarco,
     Junior, talked about his mom having to leave 3786
     sporting events to go smoke.  Withdrawal
     symptoms after quitting.  Used despite harm.
     All things that Theresa Sammarco exhibited.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thirty minutes, Hardee.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.
          We also know that cigarette is designed
     for addiction.  Dr. Cummings talked to you
     about that.
          One thing I want you to think about,
     though -- we know the cigarette is designed for
     addiction.  One thing I want you to think about
     when you're considering the evidence is Philip
     Morris and others have the ability to take
     nicotine out of cigarettes.  You saw the video
     of the plant.  They have the ability to take
     nicotine out.  And they do it in the process.
     They could keep it out if they wanted to, but
     they don't want to.
          Why?  Because nobody has ever smoked --
     nobody would then become addicted.  Those
     cigarettes don't sell, and that's all about
     money.  So what do they do?  They put it back
     in.  But they put it back in at just the right
     amount to sustain and get people addicted.
          I showed you this document.  They've known 3787
     for a long time.  Why do people smoke?  This is
     1959.  For addiction.  And so Mr. Kelly might
     come up here and talk to you about the changing
     definition of "addiction."  Right.  We talked
     about that.  He mentioned it in opening
     statement.  And you're not going to get a
     definition of "addiction" from the court.  All
     right.
          But no matter what, no matter how the
     World Health Organization defined it, no matter
     how the Surgeon General defined it as a habit
     in 1964, Philip Morris has known at least since
     1959 that people smoke for addiction.
          And so was Theresa Sammarco -- excuse
     me -- addicted to nicotine?  The greater weight
     of the evidence suggests yes.  Dr. David Burns;
     Mr. Sammarco; John Sammarco, Junior; Jimmy
     Sammarco; Edith Gentile; Edith Martinelli; and
     even Dr. Paul Bates, D.O., who if you recall on
     cross-examination of Dr. Keller -- we'll talk
     about Dr. Keller in a little while, Mr. Scarola
     asked Dr. Keller if he reviewed Dr. Bates'
     deposition.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor,
     argument outside the evidence. 3788
          MR. BASS:  Judge, I recall --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  The jury will
     recall the evidence.  I remind you again that
     what the lawyers say is not the evidence.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Mr. Scarola asked if Dr. Keller had
     reviewed Dr. Bates' deposition.  He had.  And
     Dr. Bates' opinion was that Theresa Sammarco
     was addicted, although Dr. Keller disagreed
     with that assessment.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Arguing outside the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  So was Theresa Sammarco
     addicted?  Yes.  First question.
          And really it's fitting, I think, that the
     first question is addiction really, because
     addiction, if you think about it, is kind of
     the linch pin for everything that's going to
     come.  Remember this document, Philip Morris
     knows that nicotine is the drug that keeps
     smokers smoking.
          First -- the title of this is "Smoker
     Psychology Review Program."
          "First, every undertaking has to have some 3789
     mission.  I was state our charter from Philip
     Morris in this fashion:
          "Study the psychology of the smoker in
     search of information that can increase
     corporate profits.
          "There are some distinctive features about
     the cigarette market.  We sell a product that
     is bought often and used from 10 to 60 times a
     day, day in, day out.  We provide a product
     that is the essential commodity in a habitual
     act.
          "You are all familiar with Pavlov's dog.
     Present a dog food, he salivates.  Ring a bell
     each time you present the food, and in due
     time, you can ring the bell without the food
     and he will salivate.
          "Put a hungry rat in a cage.  Put a lever
     in the cage.  Make it so that a push on the
     lever delivers a pellet of food.  In its random
     movement, the rat will push the lever.  He'll
     get the pellet.  The rat will soon associate
     lever pushing with the food pellet.  In time,
     he will be rapidly pushing the lever for food.
          "Consider the smoker.  Smoking the
     cigarette is the lever press.  The effect of 3790
     that smoking act upon his person is the reward.
     That effect reinforces the smoking act.  He
     comes to push the lever 10 to 60 times per day.
     Our task is to understand the reinforcing
     mechanism, or process, whereby the habit is
     established and maintained.  Such is our model.
     Conceptually simple on the surface, but the
     complexities lurk in numbers beneath the
     surface."
          When you're considering responsibility in
     the case, ask yourselves:  Did Theresa Sammarco
     have any idea that Philip Morris was comparing
     her, as an addicted smoker, to a lab rat?
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor,
     improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  Of course, she did not know
     that.
          Another document that I want you to think
     about when you're thinking about how addiction
     kind of permeates this case, thinking about
     responsibility, this is from 1980, you might
     recall that the comment "the lawyers remind us
     that the entire matter of addiction is the most
     potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have 3791
     in a lung cancer cigarette case.  We can't
     defend free choice if the person was addicted."
          Think about this is an internal company
     document, okay.  Addiction is the most potent
     weapon a prosecuting attorney (indicating) can
     have in a lung cancer cigarette case.
          The next question on the verdict form is:
     Was Theresa Sammarco's addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine a legal cause of her death
     from lung cancer?
          And this is -- this is really tied to the
     first question.  Why?  Because there is a
     stipulation, and it's undisputed that Theresa
     Sammarco had lung cancer.  We know that.  It's
     undisputed.  It's stipulated.  We know that her
     cigarette smoking caused her lung cancer.
     That's been stipulated.  And we know that her
     lung cancer caused her death.  That's been
     stipulated.
          And so the only thing in this question
     that's left is addiction.  And so, naturally,
     if you find her addicted in question one, then
     the answer to this is yes as well.
          Why?  Because the only question that
     remains really in this analysis, based upon 3792
     stipulations is --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor,
     improper argument based upon the stipulation.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  And I'll show you what I mean.
     All right.  You start with addiction to
     nicotine.  If you find her addicted to
     nicotine, you are going to find that her
     addiction substantially contributed to her
     smoking, which we already know caused her lung
     cancer and caused her death.  And so that's why
     really answering yes to question one
     necessarily means yes to this question.
          And, you know, talking about the
     stipulations, the stipulations really, you
     know, are not a gift from Philip Morris, okay.
     Think about what you heard about --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
     improper argument.
          MR. BASS:  Judge, I think I'm entitled to
     explain the --
          THE COURT:  Repeat it again.
          MR. KELLY:  Not a gift.
          MR. BASS:  A stipulation is not a gift
     from Philip Morris. 3793
          THE COURT:  The objection is sustained.
          MR. BASS:  Let's think about what we
     learned about cigarettes.  Thousands of
     chemical compounds including cyanide, arsenic
     and tobacco-specific nitrosamines, over 70
     carcinogens.  "45 percent of all long-term
     smokers die of a smoking-related disease.
     450,000 Americans die each year of smoking."
          She smoked for 45 years.  Of course it
     caused her lung cancer and her death.  They are
     compelled to stipulate under these facts.
          The Surgeon General in 2004, this idea
     that addiction causes disease, we have a flow
     chart here where the Surgeon General in the
     2004 report, Figure 2.1, "Scheme linking
     nicotine addiction and lung cancer via tobacco
     smoke carcinogens and their induction of
     multiple mutations takes in critical genes."
     That's the chart I showed you earlier about
     starting at addiction and ending at lung cancer
     and death.  It's kind of a cruder chart of this
     right here.  We start with nicotine addiction
     which causes cigarette smoking, and you go down
     the flow chart and end up with lung cancer.
          And Dr. Burns talked about the process as 3794
     well, right?  He started with the notion --
     and, again, this -- the amount of nicotine
     doses, this is important, because with
     3,942,000 hits of nicotine, every single hit,
     while it contains nicotine, also contains
     seven -- at least 70 known carcinogens.  Right?
          So if we are talking about 3.9 million
     hits of nicotine, we are talking about -- I
     can't even do the math on the exposure to
     carcinogens over a 45-year history.
          And Dr. Burns, if you recall, he went
     through the process about starting at a normal
     lung cell and he explained how ultimately
     cigarette smoke causes damage to the cilia and
     then it starts -- it sits there on the surface.
     And then ultimately it seeps down into the
     cells and you see these things starting to
     change.
          And that takes time.  Right?  That takes
     time.  That takes years.  And then ultimately
     we get to the point where we have a tumor, and
     then ultimately we have metastatic tumor.  And
     that takes years.  And it takes years.  And
     people that smoke for years are addicted.  And
     so that's how addiction causes lung cancer and 3795
     death.
          But, again, even though Dr. Burns --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Point it this way.
          MR. BASS:  This way?  Okay.  Maybe it was
     ricocheting before.
          MR. SCAROLA:  And you just turned off the
     TV in three judges' offices.
          MR. BASS:  On and off.  On and off.
     Right?
          And for good measure, we have Dr. Burns'
     testimony here excerpted.
          "Was that lung cancer caused by her
     addiction to smoking?
          "Absolutely."
          And this really sums it up.
          "It was caused by her addiction, which
     necessitated her regular exposure to the
     cancer-causing substances in smoke.  There's no
     doubt that addiction caused her death from lung
     cancer."
          And so, again, the scales of justice,
     remember the burden of proof, an ever so slight
     tipping of the scales.  We have the Surgeon
     General, and I put "generic" in quotes because
     see saw the genic flow chart about the concept 3796
     of how addiction causes lung cancer.
          Dr. Cummings generic, he explained it.
     Dr. Burns gave you the opinion.  We have the
     Philip Morris stipulated facts that her lung
     cancer was caused by cigarette smoking.  We
     have the evidence of addiction.  And you put
     those two things together, and you have a yes
     to this question.
          But then we also have the medical records
     which talk about lung cancer, and the death
     certificate.  So not only is there a slight
     tipping of the scale, it's overwhelming, the
     evidence that we brought you.
          Was Theresa Sammarco's addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of
     her death from lung cancer?  Yes.  If you find
     yes to question one, you should find yes to
     question two.
          Now, it's important to understand -- and
     we are going to talk about the third component
     in a second here, but what's important to
     understand, you'll see it on the -- on the
     verdict form, right, under each question.  If
     you answer -- if your answer to question one
     was no, then your verdict is for defendant 3797
     Philip Morris.
          And so if you don't think that Theresa
     Sammarco was addicted, which is the first
     question, and you answer no, Philip Morris
     prevails.  That's the only question you can
     consider.  If you answer no to question two,
     Philip Morris prevails.
          And if you answer no to question three,
     which we are going to talk about, Philip Morris
     prevails.
          So a "no" to any of those questions,
     Philip Morris prevails.
          A "yes" on all three, Theresa Sammarco is
     an Engle class member.
          Still the third class membership question.
     As of November 21st, 1996, did Theresa Sammarco
     have signs or symptoms that were diagnosable
     with the benefit of hindsight as lung cancer,
     yes or no?
          And so what's helpful to remember here, as
     you all go back in deliberate, is this, that
     there are two paths for plaintiff to get to
     "yes" here:  Signs or symptoms.  Not both.  One
     or the other.
          I submit there is a preponderance of 3798
     evidence in our favor as to both, but if you
     disagree about one, there is the other.  So
     that's important to know.
          You also got a definition of -- thank you.
     Her Honor gave in the jury instructions
     definitions of "sign" and "symptom."  Okay.
     Very helpful.  Right?
          A sign is an objectively observable
     physical condition.  Not observed.  Observable.
     An important distinction that I believe
     Mr. Scarola made very well with Dr. Keller.
     Observable.  Not when it was observed, but when
     was it observable.  Right?
          When was this -- and remember the Play-Doh
     demonstration that Mr. Scarola did with
     Dr. Keller, and we plopped it on the chart that
     Dr. Abel had, and everyone agreed that this was
     a three-dimensional -- you know, a fairly
     representative three-dimensional size of the
     tumor that was found on CT of Mrs. Sammarco.
     Right?
          So really, was this -- just four months
     prior with this tumor, whatever size it was, we
     know it was probably a little bit smaller, was
     it observable if the CT scan would have been 3799
     done.  That's really the basis of the question
     here.
          But, of course, we also have symptoms.  A
     symptom is a perceptible physical condition of
     which the patient is subjectively aware.  Not
     subjectively aware that it's a lung cancer
     symptom, but with the benefit of hindsight, is
     it a symptom that can be linked to lung cancer?
          But, you know, I think it's clear to you
     all that this really is -- that Philip Morris
     is all in on this, this question right here.
     Right.  It's the only witness that they called,
     Dr. Keller, to talk about it.
          But let's think about something.  We are
     not trying to suggest -- the starting point for
     this is, Theresa Sammarco had lung cancer.  No
     one is trying to suggest that we are trying to
     prove the case based upon her symptoms without
     a diagnosis of lung cancer.  No one's trying to
     say, well, a mass was observed, it was never
     biopsied, so we don't know if it was lung
     cancer.  It could have come from somewhere
     else, it could have been a shadow on the -- no,
     she had lung cancer.  Okay?
          And so knowing that, it makes it 3800
     relatively easy to work backwards just a few
     months to answer this question as to whether
     the tumor was -- signs were observable a few
     months before, or there were symptoms that can
     be linked to the lung cancer just a few months
     before.  Because we know she had lung cancer.
          So knowing that she had lung cancer,
     what's the question?  Right.  The question is
     not -- and knowing the definitions you've been
     given, the question is not when she was first
     diagnosed with lung cancer.  We know that was
     May of 1997.  That is not the question, though.
     Right?  The question is not when her tumor was
     first observed, right?  Because we know it's
     not observed.  We know it's was it observable.
          The question is not, when did she think
     that she might have lung cancer?  And I think
     there's -- one of the jury instructions
     addresses that.  "The plaintiff need not prove
     that Theresa Sammarco or any of her doctors had
     notice or knowledge of her lung cancer on or
     before November 21st, 1996."
          So those aren't the questions, when she
     was first diagnosed, when the tumor was first
     observed, when she thought she might have it. 3801
          The question is:  With the benefit of
     hindsight, looking back, did Theresa Sammarco
     have signs or symptoms that were diagnosable,
     observable, as lung cancer as of November 21st,
     1996?  Right?
          Was this tumor identified by CT on
     March 25th, 1997, 3 by five -- 3 by
     3.5 centimeters, was it observable and thus
     diagnosable only four short months earlier?
          Of course it was, because we know that
     tumors, particularly of this size, excuse me,
     particularly of this size, don't appear
     overnight.  Tumors grow.  Right?
          People tend to think of cancer as if it
     were being hit by a lightning bolt, but in
     reality, cancer is a series of chronic changes
     that occur over a long period of time.  That's
     why we showed you the diagrams from Dr. Burns,
     taking you from normal cell to cancer and then
     to metastasis.  It doesn't happen overnight.
     It didn't get to this side overnight.
          And I said it once, but I'll say it again
     because it's important, a sign, observable.
     Not when it was observed, but when it was
     observable. 3802
          What was the evidence?  Well, first we are
     going to talk about Dr. Keller, the defense
     pulmonologist.  And let's talk about who he
     was, okay, who he is.  He is a pulmonologist,
     not an oncologist.
          Now, as Mr. Scarola said in cross, and
     it's important for me to say here, too, I'm not
     criticizing, we aren't criticizing pulmonology
     or pulmonologists.  What we're criticizing and
     pointing out is that he is not the right
     specialty to be talking about tumor growth
     rates.  Oncologists are.
          And so that's very important.  They
     brought you a pulmonologist.  Just like they
     didn't bring anyone to contest addiction, they
     could have brought an oncologist who deals with
     treatment of cancer including tumors.
          And on that note, Dr. Keller, when a
     diagnosis is made -- and he might participate
     in that diagnosis in some or many of his
     patients, right?  But once the diagnosis is
     made and confirmed, he refers his lung cancer
     patients for treatment to oncologists,
     radiation oncologists, and/or a thoracic
     surgeon. 3803
          And that depends upon the stage.  Stage I
     or Stage II are operable, so he goes to a
     thoracic surgeon.  Stage III, metastasis,
     Stage IV, distant metastasis, he sends to
     oncologists just like Dr. Abel.
          You recall, Dr. Keller was solicited by
     Shook, Hardy & Bacon, lawyers, in 2008 to help
     them with tobacco litigation.  Entered into an
     agreement to review cases.  Member of the
     American Thoracic Society, yet does not abide
     by their policies and/or standards to
     participate as an expert witness on behalf of
     the tobacco company.
          Quite frankly, he didn't give a darn about
     those policies.  You should consider that when
     reviewing what he had to say.  You should
     consider that when comparing him to the
     witnesses that we brought you.
          And so I start with Dr. Keller because --
          MR. KELLY:  This way, Hardee.
          MR. BASS:  I'll get it right on the very
     last slide.  I will get it, maybe.
          All right.  You recall this chart?
          And Robert, obviously, everyone knows how
     helpful he is, took a picture of the chart and 3804
     we were able to put it right here.  You
     remember Mr. Sexton had Dr. Keller draw this
     chart.
          And this is why I want you to ask
     yourselves if Dr. Keller's testimony, based
     upon the jury instructions that you've been
     given, is helpful at all.  Everything he talked
     about, remember, we're talking about -- we're
     not talking about when she was diagnosed,
     right.  We aren't talking about when she had a
     needle biopsy.  We're not talking about when it
     was first observed, the tumor on CT scan, or
     even when a chest x-ray revealed some kind of
     abnormality.  We're not talking about those.
     We're not talking about when it was first
     observed.  We are talking about when it was
     observable.  Okay.
          And so I ask you to think to yourself,
     well, Dr. Keller's not an oncologist.
     Dr. Keller's testimony dealing with things that
     happened, as the instructions are telling you
     now, are really irrelevant.  And so what
     helpful testimony did he bring?
          Well, on cross-examination he did give
     good testimony for the plaintiff, and that is, 3805
     scientists have been studying growth rates of
     cancers for a very long time, decades.
     Remember that admission on cross-examination?
          Agrees that tumor growth rates is or are a
     very well-studied area.  Remember that
     admission on cross-examination?
          Growth rate of adenocarcinoma, Theresa
     Sammarco's tumor, has been studied many times.
          He agreed that median growth rate in those
     studies of adenocarcinoma, approximately 300
     days.
          And what are we talking about there?  300
     days.  We are talking about the median time it
     takes for a tumor to double in size.  Right?
     Not to grow from nothing to this size but to
     simply double in size.
          And then another thing that he admitted,
     right, we've been talking about -- on the chart
     I'll show you in a minute about, you know, if a
     CT scan or x-ray would have been done prior to
     November 21st, would, you know, would it have
     been seen?  Of course, in our view it would
     have been.  But we've been using a 1-centimeter
     mass as kind of the size that might be
     observable. 3806
          Well, Dr. Keller has seen tumors as small
     as 4 millimeters on CT scan, okay.  So
     obviously, Dr. Abel's estimation was very
     conservative that a tumor is observable at
     1-centimeter because Dr. Keller has seen them
     much smaller on CT.
          And, of course, as we've talked about it
     before, and we can't hammer it home enough, and
     Dr. Keller acknowledged it, and, of course, the
     court has instructed on it, not exactly,
     although it ties into the definition of sign,
     there is a difference between what is diagnosed
     and what is diagnosable.
          Remember, sign.  Observable.  Not
     observed.  Was and would have, based upon
     peer-reviewed studies, which I'm going to talk
     about in a moment in Dr. Abel's testimony, this
     size tumor on March 25th, been observable only
     four short months before.
          MR. SCAROLA:  An hour, Hardee.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.
          And just to drive home the point that
     Dr. Keller is not the person to be talking
     about growth rates.  Recall one of you asked
     the question, "How much time have you spent 3807
     personally learning about growth rate and
     doubling time?
          "Answer:  Quite a bit of time.  I mean, I
     have tried to read some of the recent
     literature.  I might have spent a few hours
     reading about it."
          The witness they brought you to try and
     convince you that tumor growth rate and
     doubling time is not a way that we can use in
     this courtroom has spent only a few hours
     reading about it.
          I ask you to consider that when
     considering his testimony versus the testimony
     of Dr. Howard Abel.  Cornell and Harvard
     educated physician.  First hematologist and
     medical oncologist in Broward County.  Board
     certified, internal medicine, 1969.  Hematology
     1972.  Oncology 1977.
          Oncology equals the study and treatment of
     tumors, exactly what we are talking about here.
          Practiced medicine for 44 years, 37 years
     in Broward County.
          And what was his testimony?  He gave
     testimony regarding signs and symptoms.  What
     was his testimony? 3808
          Signs.  Theresa Sammarco's tumor was
     identifiable and diagnosable before
     November 21, 1996.
          Volumetric doubling time is a way to
     understand tumor growth.  Right?  How the tumor
     grows.  It's not a one-dimensional or a
     two-dimensional thing, it is three-dimensional.
     It grows and it looks like that.
          It can be applicable going forward and
     backward.  Adenocarcinoma, the type of cancer
     that Theresa Sammarco had, is the
     slowest-growing type of lung cancer.
          What did he base his opinion on that the
     tumor was identifiable and diagnosable before
     November 21, 1996?  He relied on peer-reviewed
     studies which provide a range of growth rates.
     And that's how they look at it, right?
          And our burden is not to pinpoint exactly
     what size the tumor was on November 20th, 1996.
     We just have to prove by a preponderance of the
     evidence that it was probably more likely than
     not observable.
          That's why we gave you a range, because
     that's what the peer-reviewed studies give
     ranges of.  And we're talking about ranges of 3809
     doubling time, a smaller doubling time meaning
     that it's growing quicker, a longer doubling
     time, like 300 days, meaning it's growing much,
     much, much slower.
          Tumor identification equals tumor
     diagnosable.  And even -- and these ranges are
     based upon the study, or studies, the most
     recent one I think from December of 2012, which
     utilized new computer technology.  Right?
     Remember that?  43 days was the fastest
     doubling time in the study.  Right?  Meaning it
     doubled in size more quicker, or more quickly,
     so therefore, back on November 21st, it would
     have been smaller.
          Even that, and he talked about that's an
     outlier, but even that, 1.4 centimeters, still
     larger than the minimum size that he says to be
     diagnosable, but way larger, a centimeter
     larger than the smallest that Dr. Keller's ever
     seen on CT.  Right?
          But -- and we did that because, you know,
     we wanted to show you, even using the
     fastest-growing in the peer-reviewed study
     based upon computer technology, even using the
     fastest, it's still observable. 3810
          Median, though, 300 days.  That's the
     median.  And Dr. Keller acknowledged that
     that's been seen in studies.  The median, the
     average in this study, 300 days,
     2.8 centimeters.  Right?  And 300 days is --
     the doubling time, it's growing much slower.
     Only 2.8 centimeters.
          So either way you look at it, or any way
     you look at it, really, studies, the fact that
     cancer doesn't strike overnight like Dr. Burns
     said, common sense.  Right?
          This 3 by 3.5 mass seen on March 25th,
     1997, was observable, and thus, diagnosable
     only four short months before, because we know
     a tumor of this size doesn't appear overnight
     and it doesn't grow to that size overnight.
          And remember we included the exercise, and
     we were looking at the picture from this here.
     And so it looks funny because you're looking
     down on it, and so -- but anyway, I think you
     all remember when he plopped it down in the
     3-centimeter circle, you know, and Dr. Keller
     agreed that that was the size.  So that's why
     it looks a little -- maybe a little bit wider,
     but ...  And you recall he went through that 3811
     with him.
          And that really illustrates what we are
     talking about, you know.  When there's a
     doubling, it's not -- if it gets cut in half,
     then that, whatever it is after that, gets cut
     in half again.  So you see the progression.
     It's not all that, you know, dramatic.
          And, of course, there's testimony about
     symptoms.  Dr. Abel, symptoms of lung cancer
     that is in the testimony and in medical
     records.  Clubbing of fingers, weight loss,
     hemoptysis.  Hemoptysis is spitting up blood,
     right.  We know that.
          Chronic cough, fatigue, body aches,
     numbness in fingers.
          Opinion with a benefit of hindsight.  The
     constellation of symptoms are indicative of
     lung cancer because these are all lung cancer
     symptoms, and we know she had lung cancer.
          Dr. Keller tried to tell you that none of
     these were related, of course, but when asked
     the hypothetical by Mr. Scarola, "Doctor, I
     want you to assume that you return to your
     office this afternoon to resume your clinical
     practice of medicine.  You meet a patient of 3812
     approximately 60 years of age, a female
     patient, who comes in to you with a history of
     45 years of a pack and a half a day,
     uninterrupted smoking since age 15.  A female
     who has some tobacco-related illnesses,
     increased fatigue, recent incidence of a loss
     of 6 pounds, and recent incidence of spitting
     up blood.  You examine her hands and you find
     pronounced clubbing.  What action do you take?
          "Probably all my patients I would do chest
     x-rays, perhaps, yeah."
          Of course he would.  Of course he would
     under those circumstances.
          And besides that, Dr. Keller has never
     seen clubbing except for in late-stage lung
     cancer.
          So either way, either way, the answer to
     question 3 is yes.  Sign or symptom.  Either
     way, the answer is yes.
          And then you have class membership.  And
     the Engle findings apply.
          Smoking cigarettes cause lung cancer.
     Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.  Philip
     Morris placed cigarettes on the market that
     were defective and unreasonably dangerous. 3813
     And, of course, the concealment and the
     conspiracy findings, and then Philip Morris was
     negligent.
          One of the next issues for your
     determination is going to be whether Philip
     Morris' concealment or omission of material
     information was a legal cause of Theresa
     Sammarco's death, and then also whether the
     conspiracy was, as well.  So I'm going to talk
     about those together.
          So we know from the Engle findings that
     Philip Morris was a co-conspirator and part of
     a conspiracy with many other cigarette
     manufacturers to conceal or omit information
     regarding the health effects of cigarettes or
     their addictive nature with the intention that
     smokers in the public would rely on this
     information to their detriment.
          Of course.  And that's information we
     brought you.  We brought you marketing.  Why
     else would someone smoke filtered cigarettes if
     they didn't think that filtered cigarettes were
     filtering out the bad stuff?
          Well, we know that's not true, and we know
     now that, in fact, the smoker is getting more 3814
     bad stuff, but of course that's why people in
     the 1950s were smoking -- were smoking filtered
     cigarettes.  Of course that's why smokers in
     the 1970s and '80s were smoking light
     cigarettes.  Because they thought, as
     advertised, that there was lower tar and
     nicotine.  Right?  So, of course, Philip Morris
     and other companies believed and intended that
     the public would rely on this information.
          Now, we know that the conspiracy and the
     concealment continued until after Theresa
     Sammarco died.  She died in 1998, and it wasn't
     after that until Philip Morris finally admitted
     what it knew about the addictive nature of
     nicotine and the health hazards of smoking.
          Dr. Cummings talked to you about how lung
     cancer is basically a manmade disease, right,
     there were no -- there were no instances, or
     hardly any, of lung cancer in the 1900s, 1910s.
          Of course, 1913, cigarettes are
     introduced, and you see the blue line,
     consumption goes up, and what happens 15, 20
     years later?  Lung cancer starts.
          And we know that as cigarettes increased,
     so -- in the 1940s and 1950s, so too did, at 3815
     that time, lung cancer rates in males.  And
     folks were paying attention to that.  There
     were some medical journals that came out around
     that time, 1953.  Now, Theresa Sammarco started
     smoking in 1952.  And you heard that, you know,
     it was an era where the companies, Philip
     Morris, made smoking appear safe, healthy,
     normal.  We showed you the ads, we showed you
     some movie clips, it was glamorous, it was in
     movies.  We talked about how advertising works
     in Philip Morris' own words.  You saw that
     video.
          And, by the way, if you want to watch any
     of these videos again, they are in evidence.
     And -- I don't know that we have them in here,
     but if you needed to look at one -- want to
     look at the videos, something can be given to
     you or you can come out here and watch the
     videos.  So you have these documents here, but
     you need to know that any of these videos that
     are in evidence you all have the ability to see
     if you want to.
          We also know that August 1953, as
     Dr. Cummings talked about, Philip Morris
     marketed and studied the smoking habits of 3816
     young people.  Right?  This is a Roper poll
     that was done for Philip Morris.  "What's the
     last brand of cigarette you smoked regularly"
     is the question.  And here we have the 15-to-17
     age range.
          And so, you know, that information was
     important to Philip Morris.  Why?  Ask
     yourselves why.  Because the younger somebody
     starts smoking, the better it is for business
     for them.  Right?  Because once you get a young
     person smoking, chances are better that they
     are going to become addicted.  And when they
     become addicted, there's a great chance they
     become a customer of yours for life.
          And so they were interested in knowing
     about, and they wanted youths, like Theresa
     Sammarco, as a 16-year-old in 1953 who's
     already started smoking just the year before.
     They want those people.  They need those
     people.
          The bottom document -- I think you saw
     Mr. Scarola read to you the 1984 document, this
     is from R.J. Reynolds, a co-conspirator, but
     these companies aren't different.  It asks:
     "Why, then, are younger adult smokers important 3817
     to R.J.R.?  Younger adult smokers are the only
     source of replacement smokers."
          Replacement smokers.  Smokers that they
     need to pick up the slack and fill in the ranks
     when other smokers die or quit.  Think about
     that for a minute.  Think about that, when
     you're thinking about responsibility in this
     case and you're thinking about entitlement to
     punitive damages.
          Less than one-third of smokers start after
     the age of 18.  So, 69 percent of smokers start
     before the age of 18.  Like Theresa Sammarco.
          So we know from the chart that there's a
     dip in consumption.  What happens?  We talked
     about this in the beginning.  Stock prices
     fall.  A dip in consumption.  What are we going
     to do?  We aren't going to tell the public what
     we know.  We are going to get together, ban
     together, agree to enter into a conspiracy, but
     here is what we know when we are doing that.
     We already know cigarettes are difficult for
     people to break.  We already know that
     cigarettes cause cancer.  Boy, wouldn't it be
     wonderful if our company was first to produce a
     cancer-free cigarette.  And then we know why 3818
     they did it.  Suppose everybody smoked just one
     cigarette less a day, that would be -- would
     maybe 40 billion a year.
          So what do they do?  Rather than provide
     this knowledge to the public, say, you know
     what, these studies that came out in LIFE
     Magazine, about tumors growing on the backs of
     tar [sic], you know what, folks, America,
     public, those tumors could be growing inside
     you as well.  They didn't tell people that.
          What did they do instead?  They banned
     together and agreed that they were going to
     enter into a conspiracy to try and keep
     Americans smoking, so they could make money.
     And what do they do?  They come out,
     January 4th -- and, by the way, this is all --
     these alarm bells are going off and happening
     and all this conspiracy is being put together
     over the Christmas holiday season of 1953.
          What do they do?  They come out with the
     Frank Statement where they basically make
     promises to the American public about the
     things that they are going to do, and the
     things that they believe.
          We believe the products we make are not 3819
     injurious to health.  They know it causes
     cancer.  Promise to cooperate closely with
     those whose task it is to safeguard the public.
          You see, as time goes on, not only do they
     not do that, they start attacking the Surgeon
     General.  They start attacking the very office
     and person whose job it is to educate the
     public about cigarettes.
          But internally, while they are starting
     this plan and implementing it, there is no
     doubt or confusion that cigarettes caused
     cancer, right?
          You saw the documents:  "Carcinogens are
     found in practically every class of compounds
     in smoke."  That's a 1961 Philip Morris
     document.
          1962, R.J. Reynolds:  "Obviously, the
     amount of evidence accumulated to indict
     cigarette smoking as a health hazard is
     overwhelming."
          Another document:  "Cigarettes have
     certain unattractive side effects.  They cause
     lung cancer."
          And so what do they do?  They engage in
     this campaign of doubt, confusion of deceit, 3820
     and it works.  Right?
          1957, had this committee had not been
     formed, the cigarette industry by now would
     have been in a deplorable position.  The TIRC
     has been a successful, defensive operation.
          So, even though there is some information
     out about the potential health hazards of
     smoking, what has this plan successfully done?
          It has successfully, and been successful,
     because people are still smoking even with that
     information out there.  So they have done their
     job.  They have created enough doubt.
          One of the ways they have created doubt
     and they've created reassurance, as well.
     Right?  And how do they create reassurance?
     Filtered cigarettes.
          Don't worry, we're the good company.  We
     promised you in the Frank Statement, in
     January 1954, that we have an interest in
     safeguarding the public health.  We don't
     believe there's anything wrong.  If we find
     something, we'll let you know.
          Did that ever happen before Theresa
     Sammarco died?  Did that ever happen from them?
          Rather, they did the opposite.  Creating 3821
     doubt, because doubt was their product.  It's
     also a means of establishing a controversy.
     And we -- you saw the video clips of all of
     the, you know, public statements that were
     made.  You saw, again, later on in years,
     saying this -- our creating doubt and confusion
     and deceit, it's working.
          "1972, for nearly 20 years this industry
     has employed a single strategy to defend itself
     on three major fronts.  While the strategy was
     brilliantly conceived and executed it has
     helped us win important battles."
          This is working because people are still
     smoking.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  You want to go back?  We
     are going to play that.
          MR. BASS:  Okay.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
           "ANN BROWDER:  And I have to disagree
     with you in that we don't know what causes the
     ailments that have been attributed to the
     cigarette smoking."
          "TED KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking does not
     cause cancer, yes or no?" 3822
          "EDWARD HORRIGAN:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer.  Has not been causally
     established."
          "TED KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking -- no
     causal relationship between cigarette smoking
     and emphysema."
          "EDWARD HORRIGAN:  Despite all the
     research to date, there has been no causal link
     established."
          "ANN BROWDER:  The case is still open.
     The jury has not come in."
          "MR. STOSSEL:  It may not be harmful --
     you're not convinced?
          "ANN BROWDER:  It may be or it may not be,
     we don't know."
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Do cigarettes
     cause cancer?"
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I don't know if
     they do or not."
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I'm not in a
     position to give you a does or does not
     answer."
          "MR. CAMPBELL:  Yes, I may be convinced.
     We don't know what causes cancer in general
     right now, so I think that we may find out what 3823
     causes cancer and we may find out some
     relationship, which has yet to be proven."
          (Video ended.)
          MR. BASS:  What impact does this campaign
     of doubt have on addicted a smoker?  All right?
     That's really -- that's really the question, or
     one of the questions.  What impact does it have
     on an addicted smoker?
          Well, you have heard both Dr. Cummings and
     Dr. Burns talk about this notion of cognitive
     dissidence, right?
          The fact that in an addicted smoker if you
     hear two competing messages -- remember,
     addiction is a disease of the brain.  Okay?  In
     a smoker that hears two competing messages,
     they're more likely to listen to the one that
     suggests to them they don't need to change
     their behavior.  Right?
          The cigarette companies knew that.  That
     was their plan, to give smokers a
     self-rationale to keep smoking.  To give
     smokers a psychological crutch to keep smoking.
     One of the ways they did it, create doubt.  Put
     the message out there that nothing's wrong with
     it. 3824
          The other way to do it?  Filtered
     cigarettes.  If you are worried, okay, or if
     you have slight concern, here, smoke these.
     These new, filtered cigarettes are going to
     trap anything that comes out.
          They knew that wasn't the case, though.
     And, in fact, they are more dangerous.
     Dr. Cummings talked about that.  They are more
     dangerous -- we know now, today, that they are
     more dangerous.
          More promises.  "If our product is
     harmful, we'll stop making it."  These are
     public promises designed to create cognitive
     dissidence in the smoker.
          Recall they promised to cooperate with the
     Surgeon General, but we talked about how they
     did not turn over all the information they had
     in 1963 to the Surgeon General.
          1961, "Present technology does not permit
     selective filtration."
          Letter to Surgeon General, 1963.  "It is
     possible, of course, to modify the chemical
     composition of cigarette smoke by the use of
     filters."
          More attacks on the Surgeon General 3825
     designed, as Dr. Burns said, to undermine the
     public health message.  Public health is trying
     to get the message out, the cigarette companies
     are blunting it and trying to create confusion.
     They are not cooperating with the Surgeon
     General.
          Ask yourselves if that's the type of
     behavior that has an impact on addicted
     smokers.  Yes, it does.  Dr. Burns and Cummings
     told you that.  On addicted smokers, like
     Theresa Sammarco.  But also if it's a type of
     conduct that warrants punitive damages --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor,
     improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BASS:  Was this -- was this
     intentional?  Was there withholding of
     information from the Surgeon General
     intentional?  Was it fraudulent?
          Remember, there's the jury instruction
     that says:  It doesn't matter how the
     information gets to the smoker.  Right?  This
     is part of the chain.  Not cooperating with
     public health is part of the chain that
     prevents all the information from getting out. 3826
          They duped the Surgeon General with
     filters here and with Lights later on.  And
     Dr. Burns has testified about that.
          "Attack more where they attack the Surgeon
     General, the Number one health problem is the
     Surgeon General."
          1988.  1988 is important because not only
     do we have evidence of what we call reliance in
     this case, Theresa Sammarco.  You know, she --
     Theresa Sammarco did exactly what the industry
     suggested she should do.  She went from
     unfiltered cigarettes in 1952, to filtered
     cigarettes in 1954.
          Filtered cigarettes, at that time,
     although they were on the market, were really
     starting to take off.  And you saw the chart.
     And we are going to come to it later, I think.
          Actually, we are going to come to it -- a
     little bit later.  I thought it was right
     there.
          Anyway, then, in the 1970s, when Lights
     come out, she starts smoking Lights.  Exactly
     like the industry told her she should do.  And
     so while the focus on the concealment and
     conspiracy question is after May 5th of 1982, 3827
     you can use the evidence of her relying on what
     the industry is saying in the years leading up
     to it.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor,
     improper argument.
          MR. BASS:  Judge, it's --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  You can use the industry --
     excuse me -- her reliance before 1982 as an
     inference of reliance post-1982.  Why?  Because
     she's still smoking Light cigarettes.  Okay.
     She's still smoking Light cigarettes and
     thinking that she's not getting as much bad
     stuff, just like they were advertised.  All
     right?
          She's smoking them into the '80s and into
     the '90s, after 1982.
          This is -- I want to spend just a little
     bit of time on this.  Remember we talked about,
     you know, not only did the cigarette industry
     conceal the health -- what it knew about the
     health hazards, it also concealed what it knew
     about the addictive qualities of nicotine.
          And so this is an example of, you know, we
     talked about that they are trying to -- 3828
     industry, that is -- undermine addiction.  They
     don't want people to quit.  Right?  We know
     that.  Okay.  So besides concealing the health
     hazards and creating doubt, when they have a
     chance to weigh in on addiction like they did
     in 1988, because, remember, that's whether the
     Surgeon General came out with, you know, a very
     important report defining nicotine as
     addictive, talking about how the
     pathophysiology, how it creates addiction is
     similar to heroin and cocaine.
          Although, the cigarette industry knew,
     Philip Morris, almost 30 years before this
     report that people smoked form addiction.  This
     came out.
          What did they do?  They issued a press
     release, "Claims that cigarettes are addictive
     are irresponsible and scare tactics."  They do
     not want the public to think that cigarettes
     are addictive because if the public knows and
     the public health knows, then the public health
     is going to start to be able to help more
     people stop smoking.
          You remember Theresa Sammarco's medical
     record from 1991?  "I feel like a junkie trying 3829
     to get off drugs."  The concealment of the
     addictive properties of nicotine, it got to
     her.  Because if she believed that she was --
     that nicotine was addictive and a drug, she
     would have said, "I'm a junkie.  I'm addicted."
          She said, "I feel like a junkie" because
     she had no idea, she had no idea, because the
     full truth was concealed from her.  The message
     of the public health was blocked.
          That's how the conspiracy and the
     concealment impacted millions of smokers, and
     Theresa Sammarco.  She did exactly what the
     industry said she should do, following the
     chronology of her smoking history, unfiltered
     to filtered to Lights.  Saying that she feels
     like she's a junkie, rather than "I am a
     junkie."
          MR. SCAROLA:  An hour and a half, Hardee.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.
          Right.  And we know that Philip Morris and
     their co-conspirators manipulate and control
     the level of nicotine.  We talked a lot about
     that.  Right.
          They can take it out, they can keep it
     out.  But what happens if they keep it out? 3830
     People stop smoking.  They can't have that.
          We talked about -- right?  This is what I
     was looking for when I talked about the filter
     charts.  Theresa Sammarco -- Theresa Sammarco
     follows this chart.  Very well might be her
     smoking.  Right?  She is in that chart just
     like, ultimately by 1970, when Lights -- just
     about the time Lights are introduced, actually,
     we have that percent of the market, 80 percent
     smoking filtered.
          Light cigarettes.  Theresa Sammarco smoked
     Light cigarettes.  Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns
     explained the Lights sham, right?  The
     defendants allowed public health scientists to
     believe that Lights were safer even though the
     defendants knew they were not.  "Despite the
     FTC machine numbers, smokers were getting the
     same amount of tar and nicotine, but thought
     they were smoking a safer cigarette.
          "Public health scientists did not learn
     that these defendants were gaining the system
     until their internal documents exposed their
     secrets."
          One of the major, major tobacco control
     moments, as Dr. Cummings talked about, was when 3831
     these secret internal company documents were
     released, because that gave public health so
     much more information that they had no idea
     about before, including things like being
     misled about what Philip Morris knew about
     light cigarettes.
          We put a document in evidence called
     "Human Smoking Behavior."  And it's long.  It's
     PT4389.  And it's all about things like
     compensation.  Right?  Talking about -- and I
     didn't -- we didn't mention the internal
     Philip Morris document that talks about the
     illusion of filtration.  But here we talk about
     compensation, and that is that smokers will
     unconsciously or subconsciously smoke more on a
     lower-delivery cigarette to get the same amount
     of nicotine.
          Philip Morris studied and studied and
     studied and studied and studied, and those are
     just some of the studies about human smoking
     compensation.
          I'm jumping ahead to Waxman.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Want me to get Waxman?
          MR. BASS:  Yes.  Thank you.
          Recall -- before we play this, please, 3832
     Robert.  Thank you.
          Recall 1994.  Even in 1994, Philip Morris
     still claiming nicotine in cigarettes not
     addictive.  Still doing that to try to
     undermine cessation efforts, but this time they
     do it in front of Congress.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I would like you
     to rise.  And those who will be testifying as
     well, will you rise.
          "Will you raise your right hand.  Do you
     swear that the testimony you're about to give
     is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
     the truth?
          "THE PANEL:  I do.
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Please consider
     yourselves to be under oath.
          "Representative Ron Wyden (D-Oregon):  Let
     me begin my questioning on the matter of
     whether or not nicotine was addictive.  Let me
     ask you first -- I'd like to just go down the
     row -- whether each of you believes that
     nicotine is not addictive.
          "I heard virtually all of you touch on it. 3833
     Just yes or no.
          "Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
          "UNIDENTIFIED TOBACCO REPRESENTIVE #1:  I
     believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
          "Representative Ron Wyden (D-Oregon):
          Mr. Johnston.
          "James Johnston (RJ Reynolds):
     Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do
     not meet the classic definitions of addiction.
     There is no intoxicating --
          "Representative Ron Wyden (D-Oregon):  We'
     ll take that as a no.  And, again, time is
     short.  If you can just -- I think each of you
     believe nicotine is not addictive.  We just
     would like to have this for the record.
          "UNIDENTIFIED TOBACCO REPRESENTATIVE #2:  I
     don't believe that nicotine or our products are
     addictive.
          "UNIDENTIFIED TOBACCO REPRESENTATIVE #3:  I
     believe nicotine is not addictive.
          "UNIDENTIFIED TOBACCO REPRESENTATIVE #4:  I
     believe that nicotine is not addictive.
          "UNIDENTIFIED TOBACCO REPRESENTATIVE #5:  I
     believe that nicotine is not addictive.
          "UNIDENTIFIED TOBACCO REPRESENTATIVE #6:  A 3834
     nd I, too, believe that nicotine is not
     addictive."
          (Video ended.)
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.
          1994, after they held their hand up, swore
     to tell the truth, that's what they say to
     Congress.
          Facts on reliance.  Remember, reliance --
     you know, the focus is after May 5th, 1982 for
     legal reasons.  Okay.  But as we talked about,
     and this makes common sense, right, if you
     start relying on something well before that and
     you continue to rely on it, and it doesn't
     change, it's happening in 1982.  It's
     happening --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor --
     sorry, Hardee, to interrupt.  Objection, Your
     Honor, improper argument.
          MR. BASS:  Judge, that objection was --
     same objection was made earlier and it was
     overruled.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  What do we have?  1952 Theresa
     started smoking Marlboro unfiltered cigarettes.
     1954, Theresa switches to filters when they 3835
     came out and were heavily promoted.  1970s,
     Theresa switched to lights when they came on
     and began to be heavily promoted as a safer
     alternative.
          After 1982, she's still smoking light
     cigarettes.  1987, Edith Martinelli, Theresa
     smoking Marlboro Lights.  Theresa tells her
     that she was trying to quit by going to a light
     cigarette, Lights had less nicotine and were
     going to help her quit.  1997, short period of
     smoking Ultra Lights before she ultimately
     quit.  Ultra Lights.
          And Theresa, like millions of other
     Americans, were unaware of the manipulations
     that Philip Morris and their co-conspirators
     engaged in.  And, again, we have the video
     clips that have been played that are post-1982.
     Still trying to create the controversy.  Still
     interfering with people's cessation efforts.
     Still not telling the public that their
     products are designed for addiction.  Still not
     telling the public that lights aren't doing
     anything for them.
          So yes --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor. 3836
     Preemption.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  And so, yes, did the
     concealment and conspiracy impact Theresa
     Sammarco?  Absolutely.  Why else was she
     smoking filters?  Why else was she smoking
     Lights?  Because that's what they were saying
     was a safer alternative.
          The real sad -- this is a tragic case on
     so many levels.  But what's very sad and
     disturbing is that all of the opportunities
     that the tobacco industry had to tell the
     truth, but chose not to.
          And so we listed a couple of things
     through the years on here.  But if you think
     about it, every single day from December --
     whenever they first met, December 10th, 1953,
     until they finally admitted what they knew in
     1998, every single day for 50 years, these
     defendants, Philip Morris, chose not to tell
     the public what it knew about cigarettes.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Preemption.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BASS:  Every single day.  Every single 3837
     day, it chose -- the industry, Philip Morris,
     chose not to tell folks who were smoking
     filters or Lights that those weren't doing
     anything for them.
          THE CLERK:  Five minutes.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.  Until an hour 45?
          THE CLERK:  Uh-huh.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.  Think about all the
     chances, when you think about responsibility.
     Think about all the chances that they had to do
     the right thing, but every single day placed
     profits over safety and lives of people like
     Theresa Sammarco.
          And that's one of the things you're going
     to be doing is looking at fault.  Right.  And
     for our part, we acknowledge fault because --
     let me get the exact language here.  I can't
     find it -- because while Theresa tried to quit,
     for whatever reason, she was unable to until it
     was too late.
          But we acknowledge that -- you know, we
     acknowledge and Mr. Sammarco acknowledges that,
     you know, even addicted people have
     responsibilities and that if you try and quit
     15 times, you can try and quit 16 times.  If 3838
     you try and quit 20 times, you can try and quit
     21.  So even though she tried, she could have
     tried a little bit harder, because everybody
     can try a little bit harder.
          So that's really what we are talking
     about, we are talking about acknowledging.  We
     are talking about simply for not being able to
     quit smoking.  We aren't talking about for
     being lied to about why cigarettes were hard to
     quit.  We aren't talking about other
     intentional fraudulent conduct.  Right.  And so
     that's why the court and the verdict form tells
     you that if you answer yes to Question 5 or
     6 -- excuse me, Question 5 or 6, the
     intentional tort counts, the fraud and the
     conspiracy, the verdict won't be reduced by
     Theresa Sammarco's intentional fault because
     we're not acknowledging any fault for the lies
     and the manipulations that was told to Theresa
     Sammarco.  Okay.
          But Theresa Sammarco did have a
     responsibility to try and quit.  She met that
     as best she could, evidenced by this chart.
     She tried hypnosis.  She tried cold turkey.
     She tried the filter thingy.  We put it there 3839
     because that's what Edith Martinelli referred
     to it as.  Whatever it was, it was something
     that in addiction to the filters that she had,
     she put on the end of cigarettes because she
     believed it would help her quit.
          Tried the nicotine patch.  Tried gum.
     Tried cutting back.  Lenten quit attempts.
     Switched to Lights.  Switched to Ultra Lights.
     But at the end of the day, the most important
     thing besides the quit attempts, when thinking
     about responsibility, this is a woman who
     wanted to quit.  She tried.
          She was unable.  And when she was unable,
     she cried.  John Sammarco, Junior, said she
     cried so many times because she could not quit
     smoking.
          Remember she goes to confession or maybe
     just to talk to Father O'Brien.  Father
     O'Brien, her confidante, her pastor, says, if
     things are this bad and you're trying to quit,
     you need to go back to smoking so that you save
     your house.  Imagine how bad off she must have
     been if Father O'Brien is telling her you
     should go back to smoking.
          So compare her efforts to quit.  Compare 3840
     the things she did.  Think about in her day and
     age, there weren't all of the cessation aids
     that are available now.  She did what she
     could.  She had everything to live for.  She
     had every reason to quit.  And she tried, but
     she just couldn't.
          Compare that with what we've heard about
     Philip Morris and co-conspirators when you're
     thinking about responsibility.
          That's just a shot of some of the
     pharmaceutical quit aids available today.
          And so I'm getting ready to sit down.
     Mr. Scarola is going to talk to you about
     Mr. Sammarco's loss.  But there's just a couple
     of things that I want to talk to you about.
          One, we talked about in the beginning,
     which seems like a little while ago, I asked
     you, I said, knowing what you have heard in
     this case, what are you going to do about it?
     Right?
          This is a document from 1968.  "Our basic
     position in the cigarette controversy is
     subject to the charge and may be subject to a
     finding that we are making false or misleading
     statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." 3841
          That sums up what they were doing, but it
     also shows that one day, one day they thought
     and feared they might be accounting for the
     things that they did in a courtroom just like
     this.  They knew it.  The things they did were
     wrong.  Beyond wrong.  In fact, go to the
     dictionary, and you're not going to find a word
     in there that describes what they did and how
     they felt about people.
          And so today's that day of reckoning.
     Today is that day where you say, yes, you did,
     Philip Morris, co-conspirators, you did make
     false and misleading statements to promote the
     sale of cigarettes.  And you didn't care about
     anyone except yourselves and your pockets and
     your bank accounts.
          Are punitive damages warranted against
     Philip Morris in this case?  You better believe
     it.
          And the court, Her Honor, talked to you
     about a Phase II.  What you should understand
     about Phase II is, it will be very short.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
     improper argument.  We don't know.  We haven't
     even talked about that. 3842
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BASS:  One last thing -- thank you,
     Jack -- is you are going to be asked, as we
     talked about, responsibility.  The vision of
     responsibility.  And we can make suggestions to
     you but, of course, it's up to you.
          And so based upon everything that you've
     heard, based upon Terri Sammarco, knowing how
     much she had to live for, knowing how
     hopelessly addicted she was, feeling like a
     junky trying to get off drugs, wanting to quit.
     Crying, but unable.  Thinking about everything
     we heard about Philip Morris, we are going to
     suggest to you that you put no more than
     5 percent of the responsibility on Theresa
     Sammarco, and 95 percent on Philip Morris.
          Of course, it is up to you, but think
     about all the things that Philip Morris did to
     keep addicted smokers like Theresa Sammarco
     smoking.
          Thank you very much for your attention
     throughout this whole trial.  Thank you very
     much for your attention today.


                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. SCAROLA:  Good afternoon, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          What I will be speaking to you about for
     just a few minutes at this point in the trial
     is what is probably going to be the most      difficult task that you will face during the
     course of your deliberations in this case.  And
     it is the most difficult because it is the area
     in which the law gives you the least guidance.

          As you go through the jury instructions
     with regard to all of the issues that Hardee
     spoke you to about, you are going to find some
     very specific instructions that will lead you
     unerringly to a just result if you carefully
     examine those instructions.
          But when it comes to making a
     determination as to how you translate the loss
     that John Sammarco, Senior, has suffered into a
     dollar verdict, the totality of what the law
     tells you is summarized here.
          You are told:  "There is no exact standard
     for fixing the compensation to be awarded.  Any
     such award should be fair and just.  Write on
     the verdict form in dollars the amount of
     damages which the greater weight of the
     evidence shows John Sammarco, Senior, sustained
     as a result of her, Terri Sammarco's, death,
     including any damages he's reasonably certain
     to incur or experience in the future." 3846
          There is no exact standard.
          So one of the important responsibilities
     that the lawyers in a case like this have is to
     provide you some guidance as to how you might
     go about arriving at a fair and just verdict,
     an award that is fair and just compensation for
     the enormous loss that John Sammarco, Senior,
     has suffered in the past and will continue to
     suffer through the balance of the statistically
     anticipated joint life expectancies of John and
     Terri Sammarco had Terri's life not been
     tragically cut short.
          What can I say about that?  We have tried
     very hard in the presentation of the evidence
     to you to give you a foundation from which you
     would be able to have some insight into the
     magnitude of John's loss without ever appealing
     to your sympathy.
          You know from the evidence that's been
     presented that in March of 1997, the Sammarco
     family's world was turned inside out and upside
     down.  It was a pretty remarkable world before
     March of 1997, not -- not unaffected by the
     same kinds of trials and tribulations that
     every human life is exposed to and that every 3847
     family endures, but it was a remarkable family.
     It is a truly remarkable family.  But it lost
     its center.
          It was a life the pleasures of which were
     epitomized by a gathering around the table that
     John Sammarco built with his own hands to share
     a meal that Terri cooked with her own hands,
     pasta and gravy, surrounded by children and
     grandchildren and extended family and friends.
     It was a life in which John and Terri were just
     beginning to reap the rewards of the hard labor
     in which they had engaged with great
     satisfaction for faith, for family, and for a
     future that they planned to share together.
          And then like a lightning bolt, cancer
     reared its ugly head and a war began.  It had
     been there.  It had been growing.  And in
     retrospect, the family lives with the thought
     that maybe there were things that we could have
     and should have and would have seen with the
     benefit of hindsight that's 20/20, but we
     didn't.  And it struck us like a lightning bolt
     and war began.
          And John for 17 months sat and held his
     wife's hand while the chemicals were pumped 3848
     into her veins.  He sat out in the waiting room
     and he prayed while the radiation was aimed at
     those cancer cells.  He watched his wife be
     eaten away by disease.  He helplessly watched
     for 17 months as cancer spread to her brain and
     began to destroy the love of his life.
          So how -- how can you begin to put a
     dollar figure on that 17 months?
          And what about the 16 years since that
     time, when every time John Sammarco walks
     through his front door, there's the
     poster-sized picture of John and Terri.  When
     every direction that he turns in that house,
     you see another picture of Terri and the
     family, Terri and her grandchildren.  The notes
     on the refrigerator.  There today, every day
     for every year, every month, every week, every
     waking hour, how do you begin to put a price
     tag on that?  And knowing that it doesn't end
     here.  It continues on for some, if I remember
     the number, six more years.  And we are going
     to look at that.
          What can we do, how can we put -- how can
     we put a number onto that?
          Well, I'm going to suggest something to 3849
     you, and then I'm going to try to put that
     number in context.
          But before I do that, I want to be sure
     that you understand, we are not here to ask you
     for sympathy.  You know, you know how many
     tears have already been shed by John and for
     John and will continue to be shed at every
     family gathering when Terri's absence is
     palpable.  You know that.
          We don't want your sympathy.  A verdict
     infected by sympathy is an unjust verdict.
          Justice.  How do you do justice?  You do
     justice by eliminating sympathy from your
     verdict and making absolutely sure that to the
     fullest extent possible your verdict reflects
     empathy.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
     a golden rule argument and that is improper.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. SCAROLA:  May I be heard, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Just rephrase it and move on.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Sympathy means you hurt and
     I hurt with you.  Do not render a verdict out
     of shared hurt.  Render a verdict that reflects
     understanding.  You hurt, and I have taken 3850
     time and effort to understand that hurt.  I am
     rendering a verdict that to the very best I
     possibly can reflects a full and complete
     understanding of all you've been through and
     all you're going to go through.  No sympathy.
     Understanding, comprehension, from the glimpse
     into the Sammarcos' lives that you have had,
     from the glimpse into John Sammarco's life that
     you have had, render a verdict that reflects
     understanding.
          So these are the numbers that I suggest to
     you.
          For the 17 months in the past, from March
     of '97 through August 26, 1998, I suggest to
     you that fair and reasonable compensation is
     $100,000 per month, that's $1.7 million, for
     having endured that horrendous, tragic,
     helpless experience of watching the love of his
     life eaten away by cancer.
          For the 15-1/2 years since Terri's death,
     from August 26th, 1998, until today in this
     courtroom, 15-1/2 years, $500,000 a year,
     $7.75 million.
          For the seven additional years, that's the
     joint life expectancy based upon the charts 3851
     that we have seen, $500,000 a year,
     $3.5 million.
          Total compensation for 23 years, 11 months
     of mental pain and suffering, $12,950,000.
     That's a tremendous amount of money, isn't it?
     For an enormous loss.
          So, how do we put that in perspective?
     How do we -- how do we justify those kinds of
     numbers when we are left with a task as to
     which the law provides no guidance?
          Well, we are told that our verdict must be
     based upon the evidence in this case.  So what
     has the evidence in this case shown us about
     what people are paid for the burdens they are
     asked to carry?
          Because that's what we are doing.  We are
     paying John Sammarco for the burden that he is
     being asked to carry.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Two minutes.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
          There have been 8,942 days of suffering in
     the past and suffering in the future for which
     there must be compensation to John Sammarco.
     That's what all those other numbers add up to.
     8,942. 3852
          Well, Dr. Keller --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor,
     improper comparative valuation.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Dr. Keller gets paid $6,000
     a day for carrying his burden on behalf of
     Philip Morris.  That's $53,655,000.  That's how
     much Dr. Keller charges for carrying a burden.
          If we take the higher number that he said
     wasn't a raise, that he's been charging since
     the beginning, $8,000; that's $71,536,000 for
     Dr. Keller carrying the burden that Philip
     Morris imposed upon him.
          There are 16 waking hours in a day.  8,942
     days, 143,072 waking hours -- only waking
     hours -- we are not counting the sleepless
     nights, any of the sleepless nights -- 143,072
     hours times the lowest rate that Dr. Keller
     charges to carry the burden for Philip Morris,
     that's $53,652,000.
          MR. KELLY:  Improper per diem argument,
     Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Florida's current minimum
     hourly wage is $7.93 an hour.  If John Sammarco 3853
     were to be paid for the waking hours when he
     must carry this burden, at just the minimum
     wage of the state of Florida, $1,135,000.
     Let's put this in perspective.  Is this a
     minimum wage job that John has been asked to
     do?  I suggest no.
          And if you tried to buy tickets today to
     the current showing at the Broward Center for
     the Performing Arts and you got the good
     tickets, if any of those seats were still
     available, $324 for about three hours
     entertainment to relieve the pain or burden of
     whatever it is that you would like to get away
     from.  That's more than a hundred dollars an
     hour.  A hundred dollars an hour to be
     entertained.  That's $14,307,200.
          So how did we get to these numbers?  Well,
     we got to them -- we got to them trying to put
     John's loss in perspective and find a rational
     basis for translating that loss into dollars
     and cents as difficult as that is, in spite of
     the fact that there is no guidance in the law.
          And we look at those things around us and
     our common sense and our common experience and
     we said, this is more than a minimum wage job 3854
     and it's got to be worth at least something
     close to what we pay to go see a show at the
     Broward Center for the Performing Arts.
          So these are the suggestions that I made
     for you.  They are not binding.  I suggest to
     you that they are reasonable minimums.
          I ask you to consider them carefully.  I
     ask you to return a verdict free of sympathy
     and reflective as much as it possibly can be
     reflective of a full and complete understanding
     of the loss that John has suffered.
          I will have an opportunity to speak to you
     again, after defense counsel has had their
     chance to speak to you.  And I will, at that
     time, I assure you, join in giving thanks for
     the incredible dedication that you folks have
     shown to this job.
          Thank you very much.


                  CLOSING REBUTTAL
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you very much.  May it
     please the court.  Ladies and gentlemen.
          This is what I want to talk about.  I will
     never have the time to address everything with
     you that I would like to say, but there's one
     thing that I told you that I would say that I
     must absolutely take time to do, and that is,
     to join in the statements that were made by
     both Hardee and Mr. Kelly about how much we are
     indebted to you for the sacrifices that you
     have made to be here.  The strength of this
     jury system rests squarely upon the willingness
     of folks like you to make the kinds of enormous 3956
     sacrifices that you have made in order to
     assist us in resolving this dispute.
          And personally, on Hardee's behalf, but
     most particularly on behalf of John and the
     Sammarco family, we are extremely grateful to
     you and know that you will do justice because
     you have dedicated yourselves so faithfully to
     this task.  Thank you very much.
          The first question that you have been told
     repeatedly you are going to address is the
     question of addiction.  You have been told that
     you have the discretion to accept whatever
     definition of "addiction" you want to accept.
          Well, that isn't true, and the reason it
     isn't true is because Judge Henning is going to
     tell you, you must accept these facts as true,
     because they are stipulated facts.
          And among the stipulated facts, number 4,
     nicotine in cigarette smoke is addictive.  Is
     addictive.
          You cannot use a definition such as the
     definition that has been discussed earlier in
     this testimony about the need for intoxication,
     because everybody agrees nicotine is not
     intoxicating.  It does not fit that definition 3957
     of "addiction."  But because there's a
     stipulation that nicotine is addictive, the
     definition that you must use is one that fits,
     nicotine.
          Nicotine is addictive.  Terri Sammarco was
     clearly addicted to nicotine pursuant to any
     definition except one that would require that
     she become intoxicated by smoking.
          I suggest to you that the stipulation,
     compelled by the evidence in this case, that
     stipulation makes the answer to question
     number 1 obvious and easy.
          There is another stipulation.  Theresa
     Sammarco died of lung cancer caused by her
     smoking cigarettes.  That is a stipulation that
     was compelled by the overwhelming evidence in
     this case that the type of lung cancer that
     Terri Sammarco had is caused almost exclusively
     by lung cancer, and her adenocarcinoma of the
     lung was caused by 45 years of very heavy
     smoking.
          So nicotine in cigarette smoke is
     addictive.  Theresa Sammarco was smoking
     because she was addicted at least -- at least
     in material part, and therefore, Theresa 3958
     Sammarco died of lung cancer caused by her
     smoking cigarettes.  The answer to question
     number 2 is yes.
          That brings us to question number 3.
     Question number 3 is what was described in
     opening statement by opposing counsel as the
     manifestation issue.
          When you get Judge Henning's instructions
     in writing and you take them back there with
     you and read them carefully, as I'm sure you
     will, you will find that the word
     "manifestation" appears nowhere in those
     instructions.  The court does very carefully
     define the standard.  The standard -- and
     incidentally, before I skip this, dependence,
     habit, intoxication, they're all irrelevant.
     They just don't make any difference.
          You will find that what we must prove with
     regard to the November 21, 1996 cutoff date is
     covered in three instructions.
          And I suggest to you that it might be
     helpful, because I've tried to do things in the
     short amount of time that I have that will --
     that will make your job a little bit easier,
     you might want to just jot down that when you 3959
     get to question number 3, the instructions that
     deal with question number 3 are instructions 8,
     13 and 14.
          You are going to read all of them, but you
     might want to take those and put them on the
     side over here and say, okay, these are the
     instructions now that deal with this question.
     Let's reread them again before we answer the
     question.
          And what you're going to see when you look
     at those three instructions is that the court
     will tell you, what must be proved is that as
     of November 21, 1996, Theresa Sammarco had
     signs or symptoms that were diagnosable with
     the benefit of hindsight as lung cancer.
          Now, I watched the clock and opposing
     counsel spoke about this question for one hour
     and 20 minutes before we took a break.  And in
     that one hour and 20 minutes, the word
     "hindsight" never passed his lips.  And there's
     a reason why it never passed his lips and
     there's a simple illustration as to why.
          Remember he spoke about whether there was
     a quarter in his briefcase?  And as we stand
     here right now, we don't know whether there was 3960
     a quarter in his briefcase or not.  And I guess
     we could take it downstairs and we could run it
     through the x-ray machine, and we might be able
     to see that disk on the x-ray machine, and
     maybe we could tell it was a quarter and maybe
     it would look like one of those round batteries
     or some -- a washer or who knows what it might
     look like.
          But we could take the briefcase, we could
     open it up, and I promise I'm not going to do
     this, we could open it up and we could dump it
     out, and then we could look and we could see,
     is there a quarter there?  And once we found
     out that there was, in fact, a quarter by
     opening up the briefcase and dumping it out,
     with the benefit of hindsight, we will know
     that it was there because the briefcase sat
     there the entire time.
          Now, we didn't open up Terri Sammarco's
     lung because there was no surgery, but we
     reached inside her body, and we reached inside
     the body with a needle that extracted cells
     from that very large tumor that was in her
     lung, and we pulled out those cells and we
     found out, this is an adenocarcinoma.  At that 3961
     point in time, we knew what was inside Terri
     Sammarco's lungs as of the time that we
     extracted the cells.
          Now, the question then becomes, how long
     were those cells in Terri Sammarco's lung?  And
     everybody in this case agrees, everybody agrees
     that no one can tell with precision, and that's
     another phrase that we heard repeatedly from --
     from opposing counsel, somewhere I have it.
     Here you go.
          The phrase that we heard repeatedly was,
     "We cannot know precisely how big that tumor
     was at any given point in time."
          And I absolutely agree, and Dr. Abel
     agreed and Dr. Keller agreed, we don't know
     precisely how big it was at any point in time.
          And if what we were required to prove is,
     with the benefit of hindsight, how big was the
     tumor at any given point in time, then the
     answer to that question would need to be no, we
     don't know.  Medical science has not reached
     that point.
          But what medical science has told us, and
     Dr. Keller has admitted this as well, what
     medical science has told us is that we know 3962
     what size it probably was.  Because the
     standard is not proving precisely how big the
     tumor was at any given time, the standard, what
     we are required to prove by a greater weight of
     the evidence is, was it probably, was it more
     likely than not, diagnosable as of November 21,
     1996?  That's the date down at the bottom,
     that's what was referred to as the
     manifestation date.
          So what does medical science tell us?
     Forget about Dr. Abel.  Put him aside for just
     a moment.  What does Dr. Keller tell us that
     medical science says?
          In the three hours that he has
     investigated this topic, three hours, he said,
     "All of the studies that I am aware of" -- and
     there were many studies of adenocarcinomas --
     "all placed the median doubling time at 300
     days, 303 days, 305 days, right around 300
     days, the median doubling time."
          The fastest doubling time ever observed in
     any scientific study that anyone has seen is 43
     days.  Dr. Keller admitted that.
          Now, do we know whether this was the
     fastest adenocarcinoma in terms of its growth 3963
     rate ever observed by science?  Or the slowest
     adenocarcinoma every observed by medical
     science?  We don't know that.
          We do know, because Dr. Keller admitted
     it, that just because you've finally identified
     it, its growth rate doesn't change.  Its growth
     rate doesn't change.
          Do we know precisely what that was, no.
     Do we know probably what it was, yes.
     Probably, the probabilities are that it behaved
     like all of the other adenocarcinomas that were
     observed by medical science, and the likely
     doubling rate was 300 days.
          But what did we do for you?  We said,
     let's assume that it wasn't 300 days, that it
     was fully three times faster than that.  It
     doubles at 100 days.  That means it was
     2.2 centimeters on November 21, 1996.
          Let's assume it was even faster than that,
     it was 60 days.  That means it was
     1.8 centimeters.
          Let's assume that it was the
     fastest-growing adenocarcinoma ever reported by
     medical science, 43 days.  That means it was
     1.4 centimeters on November 21, 1996. 3964
          And when it was finally biopsied later and
     found out to be cancer, adenocarcinoma, with
     the benefit of hindsight, we know that the
     1.4-centimeter diagnosable sign of cancer was
     cancer.  We know that.
          So the only way that question number 3 can
     be answered no is if you were to ignore the
     court's instructions on the law and ignore the
     fact that we have the benefit of hindsight in
     making this determination.  We never need to
     reach whatever contested issues there may be
     about symptoms and whether they are specific or
     nonspecific symptoms.
          Again, I suggest to you that with the
     benefit of hindsight, we know why there was
     finger clubbing.  We know why.  Dr. Keller told
     us, in 30 years of practice, he has never seen
     finger clubbing except in association with
     late-stage cancer.
          Now, could it have been caused by
     something else?  Sure.  Could all of those
     symptoms have been caused by something else?
     Is it possible?  The answer to that question,
     answered honestly by Dr. Abel, was yes, it's
     possible, they could have been caused by 3965
     something else.
          But now that we know that the cancer was
     there, these are symptoms that are probably
     associated with cancer.  The greater weight of
     the evidence associates them with cancer.
          You take all of it together, you take all
     of the signs and all of the symptoms and you
     put them together, and there's absolutely no
     question about the fact that with the benefit
     of hindsight, Terri Sammarco had cancer on
     November 21, 1996.  It was there.
          And that's really the issue.  Can we say
     now with the benefit of hindsight that the
     cancer was there by November 21, 1996, or did
     Terri Sammarco get hit by cancer lightning?
          A sign is defined, a symptom is defined.
     That's what appears on those other two pages,
     page 13 and page 14, that I suggested you need
     to look at.  That tells you signs and symptoms.
     And they are the same definitions that both of
     the doctors agreed to.
          Symptoms are subjective, it's what the
     patient perceives.  Signs are objective, it's
     what the doctor can observe.
          Signs and symptoms in this case clearly 3966
     support the finding that this disease was not
     only present, but it fell within the blue
     circle.  It was diagnosable as of November 21,
     with the benefit of hindsight, because we had a
     lesion that was substantially larger, almost
     four times larger, three times, almost four
     times larger than with the benefit of hindsight
     we know can be detected with a PET scan.
          It only takes .4 centimeters, only
     .4 centimeters, and this was 1.4 centimeters.
     If we assume it to have been the absolutely
     fastest duplicating doubling adenocarcinoma
     ever observed by science.
          While I have this here, there was, you'll
     recall, a criticism for not calling Dr. Bates,
     Dr. Jancko, Dr. Morse, the radiologist, and the
     pathologist.
          Well, I think you all know that there is
     the power of subpoena to compel witnesses to
     appear in the courtroom that is available to
     both sides.  Anyone is capable of subpoenaing
     anyone that they believe to have relevant and
     material information.  And if you can't get
     them here into the courtroom, you can take
     their depositions in advance under oath and you 3967
     can present their testimony that way.
          So it's not that the plaintiff didn't call
     Dr. Bates, Dr. Jancko, Dr. Morse, a
     radiologist, or a pathologist, it's that both
     parties decided they weren't going to help you
     find the truth in this case.  That's why they
     weren't called.
          But then ask yourselves, why didn't the
     defense call Dr. Dorce, whose name you heard in
     opening statement?  Why was there no oncologist
     called by the defense?  Why was there no
     addiction expert called by the defense?  Why
     wasn't there a historian to come in and contest
     the historic documents that were described to
     you in detail with extraordinary ability to
     recall dates, names, times, places of a man who
     has studied these documents now for decades?
     Dr. Cummings, the world's most renowned
     authority on the secret documents of tobacco.
          I'm going to race through this very
     quickly.
          This is an overview that addresses issues
     with regard to the apportionment of fault and
     reliance as well and there's some overlap here.
          What does Philip Morris and what do 3968
     Philip Morris' co-conspirators, the other
     tobacco companies who interrupt their Christmas
     vacation to wind up at the hotel in Manhattan
     and plan this strategy to try to salvage their
     business when people stop buying their
     cigarettes, because they have now been linked
     to cancer?  They give away free samples of
     their addictive product to soldiers.
          MR. KELLY:  Your Honor, I'm going to
     object as improper argument, not related to the
     harm that Mrs. Sammarco sustained.
          THE COURT:  Objection is overruled.
          MR. SCAROLA:  They buy the endorsement of
     sports heros, TV and movie stars and other
     celebrities.  They spend a billion dollars a
     year -- you saw that figure in evidence -- a
     billion dollars a year promoting the sex
     appeal, the power, the sophistication of a
     product --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor, that is
     specifically preempted for the period of time
     after 1982.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Your Honor, it is not
     preempted.
          THE COURT:  I remind the jury that they 3969
     will make the determination of what was in the
     evidence and what they've heard and what
     they've seen.  What the lawyers say is merely
     argument.
          You may continue.
          MR. SCAROLA:  They promote the sex appeal,
     the power, the sophistication of a product that
     they knew to be addictive and lethal.  They
     create a false controversy about the health
     risks of smoking, discredit the science that
     proves the product is lethal, they deny
     addiction, they demean the public health
     officials, including the Surgeon General, who
     are trying to educate the smoking public.  They
     manipulate the nicotine levels of cigarettes to
     increase their addiction levels.  They addict
     children --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. SCAROLA:  -- when their brains are
     most susceptible.
          MR. KELLY:  Sorry, Counsel.
          Improper argument concerning the in limine
     order.
          MR. SCAROLA:  This has nothing to do with
     that subject matter, Your Honor.  It has to do 3970
     with the physiology, which is a matter that has
     clearly been testified to.
          THE COURT:  Continue.
          MR. SCAROLA:  They addict children when
     their brains are most susceptible to the
     physiological changes that promote the
     strongest addictions.  They promote filtered
     cigarettes and safe --
          MR. KELLY:  Your Honor, I have a motion on
     that when we have a break.
          THE COURT:  Continue.
          MR. SCAROLA:  They promote filtered
     cigarettes as a safe alternative to quitting
     while concealing knowledge that filters don't
     work.  They promote low-tar and nicotine
     cigarettes, Lights and Ultra Lights as a safe
     alternative to quitting, knowing that they are
     even more dangerous than full-flavor
     cigarettes.  That's what they do.
          And when Theresa Sammarco falls prey to
     those schemes, that calculated scheme by buying
     and using the product that the cigarette
     conspirators induced her to buy --
          THE CLERK:  Five minutes.
          MR. SCAROLA:  -- enticed her to buy. 3971
          Thank you.
          They blame her for making the choice that
     she was trapped into by their marketing.
          When Theresa Sammarco continues to smoke
     to feed the nicotine receptors in her altered
     brain, they blame her for choosing to become a
     nicotine addict, even though they knew about
     those changes, but hid that knowledge.
          When Theresa Sammarco misses a chance to
     quit in the early '50s, when she's just
     beginning to smoke, because the link between
     cancer and smoking is discredited by the
     cigarette companies, who tell her, pay no
     attention to those scientific studies, when she
     believes them, they blame her for choosing to
     believe what they said.
          When Terri and the rest of the smoking
     public rely on their promise to remove anything
     harmful in cigarette smoke as soon as it is
     identified, they blame Terri for choosing to
     believe a promise, that they knew, but Terri
     didn't, was absolutely impossible to keep.
          The internal documents, you've seen them.
     They knew they could never do it, but they were
     promising that they would. 3972
          And in the process, Terri becomes even
     more addicted.  They blame Terri for not
     knowing she was being treated by the cigarette
     conspirators, like an addicted lab rat.  They
     blame her for not knowing the truth that was
     hidden about filters and Lights.  They blame
     her for daring to think that what you were told
     in opening statement was true.
          Nicotine is a natural part of the plant.
     All we are doing is providing what nature
     provides when what we now know is what they are
     doing is taking low-grade tobacco and taking
     stems and extracting the nicotine from the junk
     and then spraying new nicotine on the junk and
     selling their most --
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, your Honor,
     misstates the evidence.
          MR. SCAROLA:  -- addictive product.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          Continue.
          MR. SCAROLA:  And selling their most
     addictive product, the most addictive product
     they are capable of producing, while deceiving
     the smoking public about the levels of
     addiction.  When the truth is nicotine gets 3973
     sprayed on whatever they choose to put in
     there.
          Now the loving family that surrounded
     Theresa Sammarco during all of her adult life
     could not overcome the effects of that
     intentional effort to keep Terri Sammarco
     buying cigarettes, filling the coffers of this
     defendant and serving as a replacement smoker
     for one of those 450,000 other Americans that
     they were killing.
          MR. KELLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  State
     Farm-Williams.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. SCAROLA:  It was finally, although the
     loving family wasn't enough to overcome the
     strength of Terri's addiction, it was finally
     the grieving family that surrounded her death
     bed, that was able to provide her the strength
     to overcome that addiction.  And what does it
     tell us about how strong that addiction must
     have been, that that's what it took to finally
     do the job?  Can there be any doubt about the
     level of love that this mother had for her
     children?  About the level of love that she had
     for her husband.  About the level of love that 3974
     she had for her grandchildren.  How strong must
     this addiction have been that even that much
     love couldn't do it.
          What do we know?  What do we know about
     addiction?  We know from Dr. Cummings and we
     know from -- time?
          THE CLERK:  One.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
          We know that motivation isn't enough to
     overcome addiction, successful quitting
     requires motivation, times external support,
     plus one.
          The motivation and the external support
     are not enough alone.  If motivation is zero,
     it doesn't happen.  If external support is
     zero, it doesn't happen.  It's got to be
     greater to overcome the addiction.  We know
     that.  So we know how strongly addicted Terri
     was.
          And remember these, Concealment of Smoking
     Cancer Relationship.  This is -- did this
     continue after 1982?  The answer to that
     question was yes.  Concealment of nicotine
     addiction.  Did it continue after 1982?  It
     continued to 1988. 3975
          THE CLERK:  Time.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Filter deception.  Did it
     continue to 1998?  Yes.
          Light, low-tar nicotine deception.  Did it
     continue after 1982?  Yes.  It continued to
     1998.
          THE CLERK:  Time, Your Honor.
          MR. KELLY:  Did the buzzer go off, Your
     Honor?
          THE CLERK:  Yeah.
          MR. SCAROLA:  May I have 30 more seconds,
     Your Honor, just to finish.
          THE COURT:  Finish.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
          Ultralight deception continued to 1998.
          Genetic mutation due to filter vents.
     Continued through 1998.
          Every one of Terri's family members were
     asked:  "Before you heard the testimony that
     you heard in this courtroom, did you know that
     those things were false?
          And their answer was "No."
          No.  The Sammarco household was deceived.
     Terri Sammarco was deceived.  She believed she
     was smoking safer cigarettes after 1982.  She 3976
     believed that.  She was deceived.
          What I never got to, but thank you so
     much.
