          MR. PAIGE:  Good morning.
          JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. PAIGE:  And I just want to make sure, am I
     blocking you at all?
          JUROR:  No.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  But thank you-all for being
     here, and I know when I sit down, I'm going to 4603
     speak for a while and I'm going to try not to go as
     long as -- I mean not as fast as the judge went.
     I'll try to slow it down a little bit, and we'll
     try to go through some of the instructions and some
     of the evidence and some of the law.
          And I will say this, that, you know, we've
     watched each and every one of you and we know that
     you guys have been paying attention and taking
     notes and you have been asking questions.
          And so what I say now and when I get done,
     what Mr. Bayuk and Ms. Henninger say, you probably
     know most of all this already, and so this is just
     our opportunity to speak to you, and we thank you
     so much and we know that -- I know that you
     remember, the judge has pointed out, we try cases
     in front of different judges all the time, and I've
     never been in front of this judge before, but one
     of the phrases that she uses is that we're on a --
     that this has been a journey.
          And I just remember, you know, it seems like
     it was yesterday, but it was a long time ago when
     there was, you know, hundreds of you, and I kind of
     remember where each of you were sitting, and it has
     been a journey, and you-all have your own families
     and your friends and your work, and to be here for 4604
     this length of the time and pay attention and
     really listening is appreciated because, you know,
     not everybody would do it.  And we know that you
     guys have done it, you've paid attention.
          And the journey has not only been here in
     court, but we've been on a journey, we've showed
     you things, hopefully, that -- well, hopefully some
     of it was interesting, but hopefully, a lot of it
     that you've learned something and that you've seen
     things that you didn't know.  Because I know when
     we come here and we speak to people and we ask
     people questions, such as, you know, would you work
     for a tobacco company or do you have preconceived
     notions, and everybody comes here starting out
     even, but now when you hear the truth and you hear
     what really happened and we know things that we
     couldn't have known, that you couldn't have known,
     there is no way you would have known it.  You are
     leaving here with a different perspective of when
     you came here.
          And, you know, a friend of mine who I know,
     I'm very good friends with, he does kind of the
     similar law that I do, he tries tobacco cases, and
     he told me about a song and I looked it up in a
     previous trial, but it's from Elton John, maybe 4605
     some -- everybody knows who Elton John is, right?
     And the song, you probably heard it, it's Mona Lisa
     and the Mad Hatters, and there is a line in the
     song, and it says, "I thought I knew, but now I
     know that rose trees never grow in New York City."
     But the important thing is I thought I knew, but
     now I know.
          And we now -- you guys now know so much more
     than you knew three weeks ago.  You know, maybe
     when you came here, you thought you knew --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I'm sorry to object.
     I object to this, golden rule.  The issue is not
     what the jury knew, the issue is what Mr. Schleider
     knew.
          THE COURT:  No, I didn't hear that so I'm
     going to overrule it.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you.
          So, yeah, and I guess I want to be clear that
     you've learned a lot during this trial, there is
     certain things that you couldn't have known, you
     know, when people come here, before they come here
     and they know smokers, maybe, you know, maybe
     before people -- some people don't like smokers,
     you know.  You know, now you know what they go
     through. 4606
          And a lot of people feel sorry for them when
     they know that they've been targeted as children,
     they started as teenagers, they live a life of
     addiction, they try to stop when they can, and a
     lot of them died painful, horrible deaths, and it's
     not -- you know, that's what we're really here for.
     And that's why it's such an important issue.  And
     you guys have so much power, so much
     responsibility.  You know, not everybody gets to do
     that.
          So it is a privilege.  And it's a privilege
     for me to be here speaking to you guys.  You know,
     we all had different lives before we were lawyers
     and I have to cross-examine some of these doctors
     that went to Harvard and, you know, smart guys.
     And, you know, before I was a lawyer, I worked as a
     roofer, so for me to be here -- I was the kettle
     man, the guy behind the kettle.  And the last roof
     I put on, while I was in law school, was on the
     Hilton on Griffin Road that they just knocked down.
     And so for me to be here, in front of you people,
     it's a privilege and it's just so important.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  I think we're good to go.
          MR. PAIGE:  So when we talk about now I know,
     you know, what you thought you knew, but now you 4607
     know, we didn't know coming in here, a lot of
     people didn't know until they see the evidence that
     this is what these cases are about.  You know, they
     target kids, that's what their business model is,
     they go after kids.  Without youth smoking, there
     would be no epidemic of proportion --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object to time
     frame.  It's not in evidence about what we're
     doing.
          THE COURT:  It's closing argument.  It's
     overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, I'm talking about the
     evidence in the case.  And we're going to show you
     the documents that talk about youth marketing that
     are relevant to this case, okay?  But we know
     Andrew Schleider, we call him Mr. Schleider, but
     Andrew was a little boy at one point and he
     deserved better.  And when you target children, you
     know, we're supposed to protect children.  We're
     supposed to lead them, not mislead them.  We're
     supposed to embrace them.  You know, they're our
     future.
          And so when you take a child and you target
     them and you give them a drug and the life of drug
     addiction and then they get older and you blame 4608
     them and call -- and blame the victim, it's a
     very --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object, we have a
     motion in limine on that.
          THE COURT:  Uh, no, it's overruled.  It will
     be part of the record.
          MR. PAIGE:  It's very convenient.  But we're
     here today, and that's why we're here, we're going
     to ask at some point that you -- you know, we're
     going to ask for fair compensation for
     Mrs. Schleider, for what they did to her, her
     husband.  We're going to ask for fair compensation
     for the daughter, but importantly, we're going to
     ask that they be punished, that they be punished
     for what they did.  And that's what punitive
     damages are.
          You know, you can't do what they did, Andrew
     Schleider was one kid.  He was targeted when he was
     a kid.  He was one teen of many, and that's their
     business model.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, object, none of this
     is in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  It's closing argument.
     It's overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  And so this is Andrew, this is 4609
     what he went through, this is his life.  So when we
     ask, you know, people, there is a jury instruction
     that the judge just read to you that corporations
     have to be treated like people.  Okay?  But when
     you want to be treated like a person, you have to
     act like a person.  You have to act like a human
     being.  You can't just do what they did and not be
     held accountable for that.
          There is a book, "Everything I Need to Know I
     Learned in Kindergarten".  Maybe some of you have
     read it or heard about it, but it's be nice to
     people.  Don't hurt people.  Don't lie.  You know,
     you can't lie and hurt people and target people to
     get ahead in life and then not be held accountable
     and ask not to be punished.
          I have a son who is nine years old.  He got in
     trouble in school and I punished him and I said,
     look, you need to make this --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object to -- none of
     this is in evidence, this is improper closing.
     It's not in evidence.  Maybe we can approach, I
     don't want to make a speaking objection.
          THE COURT:  No, it's overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm good.  I'm going to approach?
          THE COURT:  No, just continue. 4610
          MR. PAIGE:  It's a basic premise in our
     society, okay, when a child does something wrong,
     you tell the child, you need to -- you need to make
     it right, make it right, and I'm going to punish
     you because you need to know that you're not going
     to do it again and your friends need to know that
     you got punished because you want to deter others
     from doing it as well.
          And that's what we're here for today, to be
     honest with you, that's why it's so important,
     because these corporations, they can't do this and
     get away with it.  They can't do this for 50 years,
     450,000 Americans die every year, okay?  And that's
     a lot of people.
          And these are the people who -- who are part
     of it, who lied.  And they lied and they made a lot
     of money and they lived nice lives and they took
     advantage of people, and that's what they built
     their business on, and that's what this case is
     about.
          You know, this gentleman, for some reason the
     other day I was driving down the road and I thought
     of Joe Cullman, and it was a day, I think it was
     last weekend, and I was feeling good, and I was
     like, oh, I feel peaceful driving down the road. 4611
     And I thought to myself I wonder what Joe Cullman
     would think of when he would drive down the road
     knowing that he --
          MR. BAYUK:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  I'm sorry
     to interrupt, I know this is closing, but there is
     no evidence of this.
          THE COURT:  It's argument.
          MR. BAYUK:  This is a summation of the
     evidence.
          THE COURT:  Well, it's -- I understand that.
     It's argument.  I'm going to overrule it.
          MR. PAIGE:  As lawyers, we learn in law school
     different objections and there is nothing wrong
     with objecting, and that's fine.  And I'm just
     trying to tell you my -- I represent Ms. Schleider.
     I'm trying to tell you why we're here and why we
     think this is so important.
          And you have to think about these people.
     These are the people who, you know, corporations
     wanted to be treated like people.  These are the
     people who did it, some of them.  And these are the
     people you have to think, what goes through their
     mind when they drive down the road and they're
     thinking, hey, or back then when they were thinking
     we're targeting kids and we know that we're going 4612
     to -- 90 percent of -- or three-quarters of them
     that we can get started will go into adulthood and
     smoke.  And 90 percent of all of our market is
     based upon teenage smokers.  And we know that 50
     percent of them are going to grow up and die, and
     8.5 million are currently living with
     smoking-related illnesses, that's the evidence in
     this case.
          So when we talk about 450,000 who die every
     year, it doesn't seem -- you know, it's a number
     that maybe you grow numb to, but if you wrap your
     mind around that number and you think about it,
     what that means is if there is a plane crash
     tomorrow and --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, there is no evidence,
     this is totally improper argument.  I need to make
     a motion on this.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Paige?
          MR. PAIGE:  I --
          THE COURT:  You know, I don't know where
     you're going.
          MR. PAIGE:  I mean, I'm going the same place
     I've been before.
          THE COURT:  Yeah, I'm going to -- I'm going to
     overrule it. 4613
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  I'll note your objection for the
     record, Mr. Bayuk.
          MR. PAIGE:  So if a plane crashed, it would be
     big news, right?  People would be watching it on
     CNN and we would watch it and we would feel bad for
     those families and we would mourn with the families
     and everybody would feel bad, and it would be
     horrible.  450,000 is the equivalent --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I'm sorry to
     interrupt.  Can I just get a continuing objection?
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. BAYUK:  I need to make a motion, I have a
     number of objections to this.
          THE COURT:  That's fine.  Thank you.
          MR. PAIGE:  The number would be the equivalent
     in terms of number, just so you could wrap your
     mind around the harm being done, of three plane
     crashes every day for a year.  That would be about
     450,000 Americans.
          And that's why I say when you consider what
     they've done, the harm of what they've done, the
     fact that Andrew Schleider was in there, you have
     to judge him on the reasonable person standard, did
     he act reasonably, did he do something that was so 4614
     un- -- you know, out of the ordinary, was he
     special.
          He was no different than anybody else.  He was
     a kid.  He got targeted.  He got swept up into this
     thing.  He tried to quit and he died.  And that's
     the evidence in the case about how many people have
     died, and he was just one of them.
          So this is, you know, class membership, this
     is one of the things that are going to be on the
     verdict form.  So the first thing we have to prove,
     there are certain things we have to prove, that we
     hope we have proven and things that you'll have to
     find for us to get to the point where you can award
     punitive damages and you can award fair
     compensation to the family and hold them
     accountable for everything they did for 50 years
     and hold them accountable for, you know, one of the
     things we've talked about is motivation.
          You know, Dr. Castro, a nice gentleman, I have
     no ill will towards him, he's doing the best he
     can, I guess, but they talk a lot about motivation.
     But you have to think to yourself what motivated
     them?  What motivated these people to do what they
     did for so long, all of these companies to get
     together and do that, who would do that, and what 4615
     motivated them, anything else other than greed to
     put profits over human lives, which they did for 50
     years.
          So to hold them accountable for that greed,
     for that misplaced motivation, motivation that, you
     know, Andrew -- Andrew, they criticized because he
     didn't have enough motivation, he wasn't motivated
     enough.  Well, they had plenty of motivation, they
     had strong motivations, and to hold him accountable
     for this motivation that resulted in the death of
     her husband, we have to first -- you have to first
     determine if he is a class member.
          So you probably -- you know a little bit about
     it, but the class action is when Dr. Figlar was
     deposed, or his testimony, you probably -- maybe
     you don't remember, it was a video, we played it
     very early on, it was R.J. Reynolds' corporate
     representative, and I talked to him at the end a
     little bit about the Engle class action, but it was
     a class action from the '90s for smokers like
     Andrew Schleider who started smoking in the '40s
     and '50s, at a different time, a different world
     than we live in today, and it was a year-long trial
     and there was, you know, 7,000 exhibits, I think,
     in evidence. 4616
          So here you guys have some exhibits, and we've
     had a shorter trial, but here, this is what we want
     to make sure that he is rightfully and lawfully
     considered to be a member of the Engle class
     action.
          And so we feel that we've proven beyond -- you
     know, our burden of proof, I don't know where it
     is -- oh, there it is.  Our burden of proof is by
     the greater weight of the evidence, what is --
     what -- you know, what is more likely than not to
     have occurred.
          So we think that we've proven -- we don't have
     to prove beyond a reasonable doubt.  We don't have
     to prove with a hundred percent certainty.  There
     was a lot of talk about, oh, Andrew didn't have an
     autopsy.  You don't know for a hundred percent if
     he had this diagnosis or he had that diagnosis.  We
     don't have to prove that.  That's not our burden.
          And we ask, you know, respectfully and we know
     you'll do it, hold us to our burden, hold us to our
     burden, but this is our burden in a court of law.
     Nobody is going to jail.  This is not a criminal
     trial where it's beyond a reasonable doubt.  This
     is a burden that we have in these types of cases.
          So the first question is was he addicted to 4617
     cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was it a
     legal cause of the cancer that manifested on or
     before November 21st.  And we're going through
     that.  And the second question is the same with the
     COPD.
          And that's why we went through this, although
     the only damages that we're claiming is the
     wrongful death for his lung cancer, he could become
     a class member if the disease manifested, either
     one, within the class period, on or before
     November 21st, 1996.
          So we think it was clear both, either or, but
     we're not in your mind, so we don't know what
     you're going to do, so we tried to put in evidence
     of both and let you make a decision, it could have
     been one or both or neither, hopefully not neither,
     so.
          But what class membership is not about, the
     judge just read you the instructions, I think you
     will be able to get the instructions back with you
     and the verdict form, it's not about fault of
     either party.  We can't consider the -- you can't
     consider the Engle findings and you can't consider
     our admission of fault to determine whether or not
     she's {sic} a class member. 4618
          And I'm going to talk about our admission of
     the fault and why -- you know, what it meant, what
     exactly she admitted and how we think it should be
     applied.  But from the very first pleading in this
     case, Mrs. Schleider admitted partial
     responsibility for her husband in combination with
     what they did.  And that's what we admitted.  But
     that has nothing to do with class membership.
          Reliance on statements, you know, that has
     nothing to do with class membership.  That has to
     do with punitive damages that we're going to talk
     about.  Whether addicts lose control over their
     minds or can't control themselves, you know, that
     has nothing to do with it.  Whether addicts can
     quit.  We're not disputing that addicts can quit.
     All addicts can quit, we've talked about that with
     Dr. Drobes and Dr. Castro, whether you're addicted
     to cocaine, heroin, alcohol, nicotine, people can
     quit.
          If that was the test at being a class member,
     nobody would ever be a class member.  Okay?  So
     you're not going to see an instruction anywhere
     ever in any world, in any courtroom, in any jury
     room, that says if you find he could have quit,
     he's not a class member, that's not the law in the 4619
     case.
          Whether smokers share some responsibility.
     That's not at issue for class membership.  That has
     to do with comparative fault.  And we'll talk about
     that soon as well.
          So to be a class member, "In order to be
     regarded a legal cause of lung cancer and death,
     addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need
     not be the only cause."  Okay?  This is what you're
     going to be read -- or you were read.
          "Addiction to nicotine -- addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause
     of lung cancer and death even if it operates in
     combination with the acts of another or some other
     natural cause or some other cause if such other
     cause occurs at the same time as an addiction to
     cigarettes and such addiction contributes
     substantially to producing the lung cancer and
     death."
          So this is really the main issue, because it's
     been confusing.  You know, Dr. Castro at one point
     said, well, addiction to nicotine doesn't really
     cause lung cancer and death.  And honestly, I
     couldn't understand his explanation.  And it was --
     it's very well written in the -- in the Surgeon 4620
     General Reports and whatnot that it's recognized
     that addiction is a serious problem, it's a brain
     disease, and people who do become addicted do die,
     become very sick, and they know that.  They know
     it.  It's in their own documents.
          So you have to ask yourself when you're back
     there did the addiction play an important role,
     okay, because that's the --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I'm sorry, I object to
     that as misstating legal instruction, Your Honor
     instructed the jury, it's not an important role.
          MR. PAIGE:  Substantially --
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. PAIGE:  You all know what substantially
     means.  So substantially is something that's
     important.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, it's the same
     objection.  It's not important, it's a but-for
     cause.
          THE COURT:  All right, you can explain that in
     your closing.
          MR. PAIGE:  And so whether the addiction
     contributed substantially, whether it was an
     important cause that you could say but for the
     addiction to nicotine, without the addiction to 4621
     nicotine, would this man have smoked 40 to 45 years
     a pack and a half to two packs a day?  And the
     answer is clearly no.
          And, in fact, Ms. Henninger talked about how
     they spent a fortunate trying to sell nicotineless
     cigarettes to nicotine addicts.  And so we know
     that without the nicotine, there is no addiction,
     there is no death, and our world would probably --
     and Mr. Schleider would have been far better off,
     far better off.
          So but for the addiction, if he was not
     addicted, would he have smoked two packs a day for
     40 to 45 years of their unfiltered cigarettes?  Was
     he somebody who was an anomaly, who was just
     smoking for the taste and the nicotine had no
     effect?
          That's what they would want you to believe,
     they would want you to believe that, and if you
     believe that, he will be excluded from the class
     and --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, first of all, object
     as to what we want to believe.  And second of all,
     it's not a matter of excluding him from the class.
     They have the burden of proof.
          THE COURT:  Right. 4622
          MR. PAIGE:  Right, we have the burden of
     proving it.
          THE COURT:  All right, go ahead.
          MR. PAIGE:  We have the burden of proving it,
     and if you believe that he would have smoked
     without the addiction, he will be excluded from the
     class.
          And most respectfully, they would like to win
     the case, and if he's not a class member, they
     would win the case.  So that's what we're --
     actually been fighting over for the past three
     weeks, whether or not he has been a class member.
          So if you look at their own documents and you
     see -- and this is why it's important because
     they -- they now will try to tell you in closing
     argument that the nicotine addiction was not a
     cause of his death, that nicotine addiction,
     Dr. Castro said it to you under oath -- and that's
     why I said to Dr. Castro, because I had asked him
     at one point a question, and I wanted you to see
     his -- his -- and I'm going to go through
     believability of expert witnesses in a minute, but
     I wanted you to see how truthful Dr. Castro was
     going to be, how truthful Dr. Brooks was going to
     be with you. 4623
          And I asked them to tell you, to look at you
     and tell you if you really believed that a
     two-pack-a-day smoker for 40 to 45 years, who is
     really not addicted, not even for one day, not even
     mildly addicted, and he looked you right in the
     eyes and said, "No, I don't believe that."
          So here -- and that was after meeting with his
     lawyers for eight hours.  And I got criticized for
     meeting with my -- my expert from Moffitt Cancer
     Center, you know, there was --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, nobody criticized
     anybody.  I object to the characterization about
     people criticizing Mr. Paige.
          THE COURT:  I would ask you not to do a
     speaking objection.  Just state a legal objection.
          MR. BAYUK:  I object that it's improper and
     it's not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  All right.  It's overruled.  I'll
     note your objection for the record.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, you-all probably remember
     when Dr. Castro -- Dr. Drobes from Moffitt Cancer
     Center was on the stand and they put up the time
     records and said, oh, you met with Mr. Paige for 23
     minutes and you met with Mr. Paige for 15 minutes
     and it totaled about an hour and 45 minutes that I 4624
     met with them.
          And then when Dr. Castro was on the stand,
     they said how come Mr. Paige had to go to Moffitt
     Cancer Center and get an expert, one of the
     world-renowned cancer institutes in the world, he
     had to fly 45 minutes to get here.
          Meanwhile they're meeting with their experts
     for 8 hours, 20 hours, and their experts then look
     you in the eyes and say, oh, he wasn't even mildly
     addicted for a day.
          And to get a pulmonologist to come to court
     and tell you that this man didn't have COPD, they
     had to go all the way to Los Angeles.  He had to
     fly somebody in six hours away.  Do you know how
     many pulmonologists must be in the state of
     Florida?
          So, you know, I'm welcome -- I welcome to talk
     about anything.  I want to talk about Reader's
     Digest.  I want to talk about the newspaper
     articles.  I want to talk about the PSAs.  Because
     when you put everything into perspective and see
     where -- where this family falls, they're not going
     to run from the truth.  They're not going to run
     from it.  Because the truth shall set you free.
          He started as a kid.  He was addicted.  They 4625
     were lying.  They were marketing kids.  They did
     manipulate the nicotine.  And they -- and they've
     known about it for decades.  And that's the truth.
          So this is their internal documents.  This is
     now -- now we're here, and nicotine isn't that
     important now.  But when they're in their internal
     documents and they're talking secretly about how
     they can make more money, they're talking about
     we're in the business of --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I'm sorry to
     interrupt.  We have a motion on this on defending
     the case, and I do need to make a motion on that.
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm talking about the tobacco
     executives were in -- and I'm talking about the
     documents.
          THE COURT:  All right, if you are talking
     about the --
          MR. PAIGE:  Yeah.
          THE COURT:  -- executives and the documents,
     that's fine as long as --
          MR. BAYUK:  Well, I just want to make clear I
     do have a motion on this.
          THE COURT:  Well, I think Mr. Paige
     understands what he can say, and I'm not going to
     go sidebar.  Just thank you. 4626
          MR. PAIGE:  So in their internal documents,
     without the lawyers defending the case, I'm talking
     about what was going on in 1963, 1972, 1972, and
     1977, at a time when the Andrew Schleider was
     smoking their product when he was still alive, and
     he was in his 20s and 30s, and we talk about what
     they were concealing, because it's an Engle finding
     of what they've concealed, what they've lied to the
     public about, what they've omitted.
          Think about the things you've learned in this
     trial.  Arsenic and cyanide in cigarettes.  50
     percent of smokers die.  You know, it's as
     addictive as cocaine and heroin.  How would Andrew
     Schleider have known that?  How could any smoker
     know what they're dealing with?  How can you battle
     an addiction of brain disease if they don't tell
     you what they know?
          And so "We're in the business of selling
     nicotine, an addictive drug."  "In designing any
     cigarette, the dominant specification should be
     nicotine delivery."  "Nicotine is a potent drug
     based upon the sale of attractive dosage forms of
     nicotine."
          There is nothing in there about people -- you
     won't find a document in their -- you will not find 4627
     a document that says our smokers are smoking for
     taste, it's all about choice, they can choose to
     quit when they want to.  That document does not
     exist.  It does not exist.  You won't see it when
     you go back in the jury room.  You can look for it.
     You will not be able to find it.
          Another document, they talk about their --
     they compare their customers to rats in a cage.
     And you may remember this document.  But they talk
     about comparing smoking to how you get a rat to do
     something in a cage with pushing a lever.
          And again, in their -- when you talk about
     free choice, when Dr. Castro -- yeah, Castro was
     here and he tried to say smoking is a choice, it's
     a choice behavior and all that stuff, you know,
     smokers can make a choice and they can make a
     choice to try to quit, okay.  And he did.  He
     tried.
          And you know what, if a smoker tries six,
     seven times, he should try eight or nine times, and
     that's one of the reasons why we admitted partial
     responsibility, you can always try harder.  Okay?
     You get a B in school, as I tell my kids, you can
     try harder and hopefully you can get an A, maybe
     not, but just try hard. 4628
          You know, you can try as hard as you can.  And
     that's what Andrew Schleider did, he tried as hard
     as he could, and had he lived longer, maybe he
     would have -- probably would have been able to quit
     at some point in time, but as smokers go, he died
     pretty young, he got sick pretty young.
          And so -- but you can't just choose to say I
     want to quit.  You can choose to say I want to try
     to quit, and then you have to try.  And then you
     are battling an addiction and then you'd better
     know what you're dealing with and you'd better get
     a lot of help because it's not easy for some
     people.
          This is the FTC report.  "There is no
     indication in any advertisement that after a person
     smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is
     no longer a matter of choice, but becomes a matter
     of need."
          1989 Surgeon General Report, "Two factors
     refute the argument that smoking is a matter of
     free choice.  Most smokers start as teenagers and
     then become addicted."  And in their own internal
     documents from 1980, they knew this and they didn't
     share this with Andrew Schleider, they didn't share
     it with their customers, they didn't share it with 4629
     America, they never -- they did not admit this.
          "Cigarette smoking is more addictive than
     using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who
     ever smoke.  We can't defend continued smoking as
     free choice if a person was addicted."  So they
     know that.  And the Surgeon General knows that,
     it's pretty clear, okay.
          This is something that was shown to you when
     Dr. --
          MR. BAYUK:  I'm sorry to interrupt.  These are
     not in evidence.  These -- we discussed these
     yesterday.
          MR. PAIGE:  They're not in evidence, Your
     Honor.  They were shown when the witness was here,
     and they were published verbally.
          MR. BAYUK:  Respectfully, that's not the
     standard, I mean.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Let's go sidebar.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, I'll -- if you're inclined
     to --
          THE COURT:  Just take them off the screen and
     continue.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          Okay, no problem.
          But you remember when Dr. Castro was here 4630
     yesterday and we showed the -- we talked about
     government reports that talked about how highly
     addictive nicotine was, the CDC, NIDA, the Surgeon
     General, National Institutes of Health, World
     Health Organization.
          Why in the world would all these
     organizations, all these government bodies, be
     hiring all these scientists and spending all this
     money to battle nicotine addiction if it wasn't a
     serious problem and causing so much harm?  And --
     and if it was just really a matter of free choice,
     why waste their time?
          And there are so many smart people still
     learning more about the genetics of nicotine
     addiction, things that we didn't know, that Andrew
     couldn't have known, and there is so much going on
     to help people.
          And as you've heard in this case, the smoking
     consumption rate is going down and down, and
     hopefully it will continue to go down as time goes
     on.  And that, again, is another reason why, when
     we get to the punishment phase, and I hope we do --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, that's an improper use
     for punitive damages and personal opinion about
     punitive damages. 4631
          THE COURT:  I'm going to overrule it.
          MR. BAYUK:  Okay.  I would like to make a
     motion again.  Thank you.
          MR. PAIGE:  The -- the -- the -- I forget
     where I was when -- I'm trying to think now.  The
     -- I was talking about punitive damages.
          So at some point, I'm going to get to in my
     outline here about punitive damages, why they're so
     important, why they should be awarded in this case,
     and if we do get there, and it would run us into
     next week, hopefully only a couple days, one or two
     days, I hope that you-all will have your patience
     to complete the journey with us, and if they do,
     Dr. Figlar I expect will come and I'll be able to
     talk to him, which I look forward to.
          But this is a definition from NIDA where it
     says, "Nicotine addiction is defined as a chronic
     relapsing brain disease that is characterized by
     compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful
     consequences."  And that's what addiction is.
          You know, people talk about why do people
     smoke if they know it's harmful?  Why do people use
     cocaine if they know it's harmful?  Why do people
     become alcoholics if they know it's harmful?
     Because it's beyond their control.  Most smokers, I 4632
     think even Dr. Castro admitted 70 percent of
     smokers say they'd like to quit, they don't want to
     smoke, they wish they didn't smoke.
          And that's why it was interesting when
     Dr. Proctor was here and something came up, I don't
     remember whether it was on direct or redirect, but
     a question came up and we talked about -- oh, when
     they were talking about the cigarette that they
     produced that was nicotineless, that they spent a
     fortunate doing, that they spent a billion dollars
     producing some cigarette that didn't have nicotine
     that it failed.
          And of course it is going to fail in a society
     where you have 60 million smokers who are smoking
     nicotineless cigarettes.
          But think about it, think about it, in 1953
     when they their choice, when they had a choice and
     they could have been not so motivated by money and
     they all met in the Plaza Hotel, if they would have
     conspired and they said they were going to
     cooperate with the government, think about it, if
     they would have conspired at that time to say, hey,
     we're the ones who are making this drug for people,
     for kids who are smoking it, and we know it's
     killing them, why don't we all just say forget it, 4633
     we're going to make a nicotineless cigarette, we'll
     spend a fortunate, a billion dollars doing that,
     and then if any teenager starts smoking, he won't
     become addicted, and then -- because people don't
     start to smoke for taste, they don't start -- they
     get sick, they get nauseous because there is a
     poison, nicotine, your body has to get used to it.
          So for new smokers, they could have done that
     if they wanted to, that could have been their
     choice.  They would have made a lot less money,
     they would have made a lot less money over time,
     they would have killed a lot less people, but that
     was their choice not to do that, and that was a bad
     choice for many American families, including
     Mrs. Schleider.
          So again, whether or not he was addicted, he
     began smoking between 11 and I think it's really 14
     years of age.  We know 90 percent of all smokers
     begin smoking while the brain is developing by
     age -- it's really 24, the frontal lobes of the
     brain, anybody who has kids, teenagers know it.  I
     don't think Dr. Castro would admit it.
          But that the frontal lobes of the brain,
     that's, you know, the part of the brain that deals
     with, you know, thinking about long-term 4634
     consequence, you know, evaluating risks.  And
     that's why the teenager is so vulnerable.  That's
     why that's their market.  That's their target
     audience.  That's who they get.
          They get these kids, and that's what they
     build their business on.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object again as time
     frame given your ruling in the case.
          THE COURT:  Oh, I agree, it's sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  I move to strike it.
          MR. PAIGE:  During --
          THE COURT:  I'm going to strike the last
     comment.
          MR. PAIGE:  During Mr. Schleider's life -- and
     I'm going to show you the documents that are in
     evidence about that.  You know, he increased his
     tobacco use, he was getting 300 to 500 hits of
     nicotine to his brain every single day.  He
     first -- smoked first thing in the morning.  He
     smoked to avoid withdrawal.  He tried to quit cold
     turkey, gum, patch, hypnosis.  He smoked dirty
     cigarettes out of an ashtray when he needed
     nicotine.  And after being diagnosed with COPD and
     lung cancer, he continued getting his nicotine.
          And if that's not addiction, I don't know what 4635
     is.  I don't know if I could show you an addicted
     smoker --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object to
     Mr. Paige's personal opinion about what addiction
     is.  We need to limit ourselves to the evidence in
     the case.
          THE COURT:  Okay, Mr. Paige, continue your
     closing.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  With what -- you know what, I'm
     going to overrule it.  I'll take it -- I'll take
     your objections up later.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          So -- I forget what I was on.
          So anyway, so we're going to move to
     believability of a witness, and I'm going to talk
     about some of their witnesses.  But this is a -- an
     instruction that the judge just read to you, but
     you'll see it again when you're back in the jury
     room.
          So they brought in Dr. Castro to tell you that
     he wasn't addicted, and they brought in Dr. Brooks
     to tell you he didn't have COPD.  And so you --
     you -- you heard their -- the testimony from those
     gentlemen, and you could consider the frankness or 4636
     the lack of frankness of the witness when you are
     considering whether or not you believe them, and
     for expert witnesses, you may accept their opinions
     or you could reject it.  Okay?
          So if you think that those experts were not
     being truthful with you, were not being frank with
     you, you don't even have to the consider it, you
     could take those experts and not -- just throw them
     out the door and say we're not even going to talk
     about Dr. Castro or Dr. Brooks because we don't
     believe them, because they weren't being frank with
     us.
          You know, Dr. Brooks will talk about how frank
     he was when he found those -- some record that he
     found, but he didn't tell anybody about it until
     cross-examination.
          So these are the gentlemen.  And we'll talk
     about Dr. Castro first.  He said that she {sic}
     wasn't -- that Mr. Schleider wasn't addicted.
     There was a medical record before the lawsuit was
     ever filed back in 1997 from one of his treating
     doctors who was trying to help him, you know,
     that's -- these are doctors who try to -- there are
     some people, you know, who try to help people, who
     try to do the right thing, who go out of their way 4637
     to help people, not hurt people.
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
          MR. PAIGE:  So these are -- we were talking
     about Dr. Castro, who said he was not addicted.
     This is the evidence of whether the gentleman was
     addicted or not.  It's in the medical records.
     Before a record -- a lawsuit was even filed, his
     medical doctors who were helping him, who were
     treating him found that he had a tobacco use
     disorder.  This is the DSM-5 we went through with
     Dr. Drobes who is with the Moffitt Cancer Center,
     who works in research, but he also works -- has
     treated over a thousand patients at
     smoking-cessation clinics and he uses this, he
     teaches doctors how to use the DSM-5 and he went
     through this with you.  I mean, the only -- the
     only thing -- I knew I would get Dr. Castro to
     agree with me on something, and the only thing I
     got him to agree with was when I conceded that my
     client probably didn't meet those two.  But I
     couldn't get him to agree with anything, he
     wouldn't budge.
          So you saw the 1996 guidelines that were in
     effect when my client was alive when they have
     examples of how you meet this criteria, you know,
     smoke -- use more or longer than intended.  You 4642
     know, he started as a kid.  He never intended to be
     a lifelong customer of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company, that couldn't have been his intent at all.
     He tried, he tried to quit, he tried to cut down.
     Most people tried, you know, three, four, five,
     seven times.  He tried.  There is no reason to
     exclude him from that criteria.
          Great deal of time using, he was smoking up to
     two, two and a half packs a day.  His family
     members said he constantly had a cigarette.  He
     would light one from another.  If we took the
     amount of time that he smoked one after the other
     it would take nine and a half to 12 and a half
     years for him to leave us and come back, that's a
     lot of time for anybody to be administering drugs
     to their brain.
          Cravings or strong desires.  He would tell
     people he needed it.  He would dig through dirty
     ashtrays.  He would leave church to smoke.  You
     know, he would wake up first thing in the morning
     and smoke.
          Again, church, restaurants, movies.  Doesn't
     say that you don't go to the movies.  It says it
     could be reduced.  Smoking in situations that were
     hazardous, smoking in bed.  You know, even 4643
     Dr. Castro, -- it's right there in the DSM, that's
     an example, smoking in bed.  He said, well, maybe,
     kind of.  You know, that was as close as I could
     get him to admit using -- and he agreed to this, he
     agreed to this and then withdrawal.  And you
     remember there are two ways you could meet
     withdrawal.  One is by having the symptoms that he
     had and the other is by smoking to avoid
     withdrawal.  And in the DSM, the example they give
     is smoking as soon as you wake up because your
     brain is without nicotine.  So this is a gentleman
     who wasn't only addicted, but he was severely
     addicted and there is no question about it.  No
     question.
          Fagerström test, it's a valid and reliable
     measure of the level of addiction.  Again, he was
     very high dependence, the highest you can get.
          So when you think about Dr. Castro, who came
     in here, swore to tell the truth, swore to take an
     oath, read all the depositions, knew everything
     that you know, came to conclusion under oath that
     this gentleman was addicted, I would ask
     respectfully that you reject his testimony and that
     you don't consider and you don't give it any
     weight, because you shouldn't have to waste your 4644
     time considering testimony like that in this case.
     This is a serious case, it's an important case, and
     the witness should have been more frank with all of
     us.
          Now, when talking about whether the addiction
     caused the disease, this is how many exposures he
     would get in his lifetime, over 4 million
     inhalations of carcinogens.  You know, we know that
     he's inhaling cyanide, arsenic, polonium-210, 70
     different carcinogens.  This is what's going on.
     These are all the things he's inhaling because he's
     an addicted smoker, that's what's going on with
     this gentleman.
          I asked Dr. Castro about the 2010 Surgeon
     General Report when he disagreed with it and I had
     to impeach him with it when it said nicotine
     addiction is the fundamental reason why smokers
     smoke cigarettes, that's in the report, and I had
     to impeach him with it because he wouldn't agree
     with it.
          This is the Surgeon General of the United
     States, you know, who he said in 2004, and
     Dr. Castro said that he was aware of this, he was
     aware of this before he ever met any tobacco
     company representative, he knew about the link 4645
     between smoking and lung cancer, and this is what
     the Surgeon General said at the time.  About
     whether nicotine addiction causes disease.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          DR. KOOP:  We should also give priority to the
     one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing
     more than 300,000 Americans each year.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. PAIGE:  So that's right there.  There is
     no dispute.  There is no -- it should be no
     controversy that nicotine addiction causes disease,
     causes death in our country, and if it doesn't,
     then nobody would be an Engle class member, not
     only Mr. Schleider, but nobody.
          And this is, again, is just reflective of how
     important nicotine addiction is, why it's
     important, why it's substantial, why it's -- why
     it's so important because it's the most substantial
     ingredient in their business, because internally,
     when they're talking about it, they're not talking
     about helping people, they're not talking about --
     about being honest or frank with anybody, okay.
     When they talk about nicotine addiction, in their
     private meetings, in their office, knowing at the
     time that Mr. Schleider was a kid that 90 percent 4646
     of them were going to -- of their customer base was
     coming from his friends, from his friends, and they
     knew how many people were dying, this is all they
     would say, "Without the chemical compound, the
     cigarette market would collapse and we would all
     lose our jobs and our consulting fees."
          No -- no -- no -- no expression of any type of
     concern other than for themselves, other than for
     themselves.  And that's when I go back to the book,
     "Everything You Need to Know You Learned in
     Kindergarten", be nice, be respectful, care about
     other people, do the right thing, don't lie, don't
     cheat.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor.  Objection.  There are
     jury instructions in the case.  It's not a
     kindergarten book.
          THE COURT:  It's overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  And again, and this is an R.J.
     Reynolds document, "We can't be ever -- can never
     be comfortable selling a product which most of our
     customers would stop using if they could.  That is
     to say, if the exit gate from our market, the exit
     gate would suddenly open," meaning
     smoking-cessation aids, nicotineless cigarettes,
     things like that, they would be out of business 4647
     overnight.
          So those -- when you look at their documents,
     those are the PT numbers, all the documents have
     numbers on them in the folders that are going to
     come back into evidence, there is a couple
     documents that are really significant and I'll tell
     you which ones they may be.  They are all
     important, they're all interesting reading, this
     one actually is a very interesting document, but it
     talks about what they are really concerned with.
          So again, "Addiction is a legal cause if it
     directly and in natural and continuous sequence
     produces or contributes substantially to producing
     such loss or injury or damage so that it can be
     said but for the addiction, the loss, injury, or
     damage would not have occurred."
          Did the addiction play an important role?  But
     for the addiction, if he was not addicted to
     nicotine, would he have a smoked a pack, two packs
     a day for 40, 45 years, developed COPD, lung
     cancer, and died?
          So I think clearly, that part of the case
     is -- hopefully is crystal clear to you and I'm
     spending a lot of time on it and I wish I didn't
     have to, but I have to address these issues. 4648
          The next one is manifestation, "In order to
     prevail on their claims, the plaintiff must prove
     that Andrew Schleider had a disease or a medical
     condition that was caused by an addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine that manifested on
     or before November 21st.  The critical event is not
     when an illness was actually diagnosed."
          So even though if he was diagnosed by the
     radiologist back in '95 or '96, you don't have to
     actually be diagnosed with cancer at the time.
     That's the law.  So just because there wasn't a
     pulmonary function test to give him the diagnosis
     yet, just because there wasn't a biopsy on that
     date that would have shown the cancer that it
     manifested, that does not exclude him or mean we
     haven't met our burden of proof on class
     membership.  This is the law.  And again,
     respectfully, if you follow the law when you see
     the medical records, it's crystal clear, with the
     lung cancer that it manifested, there was signs of
     lung cancer at the latest November 21st, which
     happens to be the last day of the class period, and
     that's when a diagnosis or medical condition
     manifests, when it becomes diagnosable through the
     evaluation. 4649
          So symptoms of primary lung cancer can be
     chest pain, chronic cough, fatigue.  This is Dr.
     Brooks.  And this is a note from December 13th.
     There has been perhaps a one-year history of
     fatigue, left chest discomfort for four to eight
     weeks.  Usual chronic cough.  Chronic cough means
     he's been having it a long time.  Acute I think the
     doctor said ten days, chronic has been going on for
     months or years.  So, and -- so, you know, was the
     weight loss from the cancer, I think the doctor
     said probably not.  Was the chest pain, you know,
     who knows.  But the fatigue, that is the issue in
     the case because he had lung cancer, it says chest
     discomfort four to eight weeks, history of
     increased fatigue, so we know it's now more, and we
     asked Dr. Brooks you know it's a symptom of
     metastatic disease to the liver, because if
     somebody has cancer in their body and there is
     genetic mutation changes and all that stuff that
     was on the chart where the cancer is now going
     through your bloodstream and now is in other organs
     of your body like the liver, it would be pretty --
     you know, maybe somebody goes to the doctor and
     says I have fatigue, they're not going to say, hey,
     that's lung cancer.  But that is a symptom of lung 4650
     cancer, metastasizing to the liver, there is no
     dispute about that.  Increased fatigue and
     otherwise you would just have this cancer, you
     would have to -- if you believed them, he would
     have this cancer that is now going through his
     body, going through his blood, going through his
     liver, there is seven spots on his liver, he's
     having fatigue.  And even Dr. Brooks says, "I will
     agree in general, fatigue could be associated with
     metastatic cancer, you know, to the liver."
          And then Dr. Villa who came here, in this
     complaint -- in this case, "I know fatigue is a
     general -- generic complaint, but you have the
     benefit of reviewing the medical records in this
     case.  Was the fatigue in this case a symptom of
     the metastatic cancer that this patient had?
          "It is definitely consistent with it and quite
     likely secondary to the metastatic disease."
          And now this is talking about the films.  And
     this is important because it talks about, they
     asked him how long had the mass been in his chest.
     And he says there is two ways of looking on it --
     at it.  "One is how long has it been there
     radiologically.  This is a very rapid,
     proliferating tumor.  So it's highly likely that if 4651
     you have done a chest x-ray three, four months
     before, possibly six months before, you could have
     seen a mass.  If you had done a CT scan surely six
     months before, you would have seen a mass.  So
     radiologically it's been there four to six months.
     Could be more, but four to six months."
          But we know on November 21st, even according
     to Dr. Brooks, we know that the abnormality that
     showed up on November 21st was lung cancer.  Okay?
     So on November 21st, was the lung cancer diagnosed?
     Was it diagnosed?  No.  Nobody said he had lung
     cancer on that date.  Was it diagnosable?  If they
     had done the biopsy they had done three months
     later or two months later or whatever it was, a
     month later, had they done that biopsy on
     November 21st, 1996, was it diagnosable?  Did he
     have cancer that manifested in his body on
     November 21st, 1996?  According to them, no.
     According to Dr. Brooks, no.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, sorry to interrupt
     Mr. Paige.  Object, that is a misstatement of the
     jury instructions.  It requires symptoms, that's
     what Your Honor read to the jury.
          THE COURT:  Well, whatever because --
          MR. PAIGE:  A symptom -- 4652
          THE COURT:  -- whatever is in the instructions
     is what the jury --
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  A symptom of --
          THE COURT:  -- has to follow.
          MR. PAIGE:  -- of lung cancer, somebody who
     has lung cancer, a symptom of lung cancer is they
     will get a mass.  That is a symptom of lung cancer.
     Okay?  So he's having fatigue, he's having symptoms
     of the cancer, it's presenting itself, it's showing
     itself, it's in his body and it's diagnosable.  And
     that has manifested on the date, the last date at
     the latest, Dr. Villa said it's been there for
     months, he's having fatigue for months, so we don't
     even have to wait for the last day, but by the last
     day we know with a hundred percent certainty, 100
     percent certainty, not by the greater weight of the
     evidence, that he had diagnosable symptoms of lung
     cancer.
          And again, this is Dr. Brooks within a
     reasonable degree of medical probability you
     agree -- and you know, again, there is no question
     now, after Dr. Villa testified, not Dr. Brooks
     testified, there is no longer -- there is no issue
     anymore was this not lung cancer, did this start
     somewhere else and metastasize to the lung, was it 4653
     not small cell.  We established that with a hundred
     percent certainty.  This gentleman had a
     smoking-related lung cancer in his lung that was
     primary that went to the liver and killed him.  And
     it was caused by smoking their cigarettes that they
     targeted to him when he was a kid and manipulated
     the nicotine.  And so, no, I agree that he had lung
     cancer on that date.
          And here is the record November 21st.  1.2 --
     this is a clear symptom of lung cancer, poorly
     defined focal density lateral left hilum.
     Definitely diagnosable.  Fatigue, spot in his lung.
     If anybody had done that test on that day, he had
     had -- they would have known.
          MR. BAYUK:  I object, there is zero evidence
     in the record to support that.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. BAYUK:  That's not even in the record.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Paige, I don't --
          MR. PAIGE:  I don't even know what that means.
          THE COURT:  Is this part of the record?
          MR. PAIGE:  This is not in the records?
          MR. BAYUK:  No, no, what Mr. Paige just argued
     is not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  You know what, please -- you know 4654
     what, I'm going to overrule it.  I'll take up the
     objections later.
          MR. PAIGE:  This is the lung cancer.  The
     evidence in the case is this was the lung cancer.
     We know when they did the biopsy, it came up as a
     lung cancer.  It's for you to determine if you
     think that they would have done a biopsy, I guess,
     on November 21st, if it would have showed something
     else.  Clearly, it would have diagnosed lung
     cancer.
          So was he addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine and, if so, was it a legal cause of cancer
     that manifested itself on or before November 21st?
     Yes.
          Now I want to talk about the COPD.  This is
     records that were used with Dr. Brooks from the
     defense.  And some of the records, they said, and I
     want to move over to whether he had the COPD,
     symptoms of COPD that were diagnosable as well.
          And so what Brooks says is that he didn't
     have, you know, there is three types of COPD, if
     you recall.  There is asthma, which he didn't have,
     emphysema, which he probably didn't have because
     they didn't have -- we don't know he had it,
     because of the blebs on the CT scan or who knows 4655
     and then chronic bronchitis.  So chronic bronchitis
     is a form of COPD.
          There is a nurse, I guess, who filled these
     out who said there was no wheezing, asthma, or
     emphysema --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Yeah.
          MR. BAYUK:  I'm sorry to interrupt again.
          THE COURT:  That's okay.
          MR. BAYUK:  There is -- I object that there is
     no evidence of what Mr. Paige is saying in the
     record.
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm going to show who filled it
     out in a second.
          THE COURT:  Well, if it's not in the record --
     you know what, I'm going to sustain it.  But this
     is in the --
          MR. PAIGE:  Yeah, this is.
          THE COURT:  This isn't part of it.
          MR. BAYUK:  I think the records are evidence,
     but I think what Mr. Paige is saying is not
     evidence.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, we'll see in a second.
          THE COURT:  That's fine.  I'm going to sustain
     the objection. 4656
          MR. PAIGE:  We'll see who filled it out in one
     second.
          So the -- this was an anesthesia record, as
     you recall.  But these are records that were done,
     you know, months into this, four months later when
     they were concentrating on the lung cancer and what
     the doctor or nurse might have put in the record,
     but here is where when they -- when they said
     Mr. Schleider denied COPD in the medical records,
     this is the form that goes with this, which it was
     not signed, this was a form that was not signed by
     the patient, but was signed by a nurse, this is a
     form that was never signed by Mr. Schleider, and
     this is a form that was not signed by the patient,
     but they noted shortness of breath, congested or
     persistent cough, and smoking.  So those are in the
     records, and those are -- I want you to see the
     entire forms so you understand what they show.
          But there are other records.  And the other
     records are -- and this was interesting because
     when Dr. Brooks took the stand and he was under
     oath and he told you that all these medications,
     none of them were for COPD, remember that?
     Remember when he was saying that?  And he was
     telling you, hey, none of those records -- and an 4657
     expert could say what he wants, he's under oath,
     though, and he's got to tell the truth.  I don't
     know what those records -- what those medications
     mean.  So he tells me that.  Generally, I've got to
     believe him.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object to
     Mr. Paige's personal opinions about this.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  But anyway, we were fortunate
     enough that we were able to look it up and figure
     out that that wasn't true, that that was not true
     what he said on direct examination.  And then I
     asked him on cross-examination, "Do you agree
     that" -- I can't even pronounce that word,
     "methylprednisolone can improve airway in patients
     with chronic bronchitis?
          "Yes, it can, it's an antiinflammatory.
          "This is a medication that can be used to
     treat people with COPD, you know that, you've
     learned that, haven't you?
          "Of course.
          "And of course, you never said that on direct?
          "Well, it didn't come up," he said.
          He was telling you that none of those
     medications were to treat COPD.  That's what he 4658
     told you?
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object, that's not
     evidence.  He said in the record the medications
     weren't used to treat COPD in Mr. Schleider.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Mr. Paige?
          MR. PAIGE:  I didn't really understand his
     objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  I didn't either.
          MR. BAYUK:  My objection is he is
     misrepresenting the evidence.
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm --
          THE COURT:  Just state what it is, all right?
     And continue with your closing argument.
          MR. PAIGE:  You all heard the evidence.  If
     you think that Dr. Brooks said on direct
     examination that this was to treat COPD, then I'm
     mistaken and I didn't hear him correctly.  I doubt
     seriously because he said in the next question that
     it never came up on direct examination.
          Then the x-ray that was done in '95 from a
     Dr. Eisenberg shows hyperinflation with flattening
     of both diaphragms, impression, COPD.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  It comes out.  Click it.
          MR. PAIGE:  Oh, there you go.
          Okay, so I've got to speed up.  But I'm going 4659
     to request more time, Your Honor, respectfully.
          THE COURT:  All right.  I'll consider it.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you.
          So here is some of the x-ray reports.  This is
     another one in '96.  So now we're trying to figure
     out did he have COPD that manifested.  You know, we
     went over all this with Dr. Brooks, hyperinflated
     lungs, flattening of the diaphragms, that's from
     inhaling the smoke, the carbon monoxide, the
     poisons into the lung, causes the lungs to expand
     and causes anatomical changes in someone's body.
     And this was on -- this is -- these are signs and
     symptoms and proof that he had COPD in '95 and '96.
          And then there was a medical record that he
     did not bring up on direct examination, if you
     recall, and I asked him about it and I said, but
     you have this -- this was the record that he didn't
     bring up, and this was a record that was
     significant because it says, "No significant review
     of symptoms except for chronic cough with
     occasional yellow sputum."
          And we know from what he said that that's
     COPD, people that have chronic cough with yellow
     sputum is a definition of COPD.  And an increased
     AP diameter, showing that he's like barrel chested. 4660
     And those are also signs of COPD.
          And when I asked him about this, I said, "The
     fact that this gentleman had an x-ray in '95 with
     complaints of bronchitis and was having chronic
     cough with sputum and an increased AP diameter at
     Sloan-Kettering, did you talk about that during the
     eight hours of meetings with the lawyers or not?
          "I did not.
          "Nobody brought that up?
          "Did not.
          "You didn't tell them that you knew about it?
          "I read it actually this morning and I then --
     and then I recalled it.
          "And when you read it this morning for the
     first time, did you say anything to anybody about
     it?"
          And this has to go to the credibility of this
     witness, okay, of this witness who is coming to
     court, who knows of a record, he knows that an
     issue --
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry.  Excuse me.  Please.
          MR. EDSON:  I'm sorry, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  It's distracting.
          MR. PAIGE:  He knows better.  He knows better.
     Okay?  This is a serious case for the parties, for 4661
     both parties, and that's not fair.  And he came to
     court and he says -- I said, well, why didn't you
     say anything about it, and he says, well, nobody
     was here to say anything, they were all here in
     court, so just he didn't bring it up.  And here is
     a record that shows that this gentleman had COPD
     long before November 21st, 1996, and he knew about
     it.
          Then I asked him, after he finally admitted
     that, that he had this record that he concealed and
     didn't tell anybody about, I asked him, "You could
     see how reasonable people, based upon the records
     of complaints of bronchitis, yellow sputum,
     hyperinflated lungs, increased AP diameter, you can
     see how people may disagree with you, reasonable
     people, and find that he did have COPD?"
          And he admitted, "Reasonable people might
     conclude that, yes."
          And if reasonable people find that he did have
     COPD that manifested itself on or before
     November 21st, 1996, he's a class member twice
     over.  The lung cancer and COPD.  He's a double
     class member.
          And again, this is a gentleman who you will
     have to consider his frankness, and, again, when he 4662
     said that this gentleman did not have COPD, when he
     tells you that it did not manifest itself and that
     that's the evidence that they're going to rely
     upon, I would ask you again to reject his
     testimony, as you are entitled to do, because of
     his lack of frankness and his dishonesty with the
     Court.
          So was he addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine?  If so, was it a legal cause that
     manifested before that date?  Yes.
          And then once you get that, you get to the
     Engle findings, okay?  And I'm going to try to move
     faster now.  I don't --
          Your Honor, may I approach momentarily,
     please?  I want to ask you a question.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry, what?
          MR. PAIGE:  Could I approach for one second so
     I could ask you a question?
          THE COURT:  All right.  Do you need Nancy?
          MR. PAIGE:  No.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
[#DELETED RECESS#]
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          So I'm going to try to move along a little
     quicker, if I can, but I still have a lot to go
     over in terms of I want to talk about some of the
     other issues with punitive damages still and 4672
     apportionment of fault and so forth.  So let me
     move along.
          But once you determine that Mr. Schleider --
          Is this --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  It's not going.
          MR. PAIGE:  Is a class member --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Right now.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Once you determine that
     he's a class member, then you have to accept these
     findings.  And these are the findings from the
     Engle trial.  This is stuff that was disputed in
     the Engle trial that the Engle jury found in that
     case.
          And one of them was that cigarettes cause COPD
     and lung cancer.  That's a finding you have to
     accept.  The other one is nicotine is addictive.
     The third one is that they placed cigarettes on the
     market that were defective and unreasonably
     dangerous.
          This gentleman smoked unfiltered Lucky
     Strikes.  If you smoke unfiltered Lucky Strikes and
     you use them as intended, you will become addicted
     and you most likely will die.
          They concealed or omitted material information
     not otherwise known or available knowing that the 4673
     material was false, so they didn't tell people
     things that they knew.  You've seen their documents
     about what they knew, and they didn't reveal that,
     that it was false and misleading, and failed to
     disclose material facts, important facts.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I'm sorry to object,
     this finding speaks for itself and Mr. Paige can't
     interpret them.  It's in the instructions.
          THE COURT:  It's by the instructions.  Why
     don't you continue.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  I agree.
          MR. PAIGE:  So a material fact, so the
     material was false or misleading, failed to
     disclose, and it says a material fact.  You all
     know what a material fact means, right?  So that's
     what they failed to disclose.  A material fact.  It
     doesn't say an insignificant fact, it says a
     material fact about the health effects or addictive
     nature of smoking or both.
          They also entered into an agreement with other
     companies and industry organizations to conceal or
     omit information regarding the health effects of
     cigarettes or their addictive nature with the
     intent, that was their intention, was that smokers 4674
     and the public would rely upon that information to
     their detriment.  Okay.  To their detriment.  Not
     to their benefit, but to their detriment.  They
     wanted people to rely on this stuff.  They wanted
     people to rely on their --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object to the
     interpretation of the Engle finding, it speaks for
     itself.  That's in the instructions.
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, it's closing argument,
     number one.  Number two, I'm allowed to use facts
     that Dr. -- I mean I don't want to --
          THE COURT:  Yeah, I agree.  And this part I
     agree, it's overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you.
          MR. BAYUK:  And I would renew another -- I'm
     sorry.  I would renew a motion.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. PAIGE:  Anyway, so -- excuse me, I
     apologize.  So the finding was in that trial that
     you must, the findings may not be denied or
     questioned.  They cannot be denied or questioned.
     Okay.  And they must carry the same weight as if
     you would have determined them yourselves.
          So this is what they did, they met with other
     companies.  And Dr. Proctor told you about this. 4675
     And when I ask for punitive damages, by the way,
     you can't rely upon the findings for entitlement to
     punitive damages.  So you're going to remember that
     Dr. Proctor told you about, forget these findings,
     that Dr. Proctor told you about how all these
     companies met, how they all got together in a lie,
     that they wanted people to rely upon it to their
     detriment, and they knew that.  They knew that.
     There is nothing worse than that type of behavior.
          And those companies that they conspired with
     are Philip Morris, Lorillard, Brown & Williamson,
     American Tobacco, and the organizations were part
     of this fraud.  That was -- that was told to you by
     Dr. Proctor.  The CTR, the Tobacco Institute, all
     these doctors that they were telling the public
     were legitimate were not, they were not legitimate.
          And they were negligent, meaning they were
     careless.  They didn't act like a reasonable,
     prudent --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, it's the same
     objection about interpreting the Engle findings.
          THE COURT:  The findings speak for themselves,
     but.
          MR. PAIGE:  I believe there is a jury
     instruction defining negligence so. 4676
          THE COURT:  All right.  Go ahead.
          MR. PAIGE:  Negligence is not being what a
     reasonable, careful, prudent company would do with
     similar information with similar concerns for
     people.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, object, that's an
     improper statement of the jury instructions.
          THE COURT:  Okay, that's overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  So legal cause, then there is
     going to be a question, before you get to
     comparative fault, because you must find that the
     addiction to cigarettes manufactured by R.J.
     Reynolds, there is no dispute, that it was Lucky
     Strikes, that they made those, was a cause of his
     lung cancer and death.  And then you get to
     apportion fault between the parties.  Okay?  And
     that's what we're talking about, that
     Mrs. Schleider at some point admitting -- admitted
     that she bore some responsibility in combination
     with their negligence and their defective product,
     but she's not sharing responsibility for their
     lies, because that's different.  Somebody lies with
     the intention of hurting people, she is not sharing
     with them.  But for their negligence, for their
     strict liability, she is asking that you apportion 4677
     fault.
          And I just want to be clear, we're talking
     about a gentleman who was addicted to nicotine who
     tried as hard as he could to stop, and we ask you
     to compare that to the actions of these
     corporations.  You know, it's not just R.J.
     Reynolds, it's Brown & Williamson, American
     Tobacco, all their power, all their money.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object and maybe we
     need to approach to make a motion.  That's totally
     contrary to the jury instructions.
          THE COURT:  Okay, please don't make a speaking
     objection.
          MR. BAYUK:  Well, can we approach?
          THE COURT:  (Nods head affirmatively.)
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I have no idea what
     he's even talking about.
          THE COURT:  All right, well, let's go sidebar. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, my objection is,
     number one, we have a motion in limine on this Your
     Honor granted preventing the plaintiff from
     commenting on the wealth or resources or financial
     being of the company. 4678
          THE COURT:  Um-hum (affirmative).
          MR. BAYUK:  Mr. Paige has just done that and
     said -- compared my client to all the power and the
     money these companies had.  And he's doing it in
     the context of comparative fault, when the
     comparative fault issue asks about only harm to
     Mr. Schleider, not about company conduct in
     general.  It's a violation of a motion in limine, a
     violation of what the instructions say about this.
     I would make another motion for mistrial based on
     this, completely improper.
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, the evidence is that
     these companies spent $250 billion advertising this
     as a safe and healthful product, number one.
          MR. BAYUK:  Shhh.
          MR. PAIGE:  Number two, there is evidence that
     they lobbied Congress and gave misinformation to
     members of Congress, okay, it is in the evidence,
     there is documents, I'm getting to it.  So I
     think -- I don't even know what he's talking about.
          So maybe there is something I am not allowed
     to say, but this is the evidence in the case, they
     spent $250 billion marketing their product.
          THE COURT:  Shhh.
          MR. PAIGE:  $250 billion marketing their 4679
     product.  It's obvious.  And they spent -- they
     spent a lot of time even in their own documents.
          THE COURT:  If you put it that way, I agree
     with you, I don't think there is an objection.
          MR. PAIGE:  Well, that's what I'm trying to
     get to it.
          THE COURT:  Say it that way.
          MR. BAYUK:  That's not how it was phrased.
          THE COURT:  All right, so just rephrase it.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  All right.  So I took the sidebar.
     Make your correction and move on.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          MR. PAIGE:  So the evidence in the case, and
     I'm going to get to it and we'll talk about it,
     when I'm talking about the wealth of the
     corporations, you remember when it talked about the
     $250 billion they spent promoting their product,
     $250 billion, and talk about their power, we're
     going to talk about, I'm going to show you the
     documents of all their lobbying efforts that they
     went through that were in their internal documents.
     So they were -- they had enough money and spent 4680
     $250 billion promoting their product as healthy and
     they had enough power to reach members of Congress
     that Mr. Schleider didn't have.  So when you
     apportion fault, I would ask you to compare the
     actions of a youth smoker who became a drug addict
     to the actions of Brown & Williamson, American
     Tobacco, and R.J. Reynolds.
          This is Andrew Schleider and this is what
     we're talking about because when you are comparing
     fault, you've got to remember that he was just a
     kid, okay, because that's who he was when he
     started.  And this is their documents.  When you're
     talking about comparing fault from him to them,
     this is what their documents say.  "School days are
     here.  Line up the most popular students."  This is
     in evidence.  "Line up these students."  "Let's
     induce a pre-smoker or nonsmoker to become a
     habituated smoker."  That's a confidential document
     from R.J. Reynolds.  It's in evidence, okay?
          Hank Aaron, he was a home-run leader at the
     time.  He is the one who broke Babe Ruth's record,
     he was somebody that people look up to him.  This
     is school prom, Flintstones, Frank Gifford,
     beautiful woman.  That is how they would induce
     teenagers, kids, like Andrew Schleider, and they 4681
     knew it, they knew it.  In their internal
     documents, "We have deliberately played down the
     role of nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or
     no knowledge of the satisfactions," nicotine
     addiction, "that it may offer him and no desire to
     try it.  Instead, we must convince him with wholly
     irrational reasons that he should try smoking in
     the hopes" -- "in the hopes that he will find
     himself the true real satisfaction obtainable,"
     which Dr. Proctor told you meant nicotine
     addiction, okay?  So that's their business model.
     They know that they're going to convince kids,
     because 90 percent of their market start as kids,
     they know that, they know how addictive their
     product is and they're going to go after kids in
     society --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor.
          MR. PAIGE:  Like Andrew Schleider --
          MR. BAYUK:  I object as to time frame, move to
     strike.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm going to clarify it.
          THE COURT:  Clarify it.
          MR. PAIGE:  Any time I talk about kids,
     because we're talking about Andrew Schleider, I 4682
     want you to think about it and I'll try to make it
     clear, that when Andrew Schleider was a kid this is
     what they did to him.  Okay?  It's not fair to do
     it to anybody, and they did it to him, they did it
     to her husband when he was a kid.  And people --
     when he was around, that's what they would do to
     teenagers who would later grow up to be fathers and
     hopefully grandfathers.  And Andrew Schleider never
     made it to be a grandfather.  Never made it.  Never
     made it.  So back from the 1940s and 1950s, these
     are the parents and grandparents of our world today
     that have survived.  That's the world that Andrew
     Schleider lived in.
          I hope I made that clear.
          This is in their internal documents, where
     they talk about how important youth smokers are as
     replacement smokers.  That's their own words.
     They're studying replacement smokers and how
     important they were and looking back 50 years and
     how important replacement smokers are to their
     business.  Okay?  That's in evidence.  It's not a
     secret, it wasn't a secret to them, it was secret
     to Andrew Schleider, but it was no secret to them,
     they'd been doing it for a long time way back when
     Andrew Schleider was a kid. 4683
          And this is in the FTC reports, it's in
     evidence in this -- oh, the 1989 Surgeon General
     Report.  It's in evidence.  And this was read to
     you during Dr. Figlar's deposition, their corporate
     representative, it was published then and maybe
     another time.  "If the adult rate of smoking were
     to continue at the present level, the impact of
     smoking on the future health, welfare of today's
     children would be enormous.  Research has shown
     that one-fourth or more of all regular cigarette
     smokers die of a smoking-related disease.  If 20
     million of the 70 million children now living in
     the United States smoke as adults, about 29 percent
     of them, or 5 million of them, will die of
     smoking-related diseases.  This figure should alarm
     anyone who is concerned with the future health of
     today's children."
          This is -- this is what Andrew Schleider went
     through.
          And so now we can get to the fraud of the
     Frank Statement and the meeting of the -- at the
     Plaza Hotel, because this is when their fraud
     started in 1953 where they got together, they had
     opportunities, they had choices to make, they had
     their own motivations of what they did and why they 4684
     did it, when you hear about choice, when I sit
     down, Mr. Alvarez will have a few words and then
     Mr. Bayuk will.  And I just want you to remember
     when you hear the word "choice", when you hear the
     word "motivation", when you heard hear the word
     "opportunities", when you hear those words, I want
     you to remember all the choices, all the
     opportunities, all the things that they could have
     done differently if they wanted to.  And this is
     the first big time where they really had an
     opportunity to help people and save lives.
          And Reynolds is -- this is a jury instruction.
     "Reynolds is legally responsible for the acts of
     each co-conspirator as long as those acts were in
     the course and in furtherance of the conspiracy to
     conceal or omit material information regarding the
     health effects or the addictive nature of smoking."
     So they were at the meeting, they didn't speak up,
     they didn't have the courage, nobody in that
     meeting had the courage to speak up.
          MR. BAYUK:  Objection, there is no evidence of
     this.  I move to strike it from the record.
          THE COURT:  It's not in the record, Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Nobody from the --
          THE COURT:  Sustained. 4685
          MR. PAIGE:  Nobody from the meeting left the
     meeting and told the truth, okay?  When you are
     involved or have an opportunity to be involved in
     that, you have to have the courage to do the right
     thing.  And, you know, there is a movie that
     probably --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, it's the same
     objection, you just sustained it.
          THE COURT:  I don't know what he's about to
     say.
          MR. PAIGE:  I don't even know --
          THE COURT:  Why don't you continue, let me
     hear it before I decide whether or not to sustain
     or overrule the objection.
          MR. PAIGE:  Well, we're talking about their
     negligence right now.  So one of the things that
     we're claiming that they could have done was when
     they went to the meeting, they had an opportunity
     to do the right thing, they had an opportunity to
     speak up, right, to help people.  That's what we're
     claiming in this case, as part of their
     carelessness, their negligence.  There is a movie
     that you probably, most of you have seen it, not
     all of you, A Few Good Men, it's not the line where
     it says, you know, you can't handle the truth, but 4686
     you probably know that line with Jack Nicholson and
     Tom Cruise where you can't handle -- that's not
     that line.
          But there was a part in the movie where Dawson
     and Downey you remember was, Dawson and Downey, the
     big guy and the little guy.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I like that movie, but
     I'm sorry, I object, this is not in evidence, it's
     improper closing.
          THE COURT:  No, I think it's fine.  It's
     overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Okay.  You'll probably --
     maybe you won't even like this story.  But there is
     a part in the movie where Dawson and Downey where
     at the end they were getting in trouble for what
     they had done and it's at the very end of the
     movie, and Downey was a little guy and he says to
     Dawson, "I don't understand why we're getting in
     trouble, we didn't do anything, what did we do, we
     did nothing wrong."
          And he said, "We didn't speak up, we didn't
     help people who needed to be helped, we didn't
     speak up when we should have."
          And that's the problem here.  You have all
     these companies, nobody is -- 4687
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. BAYUK:  It's the same objection.
          MR. PAIGE:  It's closing argument.
          MR. BAYUK:  And I need a motion on it.
          THE COURT:  It's overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  So that's the problem.  That's why
     they're careless, that's why they're negligent,
     that's why we're here.  We're seeking justice
     today.  We want, quite frankly, we want there to be
     100 percent justice here today and we're going to
     ask for it, and Alex is going to tell you what the
     family is seeking.  But I want you to know the
     magnitude of what they did, how negligent they
     were, and how it affected this family in their
     life.  And you saw the daughter, she was in here,
     everybody is different, you know.  And obviously,
     people are affected differently, and you are going
     to measure the damages of what these people went
     through and the harms that they caused her and
     especially when we ask for them to be punished, for
     punitive damages.
          And so in the memo, they knew how bad it was,
     they knew how bad it was, and when they published
     the statement, the Frank Statement, they told 4688
     everybody together, nobody came forward and told
     the truth.  There is no proof.  "We're going to
     accept people's interest in health as our
     responsibility paramount to every other
     consideration in our business."
          And I asked Dr. Figlar does that mean more
     important than dividends, more important than
     money, and he said yes.
          You decide, do you think they really kept the
     public's health paramount to money and their
     interests.  "We believe the products we make are
     not" -- and that's their -- that they make a
     promise, they didn't do that, they saw the harm
     that was going on, and they intended for people to
     rely upon their misstatements, and that was what
     they planned, and that was what they carried out.
          "We believe the products we make are not
     injurious" and we'll cooperate with the public
     health officials and so forth.  That was a promise
     they made and that was a lie.  They never did that.
     They knew they weren't going to do that.
          Inside their documents they talk about how
     they know smoking causes cancer in individuals.
     "The individuals we met," remember, that was a
     meeting with all the TIRC, all the tobacco 4689
     companies from 1958, the British American Tobacco
     Company came here and interviewed everybody.
     Everybody believed smoking causes cancer.
     Carcinogens are found in every class of smoke.
          The overwhelming evidence is cigarettes cause
     cancer.  Cigarettes cause a certain unattractive
     side effect, lung cancer.  That's how they refer to
     lung cancer, an unattractive side effect.  People
     are dying, families are suffering, wives are
     crying, kids are crying.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, there is no evidence.
     This is totally prejudicial.  I make a motion --
          THE COURT:  Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  You've heard from Mrs. Schleider,
     you saw how they were affected by this, she is a
     wife and a mother.  You saw the daughter, you saw
     how she reacted to all this.  She's a daughter,
     that was her father, okay?  This is not a certain
     unattractive side effect.  This is real cancer and
     real people, and this is a real family, and this is
     the result of what happens.  This is a classic
     example of what happens when you do this.  This is
     just one family, one example, and we are here
     seeking justice for this family.
          The TIRC, how important the TIRC was, this is 4690
     just more of their documents about their doubt and
     confusion, how successful the TIRC has been, that
     they're going to provide smokers with psychological
     crutches and rationales to continue smoking.  The
     key word is "confusion".  Doubt is our product.
     The most important story is one to cast doubt.  And
     here are some statements from some of the tobacco
     company executives or representatives.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          DR. DUPUIS:  If we do find any that we
     consider harmful, and so far, we have not, we'll
     remove these from smoke and still retain the
     pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
          SPEAKER:  Dr. Elmer Hess of Erie,
     Pennsylvania, becomes president of the American
     Medical Association.
          SPEAKER:  How do you account for the rise in
     lung cancer?
          DR. HESS:  Well, I think -- I don't think
     smoking cigarettes particularly has anything much
     to do with it.
          MR. CULLMAN:  We want to be the detective just
     as much as the Surgeon General or the AMA.  We'll
     cooperate in every way.  I don't think the industry
     admits there are any bad elements.  If there are 4691
     bad elements, through our laboratories, through the
     Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of
     God and luck, we hope we may find them.  And if
     they are found, they will be removed.
          We -- we do talk to the question of whether or
     not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not believe
     that cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't accept
     that.  Because when, as, and if any ingredient in
     cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to
     human health, we are confident that we can
     eliminate that ingredient.
          SPEAKER:  Do you believe that cigarettes are
     safe?  Have they been proved to be safe,
     Mr. Cullman?
          MR. CULLMAN:  I believe they have not been
     proved to be unsafe.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And that's some of the information
     they knew was false, they knew they were lying,
     they wanted people to rely upon it, they knew if
     people relied upon it they would buy more
     cigarettes, I'm going to show you the charts about
     how people were buying more cigarettes, and they
     knew if people bought more cigarettes like
     Mr. Schleider, more people would get sick and die 4692
     like Mr. Schleider did.
          More internal documents where they talk about
     for 20 years, so this is 20 years after the meeting
     in the plaza, for 20 years we've employed a single
     strategy to defend itself on three major fronts.
     So they are talking about this, 1972, and looking
     back at what they've done.  And they said, "We've
     employed a single strategy for litigation,
     politics, and public opinion.  And while the
     strategy was brilliantly conceived," that's where
     they are congratulating themselves how brilliant
     they are, how brilliant they are, while -- like
     people like Mr. Schleider are addicted to their
     product, started as a teenager, and they're calling
     that brilliant, it was brilliantly conceived and
     executed, "we've won important battles because it's
     always been a holding strategy to create doubt
     without actually denying it."
          The TIRC, which was one of the co-conspirators
     the judge read to you, is an industry shield.  The
     CTR has acted as a front.  In their handwritten
     records, they're talking about "Tobacco money ain't
     so dirty anymore.  CTR is the cheapest insurance
     that we could by.  Without it, we would be dead."
     So the CTR was that front they were telling people 4693
     were legitimate scientists.  They were telling
     people, politicians, the public, Mr. Schleider, we
     have these legitimate doctors out there, and they
     knew it was a -- they knew it was a front, a
     shield, you know, and that's what they used their
     dirty money for.  And that's a dirty secret that
     nobody knows about.  Nobody knows all their little
     dirty secrets except for you-all now because you
     are seeing their documents and you are seeing what
     they did and you know the harm that they caused.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, object.  Objection on
     403 grounds, dirty secrets, and golden rule issues,
     I move to strike it.
          MR. PAIGE:  It's closing argument, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  It's overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  So -- and so that's what
     we're asking you to consider when you look at the
     documents and you look at what they call their
     money, their dirty money and you look at their
     dirty secrets and you see the harm they caused, we
     ask and we know you will take it very seriously and
     we know you will.
          That's the money they spent, half a billion
     dollars, in today's money who knows how much that
     is.  They did polls, 50 million smokers, they knew 4694
     people were believing them.  23 million smokers
     didn't even believe that smoking caused lung cancer
     in 1964, that's a lot of people, 23 1/2 billion --
     million people, and the other 25 million are ones
     that they would give their psychological crutches
     and rationales if they failed in their smoking
     efforts, if somebody tried to quit and they failed,
     there was always that doubt, that doubt that maybe
     it's not going to hurt me, maybe the filters will
     keep me safe, maybe if I -- if I -- it won't happen
     to me because the cigarette companies and all these
     famous doctors are saying that it hasn't been
     proven.  So that's the doubt that they want to
     instill in the people who believe it, that maybe it
     won't hurt them.
          They used their power and influence, and this
     is what I was talking about before.  They talked
     about "Who ain't for more money?  Who ain't for
     more money?  Do we really want to tout the
     cigarette smoke as a drug?  It is, of course, but
     there are dangerous FDA implications."
          1972 document, this is a very interesting
     document, if you have time it's 2050, but it says a
     lot.  But in it it talks about the cigarette
     controversy, the public especially, those who are 4695
     presented, and they are talking about tobacco state
     congressmen, heavy smokers, that's who they want to
     convince, must perceive, understand, and believe in
     evidence to sustain their opinions that smoking may
     not be the causal factor.  That's what they're
     using their power and influence on.
          And in another memo in 1998, "Our contacts
     with Congress which have always been good are now
     even better.  Through a systematic program of Hill
     coverage we can now count nearly 300
     representatives and 75 senators as up to grade A
     contacts, which means that we know them, but more
     importantly they know us."
          What chance did Andrew Schleider have against
     that such power?  What chance did he have to go
     against them to find out the truth of what they
     were dealing with?
          And here is more statements.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          MR. BOWLING:  I think I'm a fairly reasonable
     human being and not -- or I wouldn't be in the
     business if I thought cigarettes were harmful to
     people.  I think it's important that there be a lot
     of us around who are trying to keep the research
     honest and open.  I think the real dishonesty is 4696
     telling people things that are not so.
          SPEAKER:  Take the controversy about
     cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress, a House
     committee heard testimony from leading experts on
     smoking and health.  The record shows that many of
     the country's most respected doctors openly
     challenged anti-cigarette claims.
          MS. BROWDER:  And I have to disagree with you
     in that we don't know what causes the ailments that
     have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
          MR. KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
     cancer, yes or no?
          MR. HORRIGAN:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer.
          MR. KOPPEL:  All right, sir.
          MR. HORRIGAN:  Has not been causally
     established.
          MR. KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
     relationship between cigarette smoking and
     emphysema?
          MR. HORRIGAN:  Despite all of the research to
     date, there has been no causal link established.
          MS. BROWDER:  The case is still open.  The
     jury has not come in.
          SPEAKER:  It may not be harmful, you are not 4697
     convinced?
          MS. BROWDER:  It may be or it may not be, we
     don't know.
          SPEAKER:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
          MR. MERRYMAN:  I don't know if they do or not.
          MS. BANKS:  I am not in a position to give you
     a does or does not answer.
          DR. WAKEHAM:  None of the things which has
     been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations
     which can be considered harmful.
          MR. TAYLOR:  But the components themselves can
     be considered harmful, can they not?
          DR. WAKEHAM:  Anything can be considered
     harmful.  Applesauce is harmful if you get too much
     of it.  As a whole believed cigarettes were really
     harmful, we would not have been in the business.
     We are a very moralistic company.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, we need to approach on
     this.  I think there has been misrepresentation of
     evidence, so I do need to make a motion.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. BAYUK:  That's not an R.J. Reynolds
     document, so I'm not quite sure.
          THE COURT:  Okay, whoa, whoa, whoa.  All 4698
     right, let's approach. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, my objection is,
     number one, --
          THE COURT:  What is this, first of all?
          MR. BAYUK:  This is a Philip Morris video that
     they used in evidence.  So to attribute it to R.J.
     Reynolds, number one, is --
          THE COURT:  Is this in evidence?
          MR. BAYUK:  The video is in evidence.  To
     attribute it to R.J. Reynolds, number one, is
     false, but more importantly the caption now, they
     say R.J. Reynolds now claims Andrew Schleider
     should have known what they claim they did not.
     That was a direct comment on our defense of the
     case.  We have a motion on this, it is clear
     reversible error under 3rd District law to
     criticize or comment on someone defending a case or
     defending themselves in litigation.  Your Honor
     granted a motion in this case.  There are at least
     five cases I can cite off the top --
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. BAYUK:  -- of my head.  I move for a
     mistrial right now, Your Honor. 4699
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, we're not attacking
     their defense.
          THE COURT:  Shhh.
          MR. PAIGE:  We're not attacking their defense.
     I'm not saying that he shouldn't do this, that he's
     a bad question for doing this.
          THE COURT:  See this is why I like reading my
     instructions after the closings.  You know what, I
     should -- I did it this time, but I'm going to go
     back to what I was doing.  I think it's better just
     to read the instructions at the end of both sides'
     closings, but separate and apart from that, let me
     hear what you're --
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, we can attack the
     lawyers for doing something --
          THE COURT:  Shhh.
          MR. PAIGE:  -- unethical and -- accusing him
     of doing something unethical.  He's going to get
     up, obviously, after me and talk about what we're
     claiming --
          THE COURT:  What about this?
          MR. PAIGE:  Well, what is wrong that?  Their
     defense is that he should have known and they're
     saying that -- they're saying that they didn't
     know.  So if they didn't know, how does my client 4700
     know?
          MR. BAYUK:  Shhh.
          Your Honor, it's the use of an internal
     document Mr. Schleider could have never seen to
     criticize our position in the case right now.
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor --
          THE COURT:  But is this -- I'm sorry to cut
     you off.  I'm sorry, are you done?
          MR. BAYUK:  No, I'm saying I think it's a
     direct commentary on what we claim now in the
     courtroom versus the fraud, this has been reversed
     in other tobacco cases, this type of conduct.
          MR. PAIGE:  It has not.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. PAIGE:  It has not.
          THE COURT:  All right, well.
          MR. PAIGE:  This is all in evidence, it's all
     in evidence.  All these videos --
          THE COURT:  Okay, I mean I'm glad I called
     sidebar.  Yeah.  I don't know.  I mean, I
     understand your point.
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, they're going
     to claim -- they have all these executives saying
     they didn't know.  Now they are going to put up all
     these Reader's Digest articles and say my client 4701
     should have known.  What he's saying is I can't
     talk about that.
          THE COURT:  Shhh.
          Yes, no, I -- how much more do you have?
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I'm timing with my
     sidebars now, so I have -- I have a little bit
     more.
          THE COURT:  What's?
          MR. PAIGE:  Probably 20 minutes.  15 minutes.
     We've been at sidebar at least five minutes since
     we've got back from break.
          THE COURT:  There may be sidebars like this.
          MR. BAYUK:  There may be.  And the thing is I
     shouldn't be --
          THE COURT:  I know, I'm not -- I'm not doing
     that, with all due respect.  I mean, he's entitled
     to make his objection --
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, fine.  I'll do the same
     then.
          THE COURT:  -- and it's proper for me --
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm going to do the same then.
          THE COURT:  It's proper for me, when
     appropriate, is to bring it up sidebar.  I
     happen -- a lot of times I think it's just closing
     and it's -- you know, that's why I overrule it, I 4702
     don't think it may be some -- now, for the most
     part -- I mean, totality, it's harmless error what
     I sustained.  Yeah, I'm fine with it.  You know
     what, I'll note your objection for the record.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you.
          THE COURT:  Finish up.  But I'm not giving you
     an extension because of the sidebar.  I gave it to
     you during the break and that's it.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  I'm going to do my best.
          THE COURT:  That's it. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          MR. PAIGE:  So they have repeatedly stated in
     public that they the didn't know smoking caused
     lung cancer, not only R.J. Reynolds
     representatives -- that was their representative on
     Nightline with Ted Koppel, that was their
     representative, but other representatives that were
     in the conspiracy with them.  And their defense is,
     and we're going to get to it now, about even though
     they are saying that they didn't know, that Andrew
     Schleider with his background should have known
     what they're claiming that they didn't know.
          There are some more manipulations, I'll just
     run through these, these are Proctor, they talk 4703
     about nicotine manipulation.  I would like to spend
     more time doing it with you, but I'm running out of
     time.
          This is an important document where Dr. Abood
     was researching back in 1977 when Andrew Schleider
     was smoking, other people were smoking, and he was
     researching how to come up with smoking aids that
     they didn't have yet, medications they didn't have
     yet, and they were concerned because they would be
     digging their own grave and cut off his funding.
     And they cut off his funding.  And that's again
     when we talked about carelessness, what's the wrong
     thing to do versus the right thing to do, helping
     people like Andrew Schleider or not.  That is not
     what a reasonable corporation should do in those
     circumstances knowing the harm they were causing.
          So 50 years they wasted opportunity after
     opportunity to help people, to tell the truth, to
     help families to come forward and do the right
     thing.
          And so Andrew Schleider, when you judge his
     actions, you've got to remember, he was living in a
     time that smoking was perceived as normal, sports
     figures were smoking.  Reader's Digest, they're
     going to tell you, they're going to come here and I 4704
     can tell you, I could spend two hours if I wanted
     showing you Reader's Digest after Reader's Digest,
     newspaper article after newspaper article if I
     wanted to do that, and I could make it look like
     there is a lot, because there is 36 Reader's Digest
     articles on smoking and health over a 40-year
     period of time, over four decades, and they're
     going to tell you and they have claimed with
     Dr. Proctor that because of these Reader's Digests,
     he should have known more than they knew.  He
     should have known so much more than these Reader's
     Digest -- these Reader's Digest articles because
     over 40 years, there was some 36 articles.
          And that doesn't compare, it pales in
     comparison to the message that they were putting
     out there.  I'm your best friend, I'm your Lucky
     Strike.  Try me, I'll never let you down.  Again,
     top athletes, Willie Mays, Yogi Berra, Roger Maris,
     Joe Louis, Jackie Robinson.  And here are some of
     the commercials that he saw.  So this is when you
     are judging if he did anything wrong, what was his
     negligence, this is the society he lived in.
          MR. BAYUK:  Sorry, object, Mr. Paige said he
     saw these commercials.  There is no evidence of
     that.  Move to strike it. 4705
          MR. PAIGE:  These are commercials.
          THE COURT:  All right, sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  These are commercials that were
     available, that were on TV.  These are a few of
     them.  I don't know if these are the exact
     commercials he saw.  Dr. Proctor said you would
     have to be living in the woods to miss this
     advertising campaign that was going on during his
     lifetime.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          SINGING:  Light up the lucky, it's light-up
     time, be happy go lucky, it's light-up time.
          SPEAKER:  What cigarette do you smoke?  You'll
     be interested to know how the doctors of America
     answered that question.  Doctors in every branch of
     medicine were asked "what cigarette do you smoke?"
          SPEAKER:  Mild.
          SPEAKER:  Too fine to filter.
          SPEAKER:  What I wouldn't give, I just wanna
     --
          SPEAKER:  Ooohhh, he's got Luckies.
          SINGERS:  Tobacco and taste and too fine to
     filter, yours in every Lucky Strike.  Remember how
     great cigarettes used to taste.  Luckies still do.
          SINGER:  Don't miss the fun of smoking.  Don't 4706
     miss the fun of smoking, mildness is a flavor with
     Pall Mall.
          SINGERS:  Don't miss the fun of smoking.
     Don't miss the fun of smoking.
          SPEAKER:  Do you inhale?  Then you are better
     off smoking Philip Morris.  And here is how you can
     prove it.  Light up a Philip Morris.  Take a puff.
     Get a good mouthful of smoke.
          SPEAKER:  Friends, here is a wonderful
     Christmas gift for anyone who smokes, because it
     says Merry Christmas and happy smoking 200 times.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And they spent 2 -- $250 billion,
     and this is in evidence, the industry spent more in
     one day than the National Clearinghouse spent in
     one year.  In one year.  And they talked about
     PSAs.  And again, I could stand up here and show
     you 50 PSAs, one after the other, oh, smoking, this
     and that, smoking.  But you got to put it in
     perspective.  You got to put it in perspective with
     all the advertising, all the money they spent, and
     Dr. Proctor told you it was four to one.  So I'm
     going to show you, if you play it four to one and
     you play it fairly, what it would look like.
          (Video clip played as follows:) 4707
          SPEAKER:  Here is something else you ought to
     try, and soon, Lucky Strike.  Why?  Because if you
     like taste in your cigarette, you'll get it with
     Lucky Strikes.  This is all the taste --
          GRANNY:  Pearl, Winston is good smoking.
          Sure wish you could taste it.
          PEARL:  I am tasting it, Granny.
          SPEAKER:  Like father, like son?
          MS. LONDON:  You get a lot to like with a
     Marlboro.
          BARNEY RUBBLE:  Hey, I've got a better idea.
     Let's take a Winston break.
          FRED FLINTSTONE:  That's it, Winston is the
     one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times
     a pack.  Winston's got that filter flavor.
          BARNEY RUBBLE:  Yeah, Fred.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. PAIGE:  The US Department of Health and
     Human Services.  "Philip Morris is spending
     billions of dollars marketing death.  We are
     spending a few hundred thousand marketing life."
     That's how effective those PSAs were.  That's what
     the evidence is, that's what they knew, they
     studied these government reports.  So again, we're
     not scared to discuss the Reader's Digest or the 4708
     PSAs, but you have to take it in perspective, in
     the proper perspective in the $250 billion that
     they were spending, in the youth marketing they
     were doing when Andrew Schleider was a kid, the
     fact that nicotine was addictive and you have to
     consider all of that, all of that, fairly.
          And so -- and while all this was going on, you
     know, smoking was going up and more people were
     dying.  Here is Andrew.  He eventually started
     trying to quit when he got into his 40s.  He loved
     his daughter.  He loved his wife.  You know.  And
     he couldn't quit.  And he was -- he was doing the
     best he could.  And that's why I say we admit some
     responsibility.  His failures were failures of an
     addict, failures of weakness.  He wasn't strong
     enough.  Maybe he should have beat his addiction.
     Maybe he should have tried harder.  Everybody
     should try harder.  He lived in a time when he
     didn't know what he was battling.  He didn't have
     medications that they have now to help people who
     are highly addicted.
          Their failures were failures of greed,
     failures of intent, and failure of doing things
     that they shouldn't have done in the first place.
     So when you compare the fault, you have to look at 4709
     Andrew and compare that fairly to what they did.
          It's not a free choice.  And you've seen this.
          And so when you apportion fault, this is what
     I would consider.  Again, I'm going to give you a
     consideration for fault and this is the way I would
     like you to consider it, but you don't have to.
     You can do a totally different calculation than I'm
     going to tell you because it's -- you can just pick
     a number if you wanted, but I would ask you to kind
     of base it on something.  And what I would say to
     you is, he was born in 1940.  The first 30 years to
     about 1970 when that first warning went on the
     pack, which incidentally they read the same
     warning, but until 1966, it was like a caution, it
     may be harmful, in 1970, it said cigarettes are
     dangerous, for the first 30 years when they
     targeted him as a kid, when he was addicted, when
     he didn't really know anything at all, I would say
     that they are 100 percent at fault, that they have
     to bear full responsibility for that.
          I would say for the next 30 years, the next
     half of his life, from 1970 to about 1997, that you
     have to compare the actions of him, an addict who
     could have tried harder, who maybe have should have
     tried harder, who didn't understand his addiction, 4710
     who failed because of his weakness, not because he
     didn't love his family enough, but because he
     wasn't a strong enough addict, and you compare that
     against these companies, their failures, they are
     making an addictive product that they know, if they
     market it to children like Andrew Schleider, that
     they will inhale it into their lungs, they will
     become addicted, it is as addictive as cocaine and
     heroin, and they will most likely die.  And you
     have to compare those fault -- and there is really
     three companies, it's Brown & Williamson, American
     Tobacco, and R.J. Reynolds, they're all here, but
     they're just together.  So if you put the four
     parties together and you divided it equally, 25
     percent for the last half of his life, I would ask
     you then if you do the math, R.J. Reynolds is the
     87 1/2 percent at fault and Andrew Schleider is 12
     1/2 percent at fall.  That's what we suggest to you
     is fair.  You can decide that it's more or less,
     different, whatever you want, but that's our --
     respectfully, what we suggest what could possibly
     make sense to you-all.
          There is a concealment claim.  And I just want
     to talk about this quickly.  This is a video.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Play it?  That. 4711
          MR. PAIGE:  Yeah.
          (Video deposition of Robert Heimann played as
follows:)
     Q.   Throughout your tenure with American, it was
not only American's position, but your position that
cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is that
accurate?
     A.   Through my tenure?
     Q.   Yes.
     A.   Yes, that is so.
     Q.   That's something American Tobacco wanted the
public to believe; is that correct?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   It's a statement that American Tobacco placed
great dependence on --
     A.   We issued that statement.  Of course, we
wanted them to believe it.
     Q.   As far as you're concerned, a person is
justified on relying on that statement?
     A.   Yes.
          (Video deposition stopped.)
          (Video clip played a follows:)
          SPEAKER:  Truck driver Dennis Gaines, a
     grandfather, says he's been smoking for 30 years
     and is still not convinced cigarettes are 4712
     dangerous.
          SPEAKER:  You know they say it causes cancer
     and heart disease.  Do you believe that?
          MR. GAINES:  No, I don't.  I -- I -- not in my
     heart, I can't believe it.
          SPEAKER:  You can't believe that it's bad for
     you?
          MR. GAINES:  No.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. PAIGE:  That was 1987 as you recall.  So
     their statements, they knew people were relying
     upon them.  They were concealing material
     information with the intent that people wouldn't
     know what they needed to know.
          Here are things Andrew Schleider couldn't have
     known after -- before and after 1982.  1982 is an
     important date.  Doesn't mean anything to you-all.
     Doesn't mean anything in the case, it just has
     legal significance.  Okay?  So when you consider
     what was omitted from him, what was concealed from
     him, you have to decide when did he learn this, did
     he ever learn this, did he learn this before '82 or
     after '82?  I submit to you respectfully he never
     knew any of this.  He never knew, he couldn't have
     known that they were manipulating nicotine and 4713
     adding chemicals like ammonia and diammonium
     phosphate.  He didn't know that it was not a
     choice, that smoking was not a choice, but it was
     as addictive as cocaine and heroin or that there
     were 70 carcinogens.  This was all concealed from
     him that he was inhaling cyanide and arsenic.  By
     smoking he had a 50 percent chance of dying.  He
     probably didn't know that until 1997.
          The statements of these scientists, were
     giving psychological crutches, doubt, rationales,
     were all people that were fakes, they were paid for
     by the tobacco industry to keep addicted smokers
     smoking their deadly product just like Andrew.  He
     didn't know those people were frauds.  Tobacco
     companies expected him to rely upon their lies to
     continue smoking their addictive, cancer-causing
     cigarettes and that all their efforts were planned
     out carefully and according to their own documents
     were successful.  All that was concealed from them.
     Those were their dirty secret they never let Andrew
     know about.  He never knew what he was battling, he
     never knew.
          So when you ask whether or not there was a
     concealment or omission of material information not
     otherwise known, that he reasonably relied upon, 4714
     that was a legal cause of his death, I would
     respectfully ask that you say yes.
          You know, Andrew Schleider, he -- he was
     addicted.  One thing he was not, he was not a liar.
     He tried to quit, he tried as hard as he could.  He
     believed them and they lied to him.  And so we ask
     that you check that yes.  And whether he reasonably
     relied and it continued after 1982, he lived for
     another 15 years and did not know what he was
     battling.  And so we ask that you check both of
     those yes.
          And the same with the conspiracy, the
     conspiracy, the lies within the companies, that's
     important too.  All these questions are just as
     important.  There is no question that's not
     important on this verdict form.  They are all
     important.
          And now this is the one that we really, really
     think is important -- well, I just said none are
     more important than the others.  But this one, this
     is one where we get to claim punitive damages,
     where we get to punish them for their actions and
     without this, you know, you have seen the evidence.
     And you know what happened in this case.  And you
     know that they took advantage of this gentleman 4715
     when he was a boy, they concealed stuff from him,
     and that that's wrong, that the companies should
     not do that.  That's one of the most -- you know,
     they spent all that money, all that money on
     advertisements, all that power in Congress, when
     they could have been helping people, helping --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object, that's not a
     standard for punitive damages.  I move to strike
     it.
          THE COURT:  It's sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, so.
          THE COURT:  Finish up your closing, Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  Was there clear and convincing
     evidence that punitive damages are warranted?  And
     they may be warranted as punishment to Reynolds and
     as deterrent to others.  So you need to see whether
     or not they need to be punished and whether the
     other companies who were in on it with them need to
     see that this is what's going to happen when they
     act like this.
          Clear and convincing evidence, this is a
     description, it's more than the greater weight of
     the evidence, but I would submit to you the
     evidence has been overwhelming, overwhelming,
     without a hundred percent certainty that what they 4716
     did was wrong, was improper, he relied upon it and
     it was damaging to him.
          Who ain't for more money?  "Our basic position
     in the cigarette controversy is subject to the
     charge and may be subject to the finding that we
     are making false or misleading statements to
     promote the sale of cigarettes."  That's what they
     knew.  They knew that all along and they continued
     to lie, they continued to lie, and they knew the
     harm they were causing families just like this one.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Go ahead and play it?
          MR. PAIGE:  Um-hum (affirmative).
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          SPEAKER:  I would like you to rise and those
     who will be testifying as well with you to rise.
     Would you raise your right hand.  Do you swear that
     the testimony you are about to give is the truth,
     the whole truth, and nothing, but the truth?
          THE WITNESSES:  I do.
          SPEAKER:  Please consider yourself to be under
     oath.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Do you or do you not agree with
     the Surgeon General's estimate of over 400,000
     smokers dying each year?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  I do not agree. 4717
          MR. WAXMAN:  Okay.  Do you know how many die
     each year?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  I do not know.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Okay.  They agree that smoking
     causes lung cancer.  Do you agree?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  It may.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Do you know whether it does?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  I do not.
          MR. WAXMAN:  The medical experts agree that
     smoking causes emphysema.  Do you agree?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  It may.
          MR. WAXMAN:  They agree that smoking causes
     bladder cancer, stroke, and low birth weight.  Do
     you agree?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  It may be.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Mr. Tisch, I want to move to you
     for a moment.  In a deposition last year, you were
     asked whether cigarette smoking causes cancer.
     Your answer was, quote, "I don't believe so."  Do
     you stand by that answer today?
          MR. TISCH:  I do, sir.
          MR. WAXMAN:  You are the head of a
     manufacturer of a product that's been accused by
     the overwhelming scientific community to cause
     cancer.  You don't know?  Do you have an interest 4718
     in finding out?
          MR. TISCH:  I do, sir.  Yes.
          MR. WAXMAN:  And what have you done to pursue
     that interest?
          MR. TISCH:  Well, we -- we have looked at the
     data, and the data that we have been able to see
     has all been statistical data that has not
     convinced me that smoking causes death.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Mr. Campbell, you were also
     deposed, and you said, quote, "To my knowledge, it
     has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes
     cancer."  Will you ever be convinced?  And what
     evidence are you waiting for?
          And let's have the microphone passed over.
          MR. CAMPBELL:  Yes, I may be convinced.  We
     don't know what causes cancer in general right now,
     so I think that we may find out what causes cancer
     and we may find out some relationship which has yet
     to be proven.
          MR. WYDEN:  Let me just begin my questioning
     on the matter of whether or not nicotine is
     addictive.  Let me ask you first, and I'd like to
     just go down the row, whether each of you believes
     that nicotine is not addictive.  I heard virtually
     all of you touch on it and just yes or no, do you 4719
     believe nicotine is not addictive?
          MR. CAMPBELL:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive, yes.
          MR. WYDEN:  Mr. Johnston?
          MR. JAMES JOHNSTON:  Congressman, cigarettes
     and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
     definitions of addiction.  There is no
     intoxication.
          MR. WYDEN:  We'll take that as a no.  And
     again, time is short.  If you could just -- I think
     each of you believe nicotine is not addictive.  We
     just would like to have this for the record.
          MR. TADDEO:  I don't believe that nicotine or
     our products are addictive.
          MR. TISCH:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. HORRIGAN:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. SANDEFUR:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. DONALD JOHNSTON:  And I too believe that
     nicotine is not addictive.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. PAIGE:  All right.  So that pretty much
     wraps up my part of the closing arguments.  And I 4720
     do appreciate your patience and your listening to
     me.  And I know that you-all take your job
     seriously, and we know that you will, and I'm very
     proud to represent, or it's been my privilege to
     represent Diane and the family who has accepted
     some responsibility for her husband's addiction to
     nicotine, and we hope that you will hold R.J.
     Reynolds accountable for their bad acts and award
     fair compensation and punitive damages.
          And Alex has a couple of things he's going to
     talk about.  Thank you very much.


          MR. ALVAREZ:  Good morning.
          THE COURT:  No.  Closing for the defense.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  No, we are breaking up our
     closing.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  So -- I'm sorry, I was --
     all right.  Can we go sidebar?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Sure.
          THE COURT:  All right, maybe I understood. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  He has rebuttal, but we are
     breaking up ours.  Not even ten minutes. 4721
          MR. BAYUK:  I have 13 minutes left of their
     total time for two hours.
          THE COURT:  He said about ten minutes.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  You added -- you added some time
     to him for rebuttal -- for this; right?
          MR. BAYUK:  We agreed on two hours.  You added
     an extra ten minutes to Mr. Paige.
          THE COURT:  I did.
          MR. BAYUK:  That's two hours and ten minutes.
     Mr. Paige has gone 117 minutes, I believe it's 13
     minutes total.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Well, I need to do what I've got
     to do, so we'll ask for more time.
          THE COURT:  Well, I don't know.  Let me take
     that up.  Why don't you, I mean if you can do it
     in, you know, just five minutes, if you can close
     it up.  Do your best and then I'll --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  We'll give you rebuttal time.
          MR. BAYUK:  Are we going to break when he's
     done?
          THE COURT:  No, we're going to go straight
     through.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay. in open 4722
court before the Court and jury.)
          THE COURT:  Okay, Mr. Alvarez.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please the Court.
          THE COURT:  Um-hum (affirmative).
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Well, first of all, I hope that
     this experience is a positive experience.  I hope
     that your jury service is something that you're
     going to think about as positive, because, you
     know, it's important for us, we've put a lot of
     effort into presenting a case and so did they.
          And one of the things that I think is very,
     very important is what you learned.  And he talked
     about -- a little bit about that, but we've brought
     in world-class experts.  Okay.  We just didn't pull
     guys from the street and says, you know, talk about
     tobacco and health.  We brought Robert Proctor, who
     is one of the leading authorities on the tobacco
     industry who made it his life work to study this.
          We brought in Dr. Drobes, who is from a major
     cancer institute here in Florida who is an expert
     in nicotine addiction, who studied it, he's made it
     his life work.  We've brought in Dr. Villa, who has
     six board certifications, who treats cancer
     patients, he's made his life's work.
          Do you see the theme going through there?  We 4723
     brought you three people whose life work and what
     they're passionate about, they're an expert in, and
     that's what we brought.
          I want to talk to you a little bit about the
     journey that this family went through because to
     understand and evaluate their loss, Ms. Schleider
     and her daughter's loss, you've got to understand
     this family, okay?
          When they were -- in 1966, when they were
     young people, you know, people who got divorced in
     1966, you know, that was a big deal.  You know,
     today it's not a big deal.  But, you know, back
     then, it was a big deal.  They started a -- they
     started a new life together.  She was a divorced
     woman with a small child and he adopted that child
     and made his child -- loved him as his own.  Okay?
          And this is a family that went through some
     difficult times.  Some adversity.  They overcame
     that adversity.  And think about all the things
     that they overcame.  They overcame an injury where
     he had to stop working and they had to switch roles
     and she became the breadwinner and he stayed home
     with the family.  Okay?
          And then they had another adversity, right,
     and what was that adversity?  He became an 4724
     alcoholic.  And as a family they dealt with it and
     they overcame that adversity.  Okay?
          And what happens when you keep overcoming and
     overcoming and overcoming things as a couple?  What
     happens?  You get closer.  You end up getting
     closer and closer and closer because you've gone
     through trying experiences together.
          So let's put that in proper context of what
     this family was like.
          And there is a time and there is a place for
     everything in life.  And people live through
     different stages in their life.  When they're a
     young couple, they're bringing up their kids.  They
     want to make sure that their kids go to school and
     can they provide for their kids, and they make the
     focus of their life what?  Their children.  Okay.
     Because that's what you're supposed to do.  Okay?
          And then kids start to grow up, they start
     moving out, they go to college, they start making
     their own lives, right?  And what ends up happening
     to couples at that time, when they start turning 50
     years old, what is it?  They rekindle, they
     refocus, they remember what it was that brought
     them together in the first place.  Okay?
          That moment in time when they connected, okay, 4725
     they spend more time together.  And their plan was
     to continue to spend time together.
          And so what did they do?  They moved to South
     Florida in 1994 in their 50s.  Because that's what
     they wanted to do, they wanted to retire, they
     wanted to live together, they wanted to enjoy life.
          Diane had plans to grow old with her husband,
     okay?  They wanted to have grandkids.  And the --
     and spoil their grandkids.  And the arguments they
     wanted to have at that age, at that time, is who
     loves their grandkids more.  That's the arguments
     that they want to have at that age.
          And true love is about getting closer as you
     get older.  And there is nothing more beautiful to
     watch an older couple walking down the street
     holding each other's hands as they walk down the
     street.  Nothing more beautiful than that.
          And that's part of the fundamental purpose of
     life that she will never have.  Because at 55, when
     they got to that point in life, the next chapter,
     the glory chapter, her husband was taken away.
          Let's talk about Suzanne.  I'm sorry, we
     should --
          And that's -- I think that picture
     encapsulates them.  And let's talk a little bit 4726
     about Suzanne.
          You know, Suzanne had a special relationship
     with -- with her dad.  You know, there is nothing
     more -- you know, there is -- there is a special
     bond between a daughter and her dad.  Okay?  There
     is something about that relationship that's hard to
     put into words.  Okay?  Very hard to put into
     words.
          But this one was particularly close because he
     became Mr. Mom.  And they grew closer than maybe a
     normal father and daughter would.
          So I don't think it's unusual that when she
     got married, she didn't want anyone, anyone walking
     down the aisle with her because that action was a
     statement saying I miss my dad.  The only person
     that has a right to grab me by the arm and walk me
     down the aisle is that man.
          And she'll never have the joy, she'll never
     have the joy of watching her grandkids when they
     see their grandfather come running to him, hugging
     them, and watching the grandfather caress the
     grandchild and close his eyes, and that expression
     of love she will never see.
          So there is no book where you can go to, there
     is no law that the judge is going to read you to 4727
     say, you know, what's it worth, what's the value of
     that.  You have to decide that.  And we're not
     making a claim for Andrew Schleider's pain and
     suffering.  That's not the issue here.  And that's
     not what we're claiming.  What we're claiming is
     the loss --
          Can you put up the --
          This is what it is, "What is the total amount
     of any damages sustained by Diane Schleider for the
     loss of companionship and protection and for the
     mental pain and suffering as a result of Andrew
     Schleider's death?  And what is the total amount of
     any damage sustained by Suzanne Met-" -- sorry, I
     can't even pronounce her last name, "for loss of
     parental companionship, instruction, and guidance
     and for mental pain and suffering as a result of
     Andrew J. Schleider's death?"
          So there is no -- there is no book, there is
     no measurement, it's up to you what you think is
     fair and reasonable, but this was a big loss to
     this family, to this particular family, to this
     particularly close family that had to overcome so
     many things.  Okay?
          And so we respectfully -- and by the way,
     whatever the number is that I suggest to you, you 4728
     don't have to agree with it.  You could go lower or
     you can go higher, it's completely within your
     province to do.
          So we would suggest that for Diane Schleider
     it's 11 million and for the daughter Suzanne, it's
     7 million.  And we think that's fair in light of
     the evidence and the tremendous loss that this
     family has suffered.
          And this is just a suggestion.  You can go
     higher or you can go lower.
          Thank you.


          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, thank you, Your Honor.
          Hello.  Last time.  I know everybody is tired
     and I apologize and I'm not going to say too much,
     and I do believe whatever I do say you probably
     already know, so I'm going to do my best.  I have a
     lot to respond to.
          If you can just put up the first slide.  And
     I'm going to try to go through some of this if I
     can, because they said a lot of things.  And I do
     feel that some of the things they said, and I'll 4835
     try to be nice about it, was maybe attacks on what
     we did with our case.
          I'm not going to raise my voice, I'm not going
     to get excited like they did, I'm just going to
     talk to you, but punitive damages are important in
     this case, it's important that Mrs. Schleider be
     recognized as a class member, be compensated, and
     punitive damages are important and they serve a
     very important purpose, and we all know that.
          And you know what, it is true that the damages
     only go to the plaintiff.  That's true.  And that's
     the law.  And it is true that in addition to
     damages that fully compensate the plaintiff, we
     have to ask for punitive damages.  That is the law.
     And I wish -- you know, she got very excited, as
     did Mr. Bayuk.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, Your Honor, to
     characterizing my closing statement and excitement.
          THE COURT:  I agree, Mr. Paige.  Finish up.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  The 18 million that
     Mr. Alvarez asked for for two survivors of somebody
     who died from a fraud when he was marketed as a
     child, I wish that we could ask you for more.  I
     wish that I could ask you for 50 million or 100
     million or 200 million from an industry that has -- 4836
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection to --
          MR. PAIGE:  -- the resources, but we can't do
     that.
          MS. HENNINGER:  -- asking from the industry.
     There is one defendant in this case, Your Honor.
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm saying we cannot do that.
          THE COURT:  That's fine.
          MR. PAIGE:  We cannot do that.  There are laws
     that we have to abide by, there are parameters that
     we have to go by, and 11 million and 7 million is
     fair compensation for what they did to this family,
     and if we could ask for more for compensatory
     damages, I assure you that we would have.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, Your Honor, there
     is no limit on what they can ask for.
          MR. PAIGE:  Well, there actually is, Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT:  Can you clarify it for them?  And
     finish up.
          MR. PAIGE:  There are certain -- well, just --
     we can go on.
          You know, it's funny that they get up here and
     they --
          No, the one with all of the scientists, you
     don't have that one? 4837
          She just got up here and she showed you all
     the scientists who did all this research, the 6,000
     studies, and it's amazing that they are still proud
     of it, that they are still bragging about all the
     research that all this money paid for when the
     judge is going to instruct you that the Engle
     trial, the CTR, funded that research and they were
     found liable for the fraud.  So they still
     haven't --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, misstating the
     instruction, Your Honor.
          MR. PAIGE:  Well, she will read the
     instruction to you.
          THE COURT:  Okay, I already read that in jury
     instructions.  Continue to finish up your closing.
          MR. PAIGE:  You heard from Dr. Proctor about
     that research, what the dirty money was used for,
     how people didn't know what it was being used for,
     the CTR, the TIRC, they were all in on it together,
     they were all part of the fraud.  So the fact that
     they're still, still, to this day, trying to
     pretend like they --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, to characterizing
     our defense of the case, Your Honor.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay, I'll move on. 4838
          MS. HENNINGER:  Motion --
          THE COURT:  Move on, Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  Again, they criticize because we
     brought in evidence, how can I prove to you
     entitlement to punitive damages if I don't show you
     the evidence?  How can I prove to you how you are
     going to compare fault if we don't show you the
     evidence?  If we don't show you what they did, if I
     just read a couple findings to you, would you know
     what they did?  Would you know the extent of their
     fraud?  Would you be able to compare fault between
     an addicted smoker and what they did?  They know
     that we have to give you that evidence.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Objection, Your Honor,
     characterizing what I know or not know.
          THE COURT:  Okay, it's overruled, finish up.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  It was mentioned at least
     five times that they couldn't believe -- to you
     they're telling, oh, I can't believe they showed
     you the evidence.  We have to, we have a job to do,
     we would not be doing our job if we didn't show you
     the evidence.
          Real quick, the chest x-rays on the -- they
     are now telling you that there is no lung cancer,
     it is not lung cancer, we haven't proven it is lung 4839
     cancer.  These are all the doctors that say it is
     lung cancer.  It's not easy bringing a lawsuit, but
     these are the doctors who told you, who you have
     seen the records of, and who have said under oath
     that they believe it was lung cancer more likely
     than not.  We can't do anything more than that.
          The fact whether or not the COPD manifested
     itself, because that's an important issue, there
     are chest x-rays from 1995 and 1996 that clearly
     show that he had hyperinflated lungs, flattening of
     the diaphragm, impressions from the radiologist,
     the radiologist who -- who testified in this case
     by deposition said that radiologists do make
     diagnosis from x-rays.
          So that's in the record.  That is the
     evidence.
          And then the next record, this was the record
     with Dr. Brooks, significant review of -- chronic
     cough with occasional yellow sputum.  Chest x-ray
     revealed an increased AP diameter.  That's in the
     record.  He had symptoms of this.  He had signs of
     it, it was clearly diagnosable.  If you get to that
     question, this whole thing with the lung cancer,
     whether or not a mass, a mass in the lung is a
     symptom.  A symptom. 4840
          MS. HENNINGER:  Your Honor, I --
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object.  There is no
     evidence of that.
          MR. PAIGE:  Now they're both objecting.
          THE COURT:  Who am I hearing the objection
     from Ms. Henninger or?
          MR. BAYUK:  Well --
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry, with all due respect.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Same objection, Your Honor,
     there is no evidence.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry, because first you were
     making your -- the objection, I just want to hear
     from one person.
          MR. PAIGE:  Whether --
          THE COURT:  What is the objection for the
     record.
          MS. HENNINGER:  There is no evidence that a
     mass is a symptom of lung cancer in this case.
          MR. PAIGE:  Well, we said it was.
          MS. HENNINGER:  We need an expert to say that.
          THE COURT:  If it's part of the testimony,
     you've got five more minutes, Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
 