         MR. BARINGER:  Good afternoon, ladies and
    gentlemen.  I want to join with Mr. Wichmann and
    Mr. Millard by starting out by thanking you very
    much.  They are right.  We've noticed you have
    been extraordinarily diligent.  You've paid close
    attention, and probably, most of all, you have
    been incredibly patient with us.  And I know the
    Court, Mr. Schlenther, their counsel and ours very
    much appreciate the way you have approached this
    very serious and very important job.
         As I told you in opening, this case is really
    at bottom about one thing and one thing only, and
    that is the choices that Beverly Schlenther made
    throughout her life about smoking.  It's about why
    she decided to start in 1955, and it's about why 2548 she decided to continue to smoke until she finally
    quit in 2001, when, unfortunately, it was too
    late.
         You have heard all the evidence.  Most
    importantly, you have heard from Mrs. Schlenther
    herself.  You have seen her deposition and you've
    seen her address those very questions.
         Mrs. Schlenther smoked, ultimately, because
    she enjoyed it, and she thought it was fun. I believe we've established that you are the
one that elected to begin smoking, right --
    A.   Yes.
    Q.   -- and to continue smoking?
    A.   I thought it was fun. She decided not to quit until
    2001, because until then -- and you heard her say
    this over and over again -- she wasn't ready to
    quit before that.  She didn't want to quit before
    that.  And you know it wasn't because she couldn't
    quit earlier.
         Mr. Wichmann in his closing told you about
    Dr. Kathleen Brady.  He called Dr. Brady the 2549 world's foremost expert on women and addiction.
    And you saw her testimony, and you saw she's an
    extraordinarily impressive physician.  And she has
    extraordinary credentials.  And what did she say
    about Mrs. Schlenther's ability to quit? Doctor, it's true, isn't it, that
Mrs. Schlenther ultimately had the ability to quit
smoking, right?
    A.   Ultimately, she did quit smoking.
    Q.   Okay.  And she always had the ability to quit
smoking?
    A.   Yes. She always had the ability to
    quit smoking.
         I'm going to talk about all of
    Mr. Schlenther's claims and the evidence in some
    detail.  But the bottom line is that
    Mr. Schlenther has failed to carry his burden of
    proof that Mrs. Schlenther developed COPD and died
    in 2010 because of anything that R.J. Reynolds
    did.
         Because the resolution of this case depends 2550 ultimately on whether he carried his burden of
    proof, I want to talk about that just for a couple
    minutes before I start talking about the evidence.
         The Court has instructed you on the law, and
    as you remember from jury selection, you are
    obligated to follow the law that the Court gives
    you.
         You were told that Mr. Schlenther had the
    burden of proving every element of all of his
    claims by the greater weight of the evidence.
         When you deliberate, you will see that
    verdict form that plaintiff's counsel showed you
    during their closing.  And the thing I want you to
    remember is on every one of those questions that
    you have to answer when you are done.  All of
    those questions are about Mrs. Schlenther, not the
    public, not some other smoker, but Mrs. Schlenther
    and only Mrs. Schlenther.
         I'm sorry.  My mouth just doesn't work on
    that sometimes.
         You will see that the consistent theme in all
    of those questions is the concept of legal cause.
    Legal cause means that, but for Reynolds' conduct,
    Mrs. Schlenther would not have developed the COPD
    and die.  "But for" is the standard.  And you will 2551 see that the -- and this is an example from the
    concealment.  It says "but for" in the first
    question -- or in the first instruction, and the
    second instruction talks about contribute
    substantially.  But contribute substantially in
    our system of law means the same thing as "but
    for."
         To the extent when you go back into the jury
    room that you find that you have to guess or
    speculate about some issue that relates to the
    claims, it means that the plaintiff has not
    carried his burden of proof.
         And I want to talk again just a little bit
    about legal cause to illustrate this for you.
         In openings, I gave you the examples of the
    dominos falling and that what they had to show on
    concealment is, if you take out the concealment,
    that the dominos stop falling.  And that was to
    show that without the wrongful conduct, she
    wouldn't have continued smoking, and she wouldn't
    have developed COPD.
         I want to give you another example, now, to
    illustrate, and I want to talk about it in the
    context of the negligence claim, what it means
    that but for the negligence, she wouldn't have 2552 developed.  And I want you to think about this in
    the context, an easy example is a car accident.
         Consider the first scenario.  In the first
    scenario, the driver of the car is going down the
    road and texting.  And that's negligent.  And
    because he was texting, he didn't see the stop
    sign.  He ran through and hit the other car.  It
    would be -- the negligence is the legal cause,
    because if you take away the texting, the accident
    wouldn't have happened.
         But consider a second example.  The driver is
    going down the road texting, but this time he sees
    the stop sign, but his brakes fail, and he goes
    through the intersection and the accident happens.
    His negligence wasn't the legal cause of the
    accident in that case, because you could take away
    the texting and the accident still happens.
         That's what legal cause, that's what "but for
    causation" means.  You could have negligence in
    both cases.  In one case it is the legal cause; in
    the other case it isn't.
         And, ultimately, it was their burden in this
    case to prove that if you take away whatever they
    say Reynolds did wrong, that Mrs. Schlenther would
    have stopped smoking and wouldn't have developed 2553 COPD and died.  But they didn't carry that burden
    of proof.
         I want to turn to the class membership
    question.  And I'm going take this a little bit
    out of order, because I think the question that
    Mr. Millard addressed and the question of her COPD
    is different from the rest of the issues in the
    case, so I want to talk about that first.
         You'll remember in opening I told you that
    they had to establish a number of things to be a
    class member.  And we'll talk about these later,
    that she was addicted and the addiction was the
    legal cause.
         The other one is whether she had and knew or
    should have known that she had COPD related to her
    smoking before November 21, 1996.  And I'm going
    to focus on that piece of it right now.  And as
    you saw, there are two separate questions on the
    verdict form about that.
         Question 3.  Did she have it before November
    21, 1996?
         And No. 4.  Did she know that she had it or
    should have known that she had it and that it was
    related to her smoking?
         Now, in opening I did tell you that if it had 2554 been before May of 1990, her claim would have been
    time barred.  And I told you that was a
    possibility.  But as the evidence came in during
    this case, it became obvious that the real issue
    was whether she had it before November 21, 1996,
    and whether she knew or should have known that she
    had it and it was related to her smoking.  So
    that's the key.
         I think the most logical way to approach this
    question is to think about what Mrs. Schlenther
    knew over time and what her condition was.  And I
    created a timeline that, I think, will help with
    that.  And I'm going to go through this in
    chronological order about what we knew and when.
         So what do we know about the 1970s and 1980s?
    We know that when she met Mr. Schlenther in 1974
    and then they got married in 1976, she was already
    on inhalers for asthma.  We know that by 1980 she
    was seeing Dr. Koehler, and he was taking care of
    her.  And in her deposition, she told you that
    Dr. Koehler told her that her smoking was bad for
    her health, and it was causing her problems with
    her asthma.
         Mr. Millard talked about that and suggested
    that it was causing it.  Dr. Koehler told her that 2555 her smoking was making her asthma worse and
    causing her problems, not that her smoking caused
    her asthma.
         And you saw evidence about the bronchitis,
    that January 1990 medical record that we talked
    about.  Chronic problems with shortness of breath.
         Now, Dr. Whims-Squires came in, and she told
    you that that wasn't really chronic bronchitis; it
    was acute bronchitis.  And the evidence of that
    was she would get over it, just like Mr. Millard
    said.  It wasn't going -- it didn't persist.  It
    didn't, say -- Every time she has a problem, she'd
    get medication -- and Mr. Schlenther said that she
    got penicillin from Dr. Koehler -- and the
    bronchitis would go away.  So it's consistent with
    what he said, that she had seasonal bronchitis
    that would come and go.
         So what do we know about the 1990s?  We have
    no more medical records for Mrs. Schlenther until
    1995, when she saw the heart doctor, Dr. Walsh.
    In 1995, she saw him for problems.  She had
    shortness of breath and she had chest pain.
         Now, remember what Dr. Whims-Squires said
    about shortness of breath?  She told you that
    there are many medical conditions that can cause 2556 shortness of breath, and not all of them have to
    do with a person's lungs.  Cardiologists,
    pulmonologists, always have to consider whether
    it's the heart, the lungs, whatever may be causing
    it.
         Now, Dr. Walsh did write that he had to rule
    out the occult coronary disease and he had to rule
    out the pulmonary disease, just like Mr. Millard
    told you.  The problem is the record does say rule
    out.  But what do we know about what Dr. Walsh,
    this incredibly attentive doctor, did?  He didn't
    order any pulmonary tests.  He didn't have her
    have a PFT.  He didn't refer her to a
    pulmonologist for follow-up treatment about that.
    He didn't even write COPD in his records.
         Now, Mr. Millard told you that Dr. Walsh --
    he said, Right there we knew from Dr. Walsh that
    she had COPD.
         What is the experience with doctors?  When
    they think that you have a disease, they reflect
    it in your medical records.  Do Dr. Walsh's
    records say anything about COPD?  Not a word.
         And what does this attentive doctor do as a
    result of this examination?  He ordered a
    cardiac echocardiogram -- or an echocardiogram. 2557 What is that?  It's a heart test.  Did he
    order a PFT?  No.
         The only thing that this physician did at the
    time was test her heart, and he made zero
    reference in his medical records to COPD at the
    time.
         The next record is in 1998, the first time
    that Mrs. Schlenther saw Dr. Worth.  And what did
    that record say?  It said she hadn't seen a family
    doctor in three years at that point.  No symptoms
    that sent her to a family doctor.  And she did
    have -- there was a section on medical history.
    And what did Mrs. Schlenther put on that medical
    history?  She said she had a history of asthma.
         Now, if Dr. Walsh would have told her, as
    Mr. Millard suggested, in 1995 that she had COPD
    and if she knew that -- and he said she should
    have known it was related to her smoking because
    of what Dr. Walsh would have told her -- why in
    1998, when she fills out the record for Dr. Worth,
    does she circle asthma and say yes, and not
    emphysema?  Does it make sense to you that
    Dr. Walsh would have told her that she had
    emphysema or COPD and she would have checked off
    asthma and not COPD?  That makes no sense 2558 whatsoever.
         Now, there is this reference to this 1994
    pulmonary function test.  And as Mr. Millard said,
    there is no medical record of that.  No one knows
    what doctor ordered it.  Nobody knows what kind of
    test it was.  Nobody knows what the results were.
    And no one certainly knows what Mrs. Schlenther
    would have been told about it at the time.  In
    fact, Dr. Whims-Squires told you that Mr. and
    Mrs. Schlenther didn't know the results of that
    test.
         All we do know is that when Mrs. Schlenther
    went to Dr. Walsh in 1995, she didn't tell him
    that anybody had diagnosed COPD in 1994 because of
    whatever tests she had.  And even in 1998,
    Dr. Worth said there was nothing about COPD --
    there is nothing about COPD in that 1998 record.
         And what did she say in 1998 to Dr. Worth
    about this whole thing, about this '94 test?  She
    reports the history of asthma, not COPD.
         Dr. Worth told you in his testimony that
    Mrs. Schlenther had not been diagnosed with COPD
    when she first saw him in 1998.  And it wasn't
    just that there was no diagnosis.  She didn't tell
    him that anybody told her that she had a history 2559 of COPD.
         And he testified that there is no way of
    knowing when Mrs. Schlenther would have
    experienced symptoms because of her COPD as
    opposed to some other medical condition like
    asthma.
         He told you that when he saw her for the
    first time, she was using an inhaler, Proventil,
    which can be used to treat asthma.  He said that
    when he saw her, she had no respiratory distress
    in 1998.  She had acute bronchitis with a minimal
    cough.  He didn't order a PFT when he saw her in
    1998.
         She saw him again in February of 1998.  At
    that time her acute bronchitis had gone away
    because of her medication.  He didn't order a PFT
    at that point.
         He saw her again in September and November of
    1999.  Neither one of those records that you've
    seen contains any complaint of respiratory
    symptoms or even shortness of breath.  He didn't
    order a PFT in 1999.
         Mrs. Schlenther didn't see Dr. Whims-Squires
    until 2002.  She did testify she thought it was
    likely that Mrs. Schlenther had COPD in 1994, 2560 1995.
         Now, Dr. Whims-Squires talked about that same
    phantom pulmonary test from 1994.  Dr. Whims-
    Squires told you she didn't have a record of the
    test.  She didn't know what type of test it was.
    She didn't know whether it would have even been
    suitable to diagnose COPD, because there are a lot
    of different kinds of tests, and she didn't know
    which one she had.
         We do know that the test probably is not the
    kind they use to diagnose PFT or COPD.  How do we
    know that?  Mrs. Schlenther described the test
    that she had, the PFT that they used to diagnose
    her COPD.  She said they put something over her
    nose and she had to breathe through a tube.  That
    was the kind of PFT that diagnosis COPD.
         And what else did she tell you?  That that
    was the very first time she had ever had a test
    like that.  That's what she told you.
         Dr. Whims-Squires said she had no idea what
    Mrs. Schlenther's symptoms were in 1994.  Why?
    Because she wasn't treating her then.  She didn't
    see her for eight years after that.
         She also admitted, in a response to a
    question from one of you, that someone who has a 2561 history of asthma could confuse the symptoms of
    COPD and asthma.  They might not have known,
    Mrs. Schlenther might not have known.
         Dr. Whims-Squires said Mrs. Schlenther was
    never actually diagnosed as having COPD in 1995.
    No record of it at all.
         And we also know that Dr. Whims-Squires says,
    I don't know if Mrs. Schlenther was symptomatic or
    even suspicious she might have something other
    than asthma in 1995.
         Then Dr. Whims-Squires says, I don't know
    what Mrs. Schlenther's symptoms would have been in
    1996 or even 1997.
         And Dr. Worth told you medicine isn't very
    good at measuring the progression of respiratory
    problems and symptoms that people with COPD have.
    He said, There is no clear-cut standard for when
    people begin experiencing shortness of breath
    because of COPD.
         We also know that Mrs. Schlenther's son,
    Russell, came in here and testified in front of
    you.  He said he began to notice his mother having
    breathing problems in the late 1990s or early
    2000s.  That's when he said she started having
    problems with her breathing, and she wasn't able 2562 to walk as far as she used to be able to do, and
    she wasn't able to do the things she used to like
    to do.
         Late 1990s, early 2000s.  Mrs. Schlenther's
    daughter Susan testified that she began to notice
    that her mother was having difficulty walking
    distances in 1998.  She said she may have noticed
    some shortness of breath around 1996, but it got
    worse later in the 1990s and early 2000s.  And she
    also testified she didn't know what was causing
    her mother's shortness of breath at the time.
         Mr. Schlenther testified in the Lane case.
    The lawsuit they filed against that contractor and
    the City of Largo.  His testimony and his
    deposition in the Lane case was Mrs. Schlenther
    started having respiratory problems in 2001 when
    the dirt and dust from the construction work
    invaded their home.
         In the Lane lawsuit he said, That was when
    she started to lose the ability to do things
    around the house and do the things that they
    enjoyed doing together, 2001, after the Lane
    construction started.
         So what do we know about the 2000s?
    Dr. Worth testified that any symptoms of COPD that 2563 Mrs. Schlenther had when he began treating her in
    1998 were mild but they became more severe over
    time.  We know that Dr. Worth finally ordered a
    PFT for Mrs. Schlenther in June of 2001, three
    years after he began treating her.
         He testified that that was the first time
    Mrs. Schlenther was diagnosed with COPD.
         We know about the results in July 2001.
    Dr. Worth actually called Mr. and Mrs. Schlenther
    at home and told her that she had COPD.
    Mr. Schlenther testified that -- about that in his
    Lane deposition, and they both testified that that
    was the first time that she knew that she had
    COPD, in 2001, when Dr. Worth called.  And
    remember what Mr. Schlenther said about it?  He
    said he was shocked when they got that telephone
    call.
         Both Dr. Worth and Dr. Whims-Squires
    testified that 2001 was the first time
    Mrs. Schlenther was told by a doctor that she had
    COPD.
         Now, Dr. Worth referred her to Dr.
    Whims-Squires, and she saw Dr. Whims-Squires for
    the first time in 2002.  And at her first visit
    Dr. Whims-Squires noted -- and you saw a piece of 2564 this in the video they showed you -- that
    Mrs. Schlenther had progressive shortness of
    breath over several years.  However, it seems to
    have accelerated over the past year.
         But Dr. Whims-Squires, the piece you didn't
    see in the video was Dr. Whims-Squires admitted on
    cross-examination that her record is consistent
    with Mrs. Schlenther developing COPD symptoms in
    the 1998 time frame.  Dr. Whims-Squires said that
    she told Mrs. Schlenther that her smoking was the
    cause of her COPD for the first time in 2002.
         Taken as a whole, ladies and gentlemen,
    Mr. Schlenther has not met his burden of proof to
    prove to you that Mrs. Schlenther was a member of
    the class.  No one can say definitively when she
    first had symptoms of COPD as opposed to asthma.
    But we know she wasn't told by anyone that the
    symptoms that she was having were COPD and it was
    related to her smoking before November 21st, 1996.
    In fact, we know that the first time that she knew
    that was in 2001.  They have not proved to you
    that Mrs. Schlenther had and knew or should have
    known that she had COPD related to her smoking
    before November 21st, 1996.  And I would ask that
    you answer no on questions 3 and 4. 2565 The other night when I was thinking about
    this closing argument I heard a train whistle from
    somewhere out there in Clearwater, and for
    whatever reason it made me think about the
    plaintiff's theory of this case.  Essentially,
    what they are asking you to believe overall is
    that Reynolds was responsible for
    Mrs. Schlenther's starting to smoke in 1955 and
    her -- for her to continue to smoke until she
    developed COPD, COPD which caused her death in
    2010.  It's like saying that Reynolds lured her
    onto a nonstop train filled with smokers, and she
    had no way to make it stop, no way to get off that
    train until she developed COPD.  But the facts
    that you heard do not fit that theory.
         You know, I remember seeing old movies about
    old fashioned passenger trains, and in one of them
    I remember, a comedy, it was that there was this
    emergency cord hanging down, and if you grabbed
    and pulled on that thing, it would -- it would
    stop the train.  It was like an emergency brake.
    And people would fly all over.
         And I have no idea whether that is realistic,
    or not whether they really did have those.  But I
    think the analogy works, because the point is 2566 Mrs. Schlenther always had the ability to pull the
    cord to make that train stop.  She had the ability
    to stop smoking after she had got started.  It
    wasn't a nonstop train at all.  It was one that
    wasn't out of control.  It was exclusively within
    Mrs. Schlenther's power to make that train stop in
    time.
         Her husband couldn't make her stop.  Her kids
    couldn't make her stop.  Her doctors couldn't make
    her stop.  Only she could.  And certainly R.J.
    Reynolds had no power to make her stop.
         I want to talk about the question of why did
    Mrs. Schlenther start smoking in 1955.  Now, this
    isn't about blaming Mrs. Schlenther.  This isn't
    about saying she was only 13 and she didn't know
    better so you should excuse her.  The issue in
    this case is, was it something that Reynolds did
    wrong that caused her to start smoking in 1953?
         She told you why she started to smoke in
    1953.  Or 1955.  She smoked her first cigarette
    with three friends in the bathroom at the movies.
    She said she was curious.  The first cigarette was
    just something they did.
         She told you that she lived in a house with
    lots of smokers.  That's why she started.  It's 2567 just what they did.
         Now she said none of the cigarette ads she
    saw affected her decision to smoke.  That the only
    people that contributed to her decision were her
    family members who were already smoking.
         Now, Mrs. Schlenther in her deposition did
    talk about Bogie and Bacall and seeing them in the
    movies and thinking they were very lovely.  But
    she also told you that wasn't why she -- that
    wasn't why she started to smoke.  And the only way
    you can deal with that is if they want you to
    discredit her testimony.  Did she know why she
    started smoking or not?
         Dr. Brady and Dr. Benowitz, two of the
    experts that you heard from, said that family and
    peer smoking are the most powerful influences of
    why kids start to smoke.  Does advertising have an
    effect?  Sure, it could.  But what we know is the
    most powerful influences are peers and family.
    And certainly her peers and her family had a big
    influence on Mrs. Schlenther.
         Plaintiff wanted you to believe, again, that
    it was all because of advertising, even though she
    denied that.  So they brought Dr. Hurt.  He's a
    doctor from the Mayo Clinic, and he came here to 2568 testify about just about everything, although he
    has no expertise in advertising, he's never done
    any research himself in advertising, he's never
    written about advertising.  Mr. Wichmann showed
    him some documents and asked Dr. Hurt to talk
    about that.  And I want to show you a couple of
    the documents he used.
         One was a document by Dr. Teague in 1973.
    They read you part of this.  But the part they
    didn't read you was Dr. Teague saying they were
    constrained from promoting cigarettes to the youth
    market; that is, to those in the approximately
    21-years-old-and-under group.
         They also didn't show you that Dr. Teague's
    memo also said, We should not in any way influence
    nonsmokers to start.  And remember, this was
    supposed to be a top secret document that would
    never see the light of day outside Reynolds.  But
    that's what Dr. Teague wrote.
         Then they want on and they talked about a
    document from Diane Burrows that was written in
    1984, 29 years after Mrs. Schlenther started
    smoking.  Dr. Hurt talked about that.  But again,
    there were a bunch of things in the secret
    document that they didn't show you. 2569 Younger adult smokers was defined as 18 and
    24.  It also said, If we are to compete
    effectively, we must recognize the imperative to
    know and meet the wants of those who are 18 and
    have already elected to smoke as well as those of
    older smokers.
         They didn't show you that one.
         They also didn't show you this part:  RJR's
    consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of
    free, informed, adult choice, which the company
    does not seek to influence.
         Nothing in those documents talked about why
    smokers start.  Nothing talked about inducing
    young people to start.
         And, you know, R.J. Reynolds was in a
    fiercely competitive industry.  They advertised a
    lot.  And we're not denying that or minimizing
    that in any respect.  But it was legal for them to
    advertise.  Dr. Hurt admitted that the Federal
    Trade Commission has always had the power to
    regulate cigarette advertising.  And although the
    plaintiff talked about advertising, they never
    linked it specifically to Mrs. Schlenther.  It was
    always that it's out there in the environment and
    Mrs. Schlenther was exposed to it, like everyone 2570 else.  But that's different than saying what the
    effect of it was on her.
         For example, despite all that advertising,
    her sister was exposed to exactly the same thing,
    she never started to know smoke.  In fact, you
    heard evidence that two thirds of the women in the
    United States are never smokers, never smoked,
    even though they were exposed to all the same
    advertising that Mrs. Schlenther was.
         What's the point?  It's not just the
    advertising.  It is how did it affect that
    individual.  And that's what their burden is in
    this case, to show how it affected her.
         Now Mr. Wichmann tried to -- he sort of
    suggested that cigarette ads were the only thing
    that was out there at the time she smoked her
    first cigarette.  But you also heard the testimony
    of a real historian, Dr. Gregg Michel.  And I want
    to make one quick comment about Dr. Michel.
         In Mr. Wichmann's cross and here again in
    closing today, he criticized Dr. Michel because
    his opinions in two other cases were the same as
    they were in this case.  I don't understand why
    that's supposed to be startling or surprising.
    The man is a historian.  History does not change 2571 from case to case.  The articles that were in
    Reader's Digest, the articles that were in the
    newspapers, the television coverage that you saw,
    none of that changes from case to case.
         Now, Dr. Michel did go and visit the places
    that Mrs. Schlenther lived, and he wanted to give
    you examples of what was in the local press about
    that.  But there is no reason to think any of --
    any of what was going on at the time changes just
    because it's a different case.  The sources of
    information that you saw are the sources of
    information that we all get information from.  It
    doesn't change from case to case.
         Now, think about -- I want to you think about
    one other thing.  Compare that to Dr. Cummings,
    who you saw.  Dr. Cummings was a video deposition.
    In it he said he testified over 40 times for
    plaintiffs in smoking and health cases.  His video
    is used all over the state of Florida when he
    doesn't go, and Mr. Wichmann thought it was
    perfectly fine to put that on.  But it's not all
    right for Dr. Michel to have the same opinion as a
    historian?
         One other point.  Mr. Wichmann again showed
    you that Wall Street Journal article talking about 2572 the Gallup poll and suggested that it was
    misrepresented.  You saw on cross what the truth
    was.  And I'll have to explain it again because
    Mr. Wichmann apparently didn't pay attention.
         That 1954 poll said --
         MR. WICHMANN:  Judge --
         MR. BARINGER:  -- have you seen or have you
    heard -- have you seen or have you heard that
    smoking causes lung cancer?
         Ninety percent of the people answered yes.
    And that's exactly what Dr. Michel told you.  Dr.
    Michel also went on to say, But that's different
    than belief.
         And what did we do after that?  We showed you
    belief polls, and we showed you that belief built
    up over the whole time.  There.
         Was no misrepresentation.  Not by Dr. Michel.
         Dr. Michel showed you mountains of
    information that was available in the -- to the
    public about the health effects of smoking and the
    addictive nature of nicotine.  He showed you
    textbooks that were used in West Virginia when she
    was a student there.  He showed you textbooks from
    Florida when she was a student there.  He showed
    you that there were -- outside of school there 2573 were lots of other -- there was lots of other
    publicity.  He showed you examples from West
    Virginia newspapers; he showed you examples from
    Florida newspapers; all before she even started to
    smoke.
         Does that mean that we are suggesting that
    she absolutely knew and believed that in 1954 and
    1955?  Of course not.  It's simply that that was
    the information environment, that none of it was a
    secret, it was out there.
         One other point I want to make about that.
    Mr. Wichmann seems to suggest that no one could
    possibly be aware of the dangers of smoking or
    that it's addictive if they go on to become a
    smoker.  Adults make that choice.  Sometimes,
    unfortunately, kids make that choice.  It doesn't
    mean that they are not aware of the potential
    dangers.  It doesn't mean that they don't believe
    it.  Sometimes people make choices to accept a
    risk, just like Mrs. Schlenther made that choice.
         So long before Mrs. Schlenther smoked her
    first cigarette in 1955, there was ample evidence,
    there was ample coverage of the possible health
    effects and the fact that it can be difficult to
    quit. 2574 Now, Dr. Benowitz.  And I'm going to talk
    about Dr. Benowitz in context in a minute.  But
    Mr. Wichmann made a suggestion in his closing
    that's just a little baffling.
         First of all, I did not tell you in opening
    that I was going to bring a witness here to say
    that Mrs. Schlenther was not addicted.  I never
    said that.  I told you, you are going to have to
    make up your mind based on your common sense.
         And then Mr. Wichmann said, So the only thing
    I could bring was Dr. Benowitz to talk about it,
    who ended up, it was another generic deposition.
         It was a generic deposition.  It's used by
    plaintiffs all over the state of Florida.  I
    didn't bring Dr. Benowitz or play that tape to say
    Mrs. Schlenther wasn't addicted.  I brought it to
    talk about what addiction means and ability to
    quit.  And I'll show you that very shortly.
         But Dr. Benowitz, who is one of the world's
    leading researchers on nicotine and addiction,
    told you that even before Mrs. Schlenther smoked
    her first cigarette, it had been commonly known in
    this country for over 100 years that nicotine is
    in tobacco, and that it's been known for over a
    hundred years that it's difficult to quit once you 2575 start smoking, and he told you that terms like
    "nicotine fiend" and "nicotine fit" have been used
    to describe the difficulty of quitting for a long
    time in this country.
         Dr. Cummings, the other video that they
    showed you, said -- he admitted people have known
    for a hundred years that tobacco is difficult to
    quit.
         The evidence is clear, there was abundant
    information that was available.  It wasn't all
    just advertisements.
         But the bottom line is Mrs. Schlenther told
    you why she started smoking.  It was because of
    peer influence and family influence.  It wasn't
    that there was no information floating around out
    there about the hazards of smoking or the
    difficulty of quitting.  It wasn't because of
    advertising.  She told you that.  There is no
    evidence that Reynolds did anything wrong that
    caused Mrs. Schlenther to begin smoking in 1955.
         So we know why she started.  She told you.
    And now I want to talk about why she continued to
    smoke until 2001.  Why did she choose to stay on
    that train?  Why didn't she make it stop and get
    off? 2576 You heard from Mrs. Schlenther herself about
    why.  She liked smoking.  She didn't want to quit.
    And it wasn't because she wasn't warned.
         She told you in her own testimony, she was
    warned by her husband, she was warned by her
    children, she was warned by other family members,
    she was warned by her doctors, she saw evidence,
    she saw the coverage in the media, she saw the
    government mandated warnings, and she saw public
    health community public service announcements.
    Every one of those things gave her warnings about
    the potential risks of smoking and the addictive
    nature of nicotine and smoking.
         And it wasn't because she wasn't aware.  She
    told that you she was -- she said that she was
    aware of the warnings on every pack of cigarettes
    once they started going on. And you have known since at least the time
the warnings went on packages that smoking might pose a
health risk, correct?
    A.   Yes, sir. She also told you in that 2577 deposition that she was aware that, because of the
    warning, that smoking was bad for her health.  And
    she saw all the warnings over time.  The
    beginning, in 1966.  The change in 1970.  And then
    in 1972, those were on every ad that was run.  And
    then the four rotating warnings that have been on
    every pack since 1985.  She was aware of all that.
         She was also aware from personal experience.
    We know that her grandfather died of lung cancer
    in 1973.  Her Uncle Earl died from heart problems
    associated with smoking in 1973.  Her Aunt
    Virginia died in the seventies from lung cancer
    that Mrs. Schlenther linked to smoking.  She
    learned from personal experience.
         We also know that she told you that the
    reason she didn't stop was because even though she
    believed that smoking would be injurious to her
    health, she didn't stop.  Why?  Because she didn't
    want to.
         And all of the addiction experts that
    testified in this case agreed that if a smoker
    doesn't really want to quit, they won't.
         She -- we know that she ignored her
    stepfather.  Remember, her stepfather lectured her
    about smoking on her way to school when she was 14 2578 and told her it was bad for her health.  What did
    she say she did?  She ignored him.  And that may
    be typical of a lot of teenagers.
         But it didn't stop with her stepfather when
    she was a teenager.  She said her daughter said
    that when Mr. Schlenther confronted her about her
    smoking, what was Mrs. Schlenther's response?
    Leave me alone.
         Now, I want to real quick, before I do the
    next one, I want to say something about the
    brother-in-law.  Mr. Wichmann said I broke a
    promise to you because I promised that you would
    hear the brother-in-law say that she at one point
    said that she would rather be dead than quit
    smoking.
         And we didn't put him on here separately,
    because if you remember Dr. Brady's video, the
    psychiatrist, I went through all of Mr. Martin's
    testimony with her.  And I asked Dr. Brady, Isn't
    it true that the brother-in-law has testified in
    his deposition that she said she would rather be
    dead than quit?  And Dr. Brady, who had read his
    deposition, agreed.
         I didn't bring him to say the same thing.
    But you heard his testimony through Dr. Brady. 2579 Her kids constantly were trying to get her to
    quit smoking.  But she wasn't ready.  That's what
    she told you. Were they concerned for your health --
    A.   I'm sure they were.  I'm sure they were.
    Q.   What was your reaction?  What was your
response when they would talk to you about it?
    A.   I don't know.  I can't answer that.
    Q.   Were you not ready at that time?
    A.   I wasn't ready. She wasn't ready at that
    point.  Then when her doctors were advising her to
    quit she wasn't -- The doctors told you to quit, correct?
    A.   Yeah, but I didn't.
    Q.   And you testified to earlier, you weren't
ready to quit.  You didn't want to quit then, right?
    A.   That's right. She didn't want to quit when 2580 her doctor's warned her.  She said didn't even
    listen to her doctor's warnings because she didn't
    want to quit. Did you listen to your doctors when they
talked to you?
    A.   No.
    Q.   Why not?
    A.   Because I -- I didn't want to quit smoking.
    Q.   Is it fair to say you liked smoking?
    A.   Yes, sir.
    Q.   Okay.  You enjoyed it?
    A.   I did.
    Q.   Okay.  And you didn't want to quit back in
this time frame, correct?
    A.   No, I didn't. She also testified that
    despite seeing and believing the warnings on those
    packages of cigarettes, she said she wasn't
    quitting and made no effort to quit. Did you pay any attention to the content of 2581
the label?
    A.   I mean, I -- I would read it on the cigarette
pack, but I -- I wasn't quitting.
    Q.   Did you make any efforts at the time when you
saw it?
    A.   No, I didn't make any effort. You also saw medical records.
    One example was from Dr. Worth in 1999.  Patient
    flatly declines smoking cessation.
         Despite the clear testimony from
    Mrs. Schlenther herself, plaintiffs tried to
    convince you that she couldn't get off that train
    she was on because of Reynolds' wrongful conduct.
         And I want to talk about their theories of
    what they did wrong that made her continue to
    smoke.  But ladies and gentlemen, every one of
    those theories is going to fail when the facts are
    applied.
         The first theory is, and their fundamental
    theory in this case, is that Mrs. Schlenther was
    addicted and could not quit sooner because of the
    addiction.
         Now, this is part of the class membership
    issue that you are familiar with.  And I'm going 2582 to discuss this concept, this issue in the context
    of the first two questions on the verdict form
    that go to class membership.
         Was Beverly Schlenther addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine?  And was Beverly Schlenther's
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a
    legal cause of her COPD and death?
         Those are two separate and distinct
    questions.  But the question they are not asking
    is did cigarette smoking cause her COPD.  We all
    know that.  That's not in dispute.  What we are in
    front of you in closing arguments, that isn't what
    the case is about.
         The first question is, Was she addicted?
         Now, despite what Mr. Wichmann told you, what
    I said in opening was the Court is not going to
    give you a definition of addiction.  And he
    didn't.  You heard the jury instructions.  There
    is no definition.  And in the end, all that means
    is that you have to use your common sense and
    decide whether you think Mrs. Schlenther was in
    control of her smoking or whether it was in
    control of her.  Did she smoke because she wanted
    to, or did she smoke because she had to?  Was she
    willing or unwilling? 2583 Now, you saw evidence in this case about her
    ability to control her smoking.  She didn't smoke
    in the house or the car after Mr. Schlenther quit.
    She didn't smoke around her grandchildren.  She
    obeyed the restrictions at work, only smoked on
    her breaks or took a puff when we went to the
    bathroom.  She didn't smoke during meals.  She
    didn't get up and leave during meals.  She didn't
    smoke at church.  She didn't leave church
    services.  She didn't smoke at Sunday school.  In
    the morning when she was taking care of had
    mother, she would wait over an hour before she
    would have her first cigarette.
         But that's evidence that she wasn't out of
    control.  But ultimately, on the simple question
    of whether she was addicted, that's up to your
    common sense.  Because as I told you in opening,
    the real issue is the second question.  The real
    issue is, Was the addiction to cigarettes
    containing nicotine a legal cause of her COPD and
    death?
         You don't reach that if you don't -- if you
    decide she wasn't addicted.  But if you do, this
    is a separate question.
         Now, Mr. Wichmann talked to you, and he 2584 showed you clips of experts saying she was
    addicted.  And he went to his verdict form and he
    checked off "addicted" and he checked off "It was
    the legal cause of her death" as if it were the
    same question.  And ladies and gentlemen, it could
    not even be close to the same question.
         The real question is did Mrs. Schlenther have
    the ability to quit?  And the answer to that
    undoubtedly is yes, she did.
         Now, they showed you a piece of a document
    from 1980 where somebody wrote, I have been told
    that we can't defend these cases on the basis of
    free choice if someone is addicted.  And the one
    thing I will tell you about that document that
    they showed you is it is a perfect example that
    people can be wrong.  If -- if it wasn't wrong, if
    that wasn't the case, we wouldn't be standing in
    front of you right now.
         Now, in opening I did talk about personal
    choice behavior.  And Mr. Wichmann is absolutely
    correct, I am going to talk about choice a lot.
    But as I told you in opening, I'm not the only one
    and the tobacco companies aren't the only one to
    talk about choice.  You saw this in opening.  In
    1977 and 1978, the publication of Public Health 2585 Service called smoking A personal choice.
         That wasn't written by R.J. Reynolds.
         In 1982, the Surgeon General's report.  A
    personal choice behavior.
         In 1986, the Surgeon General wrote, Cigarette
    smoking is an addictive behavior, and the
    individual smoker must decide whether or not to
    continue that behavior.
         Let me tell you, first of all, one of the
    things that's interesting about that is the
    Surgeon General in 1986 was C. Everett Koop, who I
    think you saw a clip from.  That's what he put in
    his report in 1986.
         Dr. Cummings, the expert that they put on by
    video, said he agreed with the Surgeon General in
    1986.
         Dr. Brady, the psychiatrist, the first
    witness you saw in the case, said she agreed with
    the Surgeon General's statement.
         As a matter of fact, there was only one
    witness that disagreed with this.  Dr. Hurt.
         I asked Dr. Hurt, Well, if it's not a choice
    what do you call it when 60 million people stop
    smoking?
         And after thinking about it for a while, he 2586 called it treatment.  And I still don't know quite
    what that means.
         But the one thing we do know is that the
    Surgeon General has a point about this.  Dr. Brady
    in her deposition or in her testimony said it
    wouldn't make any sense for the Surgeon General to
    say that the individual smoker must decide whether
    or not to continue if the individual smoker didn't
    have the ability to carry out that decision.  It
    would be an exercise in futility.  It would make
    no sense.
         And every one of the addiction experts that
    you heard from in this case said that smokers,
    even highly addicted smokers, have the ability to
    quit.
         Does that mean that we are suggesting that
    it's always easy?  Of course not.  It depends on
    the individual.  For some individuals it's easy,
    for some it's extraordinarily difficult, but they
    all ultimately have that ability.  And the
    evidence of this simple fact is that there are
    over 60 million ex-smokers in the United States.
    How could they have done that if they didn't have
    a choice?  How could they have done that if they
    didn't exercise that choice and quit? 2587 All of the evidence shows, even on the 60
    million people, all of their experts told you the
    vast majority of them were addicted when they made
    that decision and when they successfully quit.
         And none of the experts that you heard from
    said that Beverly Schlenther couldn't quit.
    Obviously, they couldn't say that.  She did in
    2001, and she never smoked again for the remaining
    nine years of her life.  And none of them told you
    she couldn't have quit sooner.  There was
    absolutely no evidence that the day
    Mrs. Schlenther made the choice to quit smoking,
    that she was any less addicted than she had been
    at any other point in her life.
         And please remember what Dr. Brady said.  Dr.
    Brady said, She always had the ability to quit.
         Now, whether a smoker is addicted or not,
    nicotine doesn't interfere with an individual's
    ability to think or reason.  And I think there
    were a couple of questions from you during the
    trial about whether addiction affects a person's
    ability to understand warnings or understand the
    information that's available.
         Dr. Brady addressed that question, and she
    told you nicotine doesn't -- 2588 I believe I can show you this. Does that mean that smokers are unable to
understand the warnings on the pack?
    A.   No, I don't believe it's to that extent.
    Q.   Would it impair them so much that they
wouldn't be able to understand health warnings from
family members, friends, physicians?
    A.   I don't think so. Dr. Benowitz addressed the
    same question. Just so we're clear, there is nothing about
the effect on the brain that -- the effect nicotine has
on the brain that prevents a smoker from understanding
that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, COPD and
heart diseases, right?
    A.   That's correct.
    Q.   All right.  And nicotine does not affect the
thinking or cognitive process at all, does it?
    A.   No.
         (End of video clip.) 2589 MR. BARINGER:  Dr. Brady also admitted that
    the evidence in this case shows clearly that
    Mrs. Schlenther was aware of the health risks of
    smoking, and she was aware of the health
    consequences of smoking.  Mrs. Schlenther's own
    testimony was that she believed and understood the
    information in the warnings.  But remember, she
    said she just didn't care.  She didn't want to
    quit.
         Now, Dr. Brady talked about the brain
    changes.  Mr. Wichmann talked about the 60 million
    smokers and brain changes.  Dr. Brady told you
    that even addicted smokers, with all of the
    changes in the brain she described, can quit
    smoking, and that the key to successfully quitting
    is personal motivation.
         And Dr. Benowitz told you the exact same
    thing.  The key is personal motivation.  And the
    changes in the brain that they both talked about
    don't prevent that from happening.
         You also saw a pamphlet from the American
    Cancer Society.  Do you have what it takes to stop
    smoking?  And remember, it asks three questions.
    Do you want to stop smoking?  Are you willing to
    make some changes in your daily routine?  Are you 2590 willing to put up with some uneasy moments after
    stopping?  And at the bottom it says, If you can
    answer yes to all three questions, you can stop
    smoking.
         And all of the experts agreed with every bit
    of that.
         But the evidence was Mrs. Schlenther wasn't
    prepared to answer yes to those questions until
    2001.  She didn't throw her cigarettes away
    before.  She didn't throw her ash trays away
    before.  She didn't do any of those things.
         Now, Dr. Cummings, their expert on addiction,
    told you one of the ways to judge if a smoker is
    truly motivated to quit is if they do things like
    throw their cigarettes away, get rid of their ash
    trays.  And she didn't do that until 2001.
         Dr. Worth told you when he first saw her in
    1998, she was not ready to commit to quitting.  He
    testified that she quit for good in 2001, when she
    was motivated and when she was committed.
         The vast majority of time in her life she
    made no effort to stop.  The first time she tried
    was in 1985 or 1984, almost 30 years after she
    started smoking.
         Now Dr. Benowitz, Dr. Brady and Dr. Cummings 2591 also all admitted that the fact is some people
    just don't want to quit.  He said some people feel
    pressured into saying they want to quit by
    friends, family, spouses, doctors.  And he said
    that smokers will say they want to or even say
    they are trying just to get somebody off their
    back.
         You heard from family members say that
    Mrs. Schlenther tried and couldn't quit sooner.
    But she told you the truth.  She told you that the
    reason she didn't quit before that was because she
    really didn't want to.  And that -- remember that
    1984, 1985 vacation that she went on with
    Mrs. Schlenther -- with Mr. Schlenther when they
    went away for two weeks and they both tried to
    quit smoking?  She told you that when they got
    back and she started smoking again, that she told
    Mr. Schlenther she tried but couldn't, she just
    couldn't do it.  But she told you in her
    deposition the truth, and the truth was it wasn't
    that she couldn't quit, it was that she didn't
    want to quit. Is that one of the reasons that led to you 2592
choose to pick up another cigarette and start smoking?
    A.   No.  I just wanted to smoke.  I wasn't ready
to quit. That's what she said about why
    she picked up that cigarette when she went back to
    work.  She just wasn't ready to quit.
         But we do know that in 2001 she was ready.
         Now she didn't receive a package of
    previously secret Reynolds documents one day.  She
    didn't suddenly get information that they claimed
    was concealed.  That had nothing to do with why
    she became motivated in 2001.  And we know why she
    was motivated.  She said that it was because she
    wanted to stop for her granddaughter's first
    birthday the next day.  Her daughter Susan said
    that Mrs. Schlenther told her that she was
    starting to be bothered by her smoking once she
    started having grandchildren.  And she said now
    that she was having grandchildren, she didn't want
    to smoke around them, and she didn't want to take
    time away from, them so she decided to quit.
         Susan told you that is the first time she
    ever heard her mother say that.
         She said that it was the first time -- 2593 Mrs. Schlenther actually said that was the first
    time I threw away my cigarettes.  That was the
    first time she put up motivational notes around
    the house for herself.  She told you in her
    testimony that was the first time she had ever
    quit for any length of time.  And we know that she
    never smoked again.
         Now, we asked her about the prior quit
    attempts that you have heard about.  And in her
    deposition she identified three things that she
    had done over her life before 2001 to quit.
         The vacation with her husband in 1984, 1985.
    And you just heard her say that the reason she
    didn't stay quit was because she wasn't ready.
         Then she talked about hypnosis.  And they
    told you she went twice.  And the evidence was on
    hypnosis that they couldn't hypnotize her.  And
    she said she never actually even stopped smoking
    when she tried that.  She didn't skip a single
    cigarette.  She just went.  We're not sure why.
    There's no testimony about why.  But we know she
    never put down her cigarettes when she was trying
    to do that.
         Nicorette gum.  She said she tried that once
    for a couple weeks.  But what does she admit? 2594 While she was using the gum, she never tried to
    stop smoking.  She never skipped a cigarette.  She
    just chewed the gum.
         They weren't serious attempts.  And Susan
    told that you, she said she -- she said it was her
    impression that her mother really wasn't serious
    about quitting.  And Susan testified that her
    mother told her she really didn't want to quit.
         Now, Dr. Benowitz told you that if you use
    smoking cessation aids, things like the pills, or
    the pill, Wellbutrin, and although there is
    evidence that she had a prescription, there is no
    evidence that she ever took it.
         The patch, gum, any of those things,
    Dr. Benowitz told you it's no substitute for
    motivation.  And Dr. Brady told you that cessation
    aids will not make a smoker quit smoking if the
    smoker really doesn't want to.  It doesn't work.
         The evidence was that Mrs. Schlenther didn't
    try to stop smoking until smoking affected her in
    a way that was personal and mattered to her.  And
    that was something Reynolds could never have given
    her the motivation to quit for her grandchildren.
         And it's true some people have a great deal
    of difficulty quitting.  But Mrs. Schlenther, when 2595 she finally made the decision to do that, she
    never relapsed once.  She never had another
    cigarette.
         Now, it's true, she used the patch.  But she
    started using it the next morning.  And she said
    even though she was doing okay, she decided to
    keep it on for a couple of other weeks, couple
    weeks after that.
         There is no reason to believe she couldn't
    have quit without the patch, because she was
    motivated.  She was truly motivated at that point.
         When Mrs. Schlenther made the decision, when
    it became personal to her because of her
    grandchildren, she quit for good.  And that was
    motivation her husband, her children, her doctors
    and R.J. Reynolds could never have given her
    before.  That's what it took.
         Your Honor, I think this would be a good time
    to give the jurors a break.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Do you have more closing?
         MR. BARINGER:  Yes, I do.
         THE COURT:  Members of the panel, why don't
    we take a little necessity break, and we'll take
    back up with the lawyers.
         Let's make it until 25 after by the courtroom 2596 clock.
         If you just close your notebooks and leave
    them there.
         Mr. Bailiff, if you will escort them in
    whatever direction they would like to go.
         THE BAILIFF:  Yes, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  And we're off the record.
         (The jury retired from the courtroom at
    3:08 p.m.)
         (A recess was taken at 3:08 p.m.)
         (Court called to order at 3:28 p.m.)
         THE COURT:  We're back on the record in Case
    No. 10-5736.  We have attorneys present.  We're
    out of the hearing of the panel.  We're without
    plaintiff.
         Anything else from plaintiffs before we bring
    the panel back?
         MR. WICHMANN:  No, sir.
         THE COURT:  Anything else from the defense?
         MR. BARINGER:  No, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  We're ready for them.
         THE BAILIFF:  Yes, Your Honor.
         (The plaintiff returned to the courtroom.)
         (The jury returned to the courtroom at
    3:29 p.m.) 2597 THE COURT:  Thank you.
         According to my notes, we had left off with
    Mr. Baringer doing his closing.
         Counsel, you may continue.
         MR. BARINGER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I have talked about the
    two class membership issues.  As you'll recall
    from earlier on, you were told if you ultimately
    decide that Mrs. Schlenther is a member of the
    class -- and I don't think the evidence supports
    that, but if you get that far, the findings come
    into play, and I want to talk about that just for
    a couple of minutes.
         I want to remind you that the findings do not
    mean that Reynolds is liable and they don't
    establish whether Mrs. Schlenther was injured by
    any conduct of R.J. Reynolds.  In and of
    themselves, the findings do not establish either
    of those things.  And ultimately, as the
    instruction tells you, you must not speculate or
    guess what those mean or what they were based on.
         The point is, the class action jury that made
    those findings years ago didn't know anything
    about Mrs. Schlenther.  They didn't know when her
    smoking history was.  They didn't know why she 2598 made whatever decisions she made.  They simply
    didn't know.  And the plaintiff still has the
    burden, even with the findings, of establishing
    that whatever wrongful conduct they want to
    describe to you caused Mrs. Schlenther's injuries.
    That is the only way that Reynolds becomes liable.
         And I want to talk about a few of the
    theories that you've heard from plaintiffs during
    the course of the case.  One was about filtered
    cigarettes and low tar cigarettes.  You heard
    Dr. Hurt testify about that.  And you heard
    Mr. Wichmann ask him questions about, Weren't
    filters just false reassurance for smokers to keep
    them smoking?  Weren't low tar cigarettes
    intended -- intended to keep people smoking?
         And my point is going to be very simple about
    this.  It doesn't matter that the public health
    community advocated both.  What really matters is
    what difference did that make to Mrs. Schlenther.
         What do we know about filters?  She never
    smoked a nonfilter.  She never switched from
    nonfilter to a filter because she thought it was
    healthier.  She started smoking a filtered
    cigarette, Winston, that she got from her mother
    that her mother bought for her, but nonfilters 2599 were never an issue.  There is no proof that it
    had -- that the reassurance issue they're talking
    about had anything to do with her.  She never
    switched.
         The same thing with low tar and light
    cigarettes.  What was the testimony about that?
    She tried one that she borrowed from a friend, she
    didn't like it, and she never smoked them.
         And even when Mr. Schlenther was buying her
    whatever was cheapest at the Indian store for the
    last 14 years she smoked, it was never low tar.
    She never bought light -- he never bought light
    cigarettes for her, because she didn't like them.
         The issue was completely irrelevant in this
    case.
         Let's now talk about another theory you
    heard.  And that was that Reynolds intentionally
    engineered its cigarettes to be more difficult to
    quit.  Dr. Hurt talked about this.  And he talked
    about -- remember, he showed you some internal
    Reynolds' documents, and it was talking about the
    importance of nicotine and how Reynolds understood
    that nicotine was important to smokers, but it was
    a deep, dark secret that they never told the
    outside world about. 2600 Well, let's talk about the documents he used
    in his case to try and prove that.  The first one
    was from Claude Teague in 1972.  And that
    document, which we won't bother showing, was
    talking about -- remember that it said nicotine is
    the sine qua non and without nicotine, nothing?
         What did I do?  I showed Dr. Hurt a 1950
    Reader's Digest article.  And what did that
    Reader's Digest article say?  Nicotine is the
    essential ingredient in tobacco.  Without it, it's
    just another weed.
         That was over 20 years before -- that was
    over 20 years before Dr. Teague wrote his memo.
         And then Lennox Johnson, I showed him that,
    because that same Teague document talked about
    cigarettes deliver a dose of nicotine like smoking
    opium delivers a dose of morphine?
         And Dr. Hurt admitted that Lennox Johnson,
    the scientist in Great Britain, 30 years before
    Dr. Teague wrote that memo that they showed you,
    had discussed exactly the same concept.  It wasn't
    a secret unique to Reynolds at all.
         But the document also talked about altering
    tar-to-nicotine ratios on cigarettes, adjusting
    the amount of nicotine relative to the amount of 2601 tar.  And Dr. Hurt was very critical of Reynolds,
    because it said that Reynolds was looking at how
    to keep customers satisfied, how to keep them
    smoking, how to control the amount of nicotine.
         And I asked Dr. Hurt, wasn't it true that the
    Surgeon General of the United States advocated
    research in that very concept?
         And Dr. Hurt -- I had to show him the 1981
    Surgeon General's report.
         In '81, the Surgeon General said, examination
    of the ratio of tar yield to nicotine yield per
    cigarette is interesting in light of the
    hypothesis that nicotine, perhaps in combination
    with organoleptic compounds, exhibits a threshold
    value for acceptability to the consumer.
         Now, ladies and gentlemen, the Surgeon
    General in 1981 wasn't talking about engineering
    cigarettes to be more difficult to quit.  It was
    part of a public health strategy.
         I showed him that same report:  Research
    could show if there was an optimum combination of
    standard yield and ratio that leads to maximum
    satisfaction and minimal exposure to toxic
    products.
         And why in the world was the Surgeon General 2602 advocating this?  Not to addict smokers and keep
    them smoking.  Remember the concept that I
    discussed with Dr. Hurt?  The danger and the
    disease causation doesn't come from the nicotine.
    It comes in the tar.  It comes in those
    constituents.  And the Surgeon General's theory
    and the public health community, what they were
    trying to do was find a way to give smokers the
    nicotine they wanted but deliver far less of what
    was dangerous in the process.  And that is exactly
    what that -- what those documents were about.
    Even Dr. Hurt admitted that the danger is from the
    tar and the constituents, not the nicotine.
         Now, to the public health community at the
    time, it made perfect sense to do what you could
    to develop a less hazardous cigarette for smokers.
    That made sense to everyone but Dr. Hurt.
         What did Dr. Hurt say?  He said it was a
    waste of time and it was wrong for Reynolds to
    spend decades trying to produce a less hazardous
    cigarette.
         Remember, he acknowledged that they worked
    with the National Cancer Institute, Tobacco
    Working Group.  And the purpose of that work was
    to develop a less hazardous cigarette based on the 2603 Surgeon General's recommendations.  And what did
    Dr. Hurt say?  It was wrong.  They shouldn't have
    even tried doing that.
         Something else I discussed with Dr. Hurt was
    his concept about smoking pH, and that if you
    increase the pH, it makes cigarettes more
    addictive.  And he told you about the theory about
    free nicotine being absorbed faster and that, in
    and of itself, he says, makes it more addictive.
         But when I talked to Dr. Hurt about that,
    remember what we established happened.  If you
    increase the pH and there is more free nicotine,
    where did Dr. Hurt say that is first absorbed?  In
    the mouth and in the throat.  And what did he say
    about how fast that is?  That's a much slower
    route to the brain than if it's absorbed in the
    lung.
         So if you want to make a cigarette more
    addictive, why do you make it so that the
    nicotine, a part of the nicotine that ordinarily
    wouldn't be absorbed in the mouth and the throat,
    why would you want to do it?  It slows down
    delivery.  That wasn't the point.
         And then the other thing that we established
    is that because of the pH of mucus in the lung, 2604 smoke from a cigarette that doesn't have any free
    nicotine in it, as soon as it hits the lung, the
    higher pH of the lung converts the nicotine to
    free nicotine and it's absorbed.
         And how long did Dr. Hurt tell you that that
    takes to hit the brain?  I think he said five
    heartbeats.  A matter of seconds.
         So I asked him, if you increase the pH and
    you come up with some free nicotine that isn't
    absorbed in the mouth or throat, if some gets down
    there, how much faster does it get to the brain?
         And what did he tell you?  He says he's not
    sure, but maybe milliseconds.
         So remember that chart he showed how fast
    nicotine gets to the brain and dopamine starts
    getting released?  And I asked him, What was the
    pH of the cigarette use in that chart?  And he
    didn't know.
         And I said, Well, how much difference would
    there be between a cigarette with a higher pH and
    a lower pH in that peak concentration?
         And the answer was, he didn't know.
         He doesn't know what the meaning of his
    theory is.  He can't tell you how much faster it
    is, if at all.  The one thing he can tell you for 2605 sure is less of the nicotine gets to the lung,
    more is absorbed through the mouth and throat, and
    he couldn't tell you what difference it really
    made.
         But there are a couple other interesting
    things that he talked about.  First of all,
    remember he said that was the biggest secret that
    was revealed from the documents in Minnesota?  And
    that was in 1998, that suddenly the world
    discovered this whole issue of pH?  But I asked
    him about public documents from the 1970s where
    the NCI Tobacco Working Group was addressing that
    very issue, the use of modification of pH to try
    and make a safer cigarette.
         Ladies and gentlemen, there was nothing
    secret at all about the idea or the theory that if
    you altered pH, it could have some effect.  In the
    1970s, 20 years before Dr. Hurt was surprised, it
    was public that the federal government, in
    cooperation with the cigarette industry, was
    looking at that issue.
         And remember what he and Dr. Benowitz told
    you.  If you grow your own tobacco, if you go out
    in the field and you pick it, you cure it, you
    chop it up into pieces and you smoke it without 2606 any ammonia, without anything, it can be
    addictive.  And if you smoke it long enough, not
    only is it addictive, it will cause COPD.
         There was -- and then I asked him about the
    thirties, forties, and fifties.  I said, Were the
    cigarettes in the thirties, forties and fifties,
    long before anyone thought of this pH idea, were
    those cigarettes addictive?  The answer was yes.
         Addiction isn't created by this issue at all.
         And then I asked him, in terms of the effect,
    if he compares brands of cigarettes, one with a
    higher pH and one with a lower pH, I said, is
    there any evidence that the one brand is easier to
    quit than another?  And what was his answer?  No.
         He didn't have any proof that any of his
    theories made any difference at all.  No evidence
    that one brand was easier to quit than the other.
         Then he talked about menthol.  What did he
    tell you about menthol?  He said, Well, it really
    doesn't affect the addictiveness, but it makes it
    more palatable, that they're easy --
         And I asked him, Well, more palatable.  Does
    that mean they inhale more?  Does that mean they
    puff more?
         And he said no, there's no studies that 2607 indicate that that's true.
         Then I asked him, Well, isn't it true that
    Mrs. Schlenther started with nonmenthol cigarettes
    and they were plenty palatable for her?  She
    smoked them for a long time.
         And his answer was, yes.
         What about the overall cigarette market?  Are
    nonmenthol cigarettes palatable enough for
    millions of people to smoke them far in excess of
    menthol?  Absolutely.  Menthol was another
    nonissue in this case.
         Another area that Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings
    discussed was public statements that the companies
    made that it hadn't yet been proven that smoking
    causes lung cancer.
         Before we talk about that specifically, I
    want you to think for a minute, what was
    Mrs. Schlenther's constant view on that question
    about whether or not it caused disease?  Was there
    any evidence, one witness that said that
    Mrs. Schlenther ever expressed any doubt about
    whether smoking could cause disease?  No, not one
    witness.  Not one said that.  Was there any
    evidence that she ever made it a point if somebody
    said, Hey, that smoking is not good for you, you 2608 should quit, did she ever debate with them and
    say, no, I don't think so?  No.  Did she ever
    dispute it?  Did she ever say, I don't need to
    quit; it's not going to hurt me; it's not harmful?
    Did she ever say that?  No.  What did she say?
    She acknowledged that it was bad for her health.
    She acknowledged the health risks she was taking,
    but her answer was always that I'm not ready, I
    don't want to quit.
         And remember, Mrs. Schlenther's daughter
    Susan said, she -- her mother never said she heard
    anything from a statement by a tobacco company.
    She never relied on anything that a tobacco
    company said.
         And the only thing that we ever heard that --
    anything that she said was that it was after she
    quit.  Mrs. Schlenther told you in her deposition,
    the only thing that she ever heard about a tobacco
    company was after, years after she had quit.
    There is no evidence of that at all.
         Now, Mr. Wichmann played you a clip from
    Mr. Cullman, the CEO of Philip Morris in 1971.
    And he made a comment about some women want
    smaller babies.  And I think without any doubt, we
    can all agree it was idiotic and that a statement 2609 like that should never be made.  I'm not going to
    defend that.  A lot of stupid things were said
    over the years.
         But what I want you to think about is what
    Mr. Wichmann said about that.  He said, well,
    they're going to say it has nothing to do with
    Beverly Schlenther, but it sure did.  Because she
    had kids in the earlier sixties and she was
    allowed to smoke in the hospital.
         Now, things were different back then.  Times
    were different.  But Mr. Cullman's idiotic
    statement in 1971 is certainly not why
    Beverly Schlenther was smoking in the hospital in
    the earlier sixties when she had her kids.  And
    it's a perfect example of something stupid, but it
    has no effect on this case.
         Dr. Hurt tried to make it sound like, when he
    was testifying, that Reynolds believed that it was
    proven that smoking caused cancer before that
    meeting at the Plaza Hotel that you heard so much
    about ever occurred.  And supposedly, that
    evidence, the evidence to show they believed it
    before the Plaza Hotel was a memo written by
    Dr. Teague.
         But when I asked -- remember that 1953 survey 2610 of cancer research written by Dr. Teague?  I asked
    Dr. Hurt about it.  And Dr. Hurt admitted that
    nowhere in that document did Dr. Teague conclude
    that it was proven yet.  He said there was
    evidence that was accumulating that might tend to
    confirm it, but he didn't say it had been proven.
    And remember, that was exactly the same thing that
    one of the authors of the epidemiological research
    he was talking about said himself, that this is
    evidence, but it's not conclusive yet.
         And remember that I showed Dr. Hurt a
    Hill & Knowlton document that he didn't show you.
    And what was in that Hill & Knowlton document?  It
    said the CEOs of the company were sincere in their
    belief that it hadn't yet been proven.  And what
    were they relying on?  It said the National Cancer
    Institute.  That's what they were relying on.  And
    Dr. Hurt admitted that the position of the
    National Cancer Institute at that time was it had
    not been scientifically proven yet that smoking
    caused lung cancer.
         Dr. Teague's memo didn't say anything to the
    contrary.
         Now, then he went to a 1956 document by
    Dr. Rodgman.  And he read you a piece from 2611 Dr. Rodgman.  And it was the piece about how
    strong the evidence was, but he didn't read the
    rest of it.  And it goes through and talks about
    there is parallel evidence.  Some of the evidence
    supports the proposition that lung cancer is
    caused by air pollution or some of it smoking.
    And then the next piece said, in some instances,
    the evidence seems to be stronger in support of
    cigarette smoke as a causative or associated
    factor.  In other instances, the evidence seems to
    be stronger in support of air pollutants as a
    causative or associated factor.
         The point is, nowhere in that document either
    did Dr. Rodgman conclude that the evidence proved
    that smoking caused lung cancer.  He was
    discussing evidence that was being debated by the
    public and by the public health community and
    other scientists at the time.
         Now, did he show -- did they show you a
    single document from Reynolds where it said that
    the management, the CEO, that there was a
    consensus in the scientific department at some
    point that smoking had been scientifically proven
    to be -- to cause lung cancer at this time?  Out
    of all those millions and millions of pages, did 2612 you see that document?  No, you didn't.
         Now, nonetheless, Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings
    talked about the effects that they thought these
    statements might have on some smokers.  They said,
    Well, it's possible that smokers could rely on
    these statements saying that it hadn't been proven
    yet, and they could use it as a psychological
    crutch, or they could rationalize, they could
    engage in denial because of these statements.
         They never once gave you any evidence that
    Mrs. Schlenther did any of that.  And there is
    zero testimony to support that they ever did it.
    That was just a theory they had.
         And there was -- the part they didn't tell
    you about was what I had to do with Dr. Hurt on
    cross.  There was no medical and scientific
    consensus in that period in the 1950s up until the
    early 1960s on whether smoking caused lung cancer
    or other diseases.  I went through with Dr. Hurt,
    and I went through statements every one of these
    people made from the mid 1950s to 1963, where all
    of these people with all of these associations
    said publicly that they didn't believe it had been
    proven yet that smoking caused lung cancer.  And
    there isn't a single person on there or a single 2613 institution that is associated with the tobacco
    industry.  Not one.  They were making statements
    in public as well.
         And the significance is, when you think about
    their theory, is if a smoker was going to latch on
    to a statement by someone that said it hadn't been
    proven yet as a reason to rationalize continuing
    smoking, would they have chosen a statement from
    these people that it hadn't -- it hadn't been
    proven yet?  Or were they more likely to rely on
    the tobacco industry for the same kind of
    statement?
         Well, there is no evidence Mrs. Schlenther
    did either.  But one of the things we know is we
    went through and we talked about where did the
    public get its information?  Who did it trust for
    its information about smoking and health?  Was it
    the tobacco industry?  Not in 1959.  Only three
    percent.  In 1968, five percent.  In 1970, three
    percent.  In 1980, three percent.
         If someone was going to pick a source to use
    as a psychological crutch, it wouldn't have been
    the tobacco industry they would have been looking
    for.  It would have been all of these other
    people. 2614 And remember that we talked about this issue
    of -- remember awareness versus belief poll, that
    whole 1954, 90 percent had heard?  And they
    criticized Dr. Michel because they thought he
    misrepresented it.
         Well, Dr. Michel showed you belief polls.
    Not just have you heard, but do you think, do you
    believe.  And we went through a bunch of these.
         In 1957, it was up to 50 percent.  Then 71,
    81, 87, 94.
         The point was people, over the time when
    these statements were being made, in ever
    increasing numbers, believed that it had been
    proven that it caused lung cancer.
         And the same was true of emphysema.  This one
    was from 1987.  Did people believe, despite the
    industry statements, despite those things you
    heard, did they believe that it caused emphysema?
    In 1987, 85 percent of the public believed it,
    despite what the companies said at any point in
    time.
         How about what was happening with smoking
    rates in general?  By 1965, 17 million Americans
    had quit smoking.  In the four years after the
    warnings first went on cigarette packs in 1966, in 2615 those four years, an additional 13 million people
    quit, despite all the statements.  By 1979, the
    number was 30 million.  Today, the number is
    over -- right around 60 million.
         What about women in general?  What was going
    on during that period of time?  By 1965, 25
    percent of all women who had ever smoked had quit.
    By the 1970s, it was up to 29 percent.  By 1985,
    it was up to 40 percent.  All during the period of
    time that they're talking in ever increasing
    numbers, people were quitting.
         And all of that, all of that --
         You can take that down.
         But all of those people that quit, everybody
    that quit before 1998, the 40, 50 million people
    did so without ever seeing one of the secret
    documents they want to keep talking about.  They
    never saw them.  But 40-plus-million people quit
    without seeing them, because they didn't need them
    to quit.
         Mrs. Schlenther, despite all of this, said
    she believed the warnings that she had seen, she
    believed that she could be risking her health, but
    she wasn't ready to quit.  None of the public
    statements have been proven to have had any effect 2616 on her.
         Let me talk about one very minor issue
    Mr. Wichmann talked about in -- during the case,
    and he talked about TIRC and CTR, the research
    organizations that you heard about.  And he said,
    Well, they pledged to do research, but they never
    really did any research.  And Dr. Hurt said, No,
    they never really did any research.
         But in the Dr. Cummings video, one of the
    things that he testified about was that TIRC and
    CTR had spend over $150,000,000 sponsoring
    independent research.  The result was publication
    of hundreds of peer-reviewed scientific articles,
    and that the TIRC/CTR research has been cited in
    the Surgeon General's reports on smoking and
    health over 600 times.
         Mr. Wichmann also wanted to talk a bit about
    Reynolds and public statements it made about
    addiction.  And as I predicted in opening when we
    did opening statements, I told you that during the
    course of the entire trial, they would not show
    you one single document where R.J. Reynolds or any
    other tobacco company ever publicly disputed the
    fact that it could be difficult for smokers to
    quit. 2617 Did you see one?  Not a single document, not
    one where Reynolds ever challenged the fact that
    it could be difficult to quit.
         So what did they do instead?  Well, they had
    to wait until 19 -- actually, 1994.  In 1988, when
    the Surgeon General changed the definition to
    addiction, I talked about the fact that there was
    controversy about whether it should be called
    addiction or not.  And that resulted in the 1994
    Congressional hearings.
         Now, Mr. Wichmann, through the Cummings
    video, showed you a snippet, about 30 seconds, of
    all the CEOs sitting there in front of Congress,
    they raised their hand, swear to tell the truth,
    and the Congressman asked.  And the first one you
    see him ask is CEO of Reynolds, Jim Johnston.
         And he said, Do you believe nicotine is
    addictive.
         And Mr. Johnston says, No, I don't believe it
    meets the classic --
         And he gets cut off by the Congressman, and
    he says, I'll take that as no, and then he goes on
    to the rest.
         And they -- that's all they showed you.  They
    said, Reynolds denied that smoking was addictive 2618 in 1994.
         We showed you the rest of -- by the way, that
    hearing went on all day.  I mean, that was not a
    30-second-long hearing.  And we showed you a clip
    of what Mr. Johnston said in that hearing.  And he
    explained that he didn't think that smoking
    should -- that cigarettes should be lumped in with
    cocaine and heroin.  And they had a debate about
    that.
         But the most important thing that I hope you
    picked up from that testimony was Mr. Johnston
    said, he agreed that it was very difficult for
    some smokers to quit.  And that's what the point
    is.  Dr. Benowitz and Cummings both admitted that
    the label isn't what's important.  The difficulty
    in quitting has been called a lot of things over
    time.  It's been called an addiction.  It's been
    called habituation.  It's been called dependence.
    But all of them are just labels used to describe
    the fact that it can be difficult to quit.
         Now, over 10 years ago, Reynolds dropped that
    whole debate and just said, As addiction is
    commonly used now, we agree that it's addictive.
    And maybe you think that it's silly, that they
    should never have been in that debate.  And that 2619 may well be true.
         But the fact is it made no difference with
    Mrs. Schlenther.  That was on in 1994, when it
    really happened.  She admitted she didn't see
    anything about that until after she had already
    quit smoking.  But even if she had seen it in
    1994, would it have told her anything she didn't
    know?  Remember, she went through that two-week
    quit in 1984 and 1985 with Mr. Schlenther.  She
    knew what it was like for her personally.  And
    that wouldn't have told her a thing that she
    didn't already know.
         And there is no doubt, one of the other
    things that she testified is back in the 1960s,
    she said that she knew it would be difficult to
    quit, in the sixties.  And she was asked, Well,
    had you even tried to quit by then?
         And her answer was, No.  But she still knew
    it was going to be difficult.
         You have to ask yourself why.  It's probably
    because of all the information that was available.
    But the statements, that label debate about what
    to call difficulty of quitting in 1994, addiction
    or habit, has no bearing on this case at all.
         I'm going to talk about -- specifically about 2620 concealment for a little while.  This is question
    No. 7 on the verdict form.  And you'll see -- it
    asks about please state whether Beverly Schlenther
    reasonably relied to her detriment on any
    statement by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company after
    May 5, 1982, which concealed or omitted material
    information concerning the health effects and/or
    addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if
    so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her
    COPD and death.
         The next question that you will see on the
    verdict form, No. 8, is the agreement to conceal.
    So I'm not going to talk about those separately.
         But I want to remind you again that the key
    is they have to -- they have to prove to you that
    but for the concealment -- in other words, if what
    they say was concealed, hadn't been concealed --
    it would have changed what happened with
    Mrs. Schlenther.
         And remember, one thing I want you to
    remember about their addiction theory.  They want
    to talk about no choice, nothing could have
    happened, she couldn't quit earlier.  If that's
    true, think about what that means for her -- their
    concealment claim.  If Mrs. Schlenther was 2621 addicted and nothing was going to change her mind,
    what does all the concealment have to do with
    anything?  If that information had been public and
    she was addicted and had no choice and couldn't
    quit, would it have mattered?  It makes no sense.
         So what was it -- one other thing I want to
    mention about this, about the old documents.
    Remember Dr. Hurt?  Dr. Hurt said he used some of
    the old secret documents as part of his treatment
    program in Minnesota.  Forty-eight percent of the
    people he showed those documents to and gave
    treatment and kept them in treatment for eight
    days didn't quit.  The documents didn't make them
    quit.  And the other 52 percent, hard to tell.
    They got all the treatment.
         But the point was, you couldn't just show
    these to somebody and boom, they quit.  You have
    to know more about the individual.  You have to
    know more about what's important to them.  And
    that was their burden to establish why it was
    important to Mrs. Schlenther in this case, and
    they didn't do it.
         Now, they had two primary themes on what was
    concealed.  One was the addictive nature of
    nicotine and the other one was on the health 2622 effects of smoking.  I asked you in opening, as
    you listen to the evidence about concealment, to
    keep three things in mind.
         What information was hidden?  You've got to
    know what it is to be able to figure anything out
    about the claim.
         Was it available from other sources?  Was it,
    for example, like Dr. Teague saying nicotine is
    important, and the same information was available
    in Reader's Digest?
         But most importantly, would the information
    have actually made a difference in
    Mrs. Schlenther?  And you have to think about
    this.  You can't just take a well known fact,
    stamp "confidential" on it, stick it in a drawer,
    lock it, and create some secret that matters to
    someone.  You know, if you write down on a piece
    of paper, tomorrow is Wednesday, and lock it up
    tonight, it doesn't make it a secret.  And that's
    essentially what a lot of what they're talking
    about is.
         And keep in mind that the same lack of
    information they're talking about didn't stop tens
    of millions of other people from quitting.
         Let's talk about the addictive nature of 2623 nicotine.  What was concealed?  To begin with,
    Dr. Brady and Benowitz and Cummings all admitted
    that it was no secret to Mrs. Schlenther or anyone
    else that once you start, it can be difficult to
    quit.  They all said that was commonly known in
    the United States, for over a hundred years people
    knew that.
         Now, remember, I used -- I told you already
    about Claude Teague and the sine qua non and the
    delivery device.  And Dr. Hurt ultimately admitted
    that what he claimed, in answer to Mr. Wichmann's
    questions, were deep, dark secrets in the
    laboratories of R.J. Reynolds were concepts that
    were known 20 and 30 years before Dr. Teague ever
    put pen to paper.
         And remember what else that Dr. Michel showed
    you?  Dr. Michel showed you magazines and
    newspapers from the twenties, thirties, forties,
    fifties, sixties, seventies, and eighties, all
    talking about the issue of the difficulty of
    quitting.
         Remember all those articles that talked about
    how to quit and the fact that it can be addictive,
    the fact that it can be hard to quit?  Constantly
    in the public realm there were articles from a lot 2624 of different sources talking about the fact that
    nicotine could be addictive or habit or whatever
    you want to call it.  But all through that period
    of time, people understood that it was difficult
    to quit.
         There was nothing that they showed you from
    R.J. Reynolds, any of those secret documents, that
    contained a fact that bears on the question of
    whether or not it was difficult to quit.  And
    that's the only thing logically they could say
    would have made any difference to Mrs. Schlenther,
    and she knew it.
         What about health effects?  Again, Dr. Michel
    showed you what information was available to the
    public.  He went through and showed you Reader's
    Digest, twenties and forties, talking about health
    effects.  All of these, injurious to the health,
    specifically on chronic bronchitis, specifically
    on emphysema, specifically on lung cancer, all
    through this period of time from the twenties,
    thirties, forties, more frequency in the fifties.
    He showed you that Time and Newsweek ran articles
    as well.  He showed you newspapers from West
    Virginia, he showed you newspapers from Florida,
    all containing information that cigarette smoking 2625 might be hazardous to health.
         1964, the Surgeon General's report.  Major
    front-page news all across the country, including
    here in Florida.  There were magazine articles
    about it that you saw.  There were special news
    reports on television the day that it was
    released.  You saw one of those.  All of them,
    information about the health effects of smoking.
         And what did the Surgeon General conclude?
    These are examples of articles:
         Cigarette smoking increases the risk of dying
    from chronic bronchitis and emphysema.  A
    relationship exists between cigarette smoking and
    emphysema.
         And, remember, as I showed you earlier back
    in opening, I think, the Surgeon General also
    concluded in 1964 that it was a habit not easily
    broken, and it was drug-related.
         In 1968, Daniel Horn, who was the head of the
    U.S. National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health,
    said you could stand on a rooftop and shout
    "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs
    and you would not be telling anyone anything they
    did not already know.  And he's talking about the
    health effects of smoking, something that 2626 plaintiff wants you to believe Reynolds was able
    to hide from the American public.
         And all through the period, again, what was
    happening?  Increasing belief on the part of the
    public, increasing numbers of people that quit.
         One very minor point about this.  One thing
    that they also said was a deep, dark secret was
    that they had identified compounds in cigarette
    smoke inside R.J. Reynolds and the public didn't
    know.
         The one example from a document that they
    used with Dr. Rodgman was a compound called
    benzo[a]pyrene.  And I asked Dr. Hurt about that.
    And the document they were talking about was from
    1956.  This is a Reader's Digest article from
    1950, six years before that.  And lo and behold,
    benzo[a]pyrene had been identified to the public
    six years before the secret they said Reynolds was
    hiding.
         The Reader's Digest continued doing it.  In
    1959, Reader's Digest was talking about eight
    carcinogenic polycyclics are in tobacco smoke.
         There was nothing secret about anything about
    constituents.
         One thing you probably did learn, though, is 2627 Dr. Hurt ultimately admitted that R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco has been responsible for identifying more
    than half of all the constituents in cigarette
    smoke and publishing those.  In fact, he admitted,
    R.J. Reynolds invented the technology by which
    scientists have been able to identify constituents
    in tobacco smoke.
         I want to go back and show you the
    concealment question one more time, because of
    this, the May 5, 1982, and explain to you what
    that means on the concealment question.
         In order for the plaintiff to prevail on the
    concealment question, No. 7, they have to prove
    that Mrs. Schlenther reasonably relied on a
    statement by Reynolds that concealed or omitted
    material information about the health effects of
    smoking or the addictive nature of smoking
    before -- or, excuse me, after May 5, 1982.
         Plaintiff hasn't done that at all.  Remember,
    Mrs. Schlenther admitted she was aware of and
    believed the warnings on cigarette packs starting
    in the 1960s or 1970s at the latest.
         If she already was aware and already
    believed, how could she have reasonably relied on
    anything that Reynolds said after 1982?  She had 2628 already come to the conclusion that it caused
    disease 12, 15 years earlier.
         She also said she knew cigarettes were bad
    for her because of the warnings, but she said she
    didn't quit because she didn't want to.
         Remember what her Susan -- her daughter Susan
    testified to.  She said there was no reason to
    believe that Mrs. Schlenther wasn't already aware
    of the health risks of smoking by 1980, two years
    before this cutoff, and she couldn't possibly have
    reasonably relied on anything Reynolds said about
    the health effects after '82, because she already
    knew that.
         And remember on the addiction side, she
    testified that she knew about -- she knew
    personally it would be hard to quit before she had
    ever tried it.  She said that she knew it would be
    hard to quit.
         She was asked, Had you tried it at that time?
         And her answer was, No.
         And then, and the question was:  Well, how do
    you know it would be difficult?
         And she said, It's just one of those things
    you get addicted to.
         She knew, she heard that information, it had 2629 been part of her environment, and she was well
    aware of it.
         And finally, remember that Mrs. Schlenther
    testified that the only thing she ever heard about
    the tobacco company statements was after she had
    already quit.  She didn't hear anything in that
    period that she could possibly have reasonably
    relied on.
         I want to talk to you about this idea of
    comparative fault.  This is where Mr. Wichmann was
    talking about how much fault do you assign to
    Mrs. Schlenther, how much do you assign to
    R.J. Reynolds.  This only comes into play if you
    decide somewhere along the way that Reynolds did
    something wrong that was the legal cause of
    Mrs. Schlenther's injury.  You don't even get to
    this if you don't get that far.
         But if you do, I want you to keep in mind,
    because all of this is the plaintiff's burden of
    proof, Mrs. Schlenther's responsibility starts at
    100 percent.  I mean, that's a basic American
    concept.  You're responsible for your own actions,
    and the law reflects that.  They have to prove
    that she isn't 100 percent at fault.  And the only
    way you move down from 100 percent is if you agree 2630 that Reynolds did something wrong that contributed
    to why Mrs. Schlenther developed COPD and died in
    2010.
         Now, remember, there is no question in this
    case that Mrs. Schlenther had the ability to quit
    and quit sooner.  Dr. Brady, their psychiatrist,
    said she always had the ability to quit.
         Dr. Benowitz.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
    Q.   Nicotine in cigarettes doesn't prevent a
smoker who goes to see you from understanding a
warning, you tell them you need to quit smoking or
you're going to get lung cancer or you're going to get
heart disease, right?
    A.   Correct.
    Q.   And smoking cigarettes does not cause a
smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for their
own actions, correct?
    A.   Correct. Responsibility.  Dr. Benowitz,
    the world's leading researcher on nicotine
    addiction, agrees with the fact that someone is
    addicted does not relieve them of responsibility
    for their own decisions. 2631 Dr. Brady, how does she feel about that? -- responsibility even though the choice
might -- I mean, you're not saying that because it's a
tough choice that they're not responsible, are you?
    A.   No.  I'm not saying that.
    Q.   Okay. Even if it's a tough choice,
    even if it's difficult to do, they're still
    responsible for this choice.
         And Mrs. Schlenther -- or Dr. Cummings
    actually even agrees with this. And you agree with the Surgeon General,
correct?
    A.   Yeah, I do agree with him.
    Q.   You agree that the individual smoker must
decide whether or not to continue smoking, correct?
    A.   Well, obviously, an individual smoker is the
one that individually can determine whether they can
change their behavior.
         (End of video clip.) 2632 MR. BARINGER:  And remember that
    Mrs. Schlenther was asked whether she accepted
    some responsibility.  And her answer was yes. Do you feel like you bear any responsibility,
even partial responsibility, for any of your
smoking-related illnesses?
    A.   I probably should have never started, but I
did.  And I don't think it's entirely my fault.
    Q.   Some your fault, some the tobacco company's
fault?
    A.   Yeah.  Because it's put out there, and it's
put out there, it's going to harm you.
    Q.   If I understand your testimony, you
acknowledge that you have some responsibility for the
choices you've made in terms of deciding to smoke,
correct?
    A.   (Nods affirmatively).
    Q.   That was a "yes"; is that correct?
    A.   (Nods affirmatively). Remember what she said there.
    She said it's put out there, that it's going to
    harm your health.  Mrs. Schlenther wasn't sitting 2633 there saying gee, I didn't know.  Gee, they fooled
    me.  Gee, I didn't believe the cause.  She
    acknowledged.  And that's one of the reasons that
    she accepted some of the responsibility.
         She admitted that she was the one that
    decided to start smoking, she was the one that
    decided to become a regular smoker and she was the
    one that didn't decide until 2001 to quit.
         Now, one of the Surgeon General's warnings
    that has been around formally on the packs since
    1985 was, Quitting smoking now greatly reduces
    serious risk to your health.  And that's when it
    went on the packs.  But that was the message from
    the public health community, as Dr. Hurt agreed,
    for decades before that.  Since the fifties and
    sixties, the Surgeon General, the public health
    community were all saying if you quit, you reduce
    your risk.  And remember, Mrs. Schlenther's
    doctors were telling her the same thing all along:
    You've got to quit smoking to eliminate the risk
    to your health.  Her answer was always no.
         In 2001, she finally did make the choice to
    quit.  It had nothing to do with Reynolds.  She
    didn't get Reynolds documents.  Nothing like that.
    Her granddaughter did it.  She was well aware of 2634 the risks of smoking, and she had the right to
    choose to take that risk.  She had the right to
    say, I'm not ready to quit.  She had the right to
    say, I don't want to quit.  She had the right to
    say, Leave me alone, when people told her to quit.
         It's not second guessing her decision.  It's
    not saying something was wrong.  She had a right.
    She was an adult.  She was fully informed all
    during this period of time when the issue was
    should she quit.  Maybe she wasn't fully informed
    when she was 13 and she picked up that first
    cigarette.  But she -- long after she became an
    adult, she had the ability to quit smoking, which
    would have eliminated or reduced her risk of
    developing COPD.  And in exercising her right not
    to do that, she becomes responsible.  She's
    responsible for the consequences.
         Now, on this comparative fault form, you
    don't get there unless you've already decided that
    there was something wrong that Reynolds did.  But
    with all of the evidence, with all of her
    awareness, with all of the testimony about what
    she wanted to do and when she was ready to do it,
    it's hard to imagine you could find more than five
    or ten percent fault for Reynolds, even if you get 2635 this far on the -- on the form.  The choice was in
    her hands.  She was the only one that had the
    power to do something about it.  And,
    unfortunately, she exercised that power that she
    always had too late.
         Let's talk about damages for a few minutes.
    Again, you don't get to this unless you've decided
    that Reynolds did something wrong.  I need to
    discuss this, because I want you to understand
    that this is a matter that is solely within your
    discretion and good judgment.
         There is absolutely no doubt that losing
    Mrs. Schlenther was difficult for Mr. Schlenther
    and her kids.  Anyone that's lost a loved one
    understands that.  And it's natural to sympathize
    with that.  But as all agreed and as you've heard,
    sympathy is not the basis for either awarding
    damages in the first place or even considering the
    amount.
         No matter what you award, you can't bring
    Mrs. Schlenther back.  But as Mr. Millard said,
    this is the way the law deals with these issues.
         Now, there is no claim here for lost wages,
    medical bills.  There is no claim for
    Mrs. Schlenther's pain and suffering.  There is no 2636 claim for her children's pain and suffering.  It's
    only Mr. Schlenther.  And the object of
    compensatory damages is to make him whole for his
    loss, not make him wealthy.
         How do families normally deal with this kind
    of situation?  You can never replace someone you
    lose, but what do we do as a society?  Typically,
    people, you know, try and do the best for their
    families.  They buy life insurance.  What's
    normal?  Fifty thousand, 100,000, 250,000?  That's
    probably a little high for typical.  Eight to
    $10,000,000?  There is no basis in reality, based
    on this evidence at all, for even thinking about
    such an extraordinary sum of money to make
    Mr. Schlenther whole.
         Now, there is some -- there is some
    temptation to say, Well, the defendant is a big
    corporation.  They can afford it.
         Remember during jury selection, one of the
    things I asked was, if there was anybody that
    thought if you take the same loss, should a
    corporation pay more than an individual?  And I
    think everybody agreed that that's not right and
    that's not the law.  You can't discriminate
    against corporations. 2637 Let me go back to an example of a car
    accident.  No matter how we lose someone we love,
    it's a loss.  So whether it's a car accident or
    COPD or something, a loss is a loss.
         But if there were a car accident case and it
    was just a normal individual that was the
    defendant, Mr. Schlenther's loss would be exactly
    the same.  He would have lost his wife.  But would
    you even consider awarding 8- to $10,000,000 in a
    case like that?  Of course you wouldn't.
         Mrs. Schlenther took risks, calculated risks,
    but she took risks because of the pleasure that
    she got out of the activity.  Now Mr. Wichmann
    wants you to take the fact that Mrs. Schlenther
    took a risk and have it pay off in millions of
    dollars, $10,000,000.
         And what about the nature of the claims?
    Remember, Mr. Millard went through this.  He said
    loss of companionship, loss of protection, loss of
    support.  He went through that.  And I want you to
    think back for a minute about that lawsuit that
    Mr. and Mrs. Schlenther filed in 2003 against the
    City of Largo and David Lane.  And Mr. Schlenther
    in that case, what did he ask for?  He asked for
    damages for Mrs. Schlenther's COPD, because she 2638 couldn't do things around the house anymore like
    she used to.  She couldn't walk to the mailbox.
    She couldn't walk around and they couldn't go do
    things like go to conventions anymore.  Why?
    Because the dirt and dust from the construction
    project caused this harm to Mrs. Schlenther.  And
    Mr. Schlenther asked -- he said he had -- he had
    mental anguish because of the condition of his
    wife that was caused by that contractor.  And he
    asked for all of those damages.  And in
    cross-examination, he admitted he's asking for
    exactly the same kind of damages, but now it's
    from R.J. Reynolds.
         They settled that lawsuit in 2007, toward the
    end of the year, and less than eight months later,
    at the beginning of 2008, they filed the lawsuit
    for the same damages against R.J. Reynolds.
         Let's talk about punitive damages for a few
    minutes.  They want you to say yes, punitive
    damages are warranted here.
         Now, the Court has instructed you -- it was
    in the instructions -- that the standard of proof
    is different.  It has to be clear and convincing
    evidence, not just the preponderance of it.
         What does clear and convincing evidence mean? 2639 Clear and convincing evidence means that you have
    a firm belief or conviction without hesitation.
    It's a much higher standard.
         You can take that down.
         In order to have a firm conviction and to say
    that you believe punitive damages are warranted,
    you have to firmly believe that Reynolds acted
    willfully, wantonly, flagrantly, with reckless
    disregard for human life and a violation of their
    customer's rights.
         Now, I want you to keep some things in mind.
    Number 1, the whole issue of whether or not it's
    been scientifically proven that smoking causes
    disease was resolved 12 years ago, 2000.  Reynolds
    admits that.  It's not an issue anymore.  Reynolds
    has agreed that smoking is addictive, nicotine is
    addictive.  That happened a long time ago.  The
    Tobacco Institute, CTR don't exist.  They haven't
    existed since before 2000.
         And keep in mind that the only way you can
    award punitive damages is for the conduct that you
    decide harmed Mrs. Schlenther.
         Now, what does that mean?  It may be you
    didn't like the debate about the label, whether it
    should be called addiction or habituation, and you 2640 think that's wrong; you think that was reckless.
    But if it has -- if it didn't have anything to do
    with Mrs. Schlenther, you can't use that as a
    basis for awarding punitive damages, even though
    you might not have liked it.
         You might not have liked the testimony you
    heard about filters and low tar cigarettes.  But
    you know that that had nothing to do with
    Mrs. Schlenther, so that can't be the basis for
    awarding punitive damages.
         You may think that the position on
    causation -- and I want to talk about that a
    little more.  You may think that it should have
    been sooner.  And maybe it should have.  But
    unless you believe that that information had any
    effect on what Mrs. Schlenther did, you can't use
    that as the basis for punitive damage.
         And keep in mind what Dr. Benowitz said.
    Dr. Benowitz acknowledged that for decades
    R.J. Reynolds worked on ways to make cigarettes
    less hazardous, not just on the nicotine side, but
    in a lot of different ways.  Reynolds cooperated
    with the National Cancer Institute on the Tobacco
    Working Group.  None of that represents the
    conscious disregard. 2641 And on advertising, remember that the United
    States Congress considered the question in 1965 as
    to whether or not cigarettes should still be
    allowed to be manufactured and sold and advertised
    in this country.  And they decided, despite the
    fact that they knew about the health hazards and
    the addictiveness, they decided that it should.
    And as Dr. Hurt admitted, the Congress of the
    United States could change its mind and ban the
    sale and advertising of cigarettes tomorrow.
         So the mere fact that Reynolds sells and
    manufactures and advertises cigarettes cannot be
    the basis for an award of punitive damages.
         And also keep in mind that if you get to that
    point, you will have already fully compensated
    Mr. Schlenther enough to make him whole.  That's
    what compensatory damages go.  Punitive damages
    are in excess of that, and it's not to make him
    whole anymore.
         Ladies and gentlemen, it has been a long
    trial.  You have been extraordinarily patient.
    And the last thing I'm going to do is ask you to
    consider basic facts and whether or not if the
    plaintiff has proven that anything that happened
    to Mrs. Schlenther was the responsibility of 2642 R.J. Reynolds.
         The evidence has been overwhelming.
    Mrs. Schlenther smoked because she wanted to,
    because she enjoyed it, because she thought it was
    fun.  Mrs. Schlenther smoked until 2001 because
    she wasn't ready to quit before that.  She didn't
    want to quit before that.
         Dr. Brady testified that Mrs. Schlenther
    always had the ability to quit, and the reason she
    didn't had nothing to do with R.J. Reynolds.
    Throughout the entire time, there was only one
    person that had the ability to stop that train,
    Mrs. Schlenther.  Her husband tried; he couldn't
    do it.  Her kids tried; they couldn't do it.  Her
    doctors tried; they couldn't do it.  And there is
    no reason to believe that R.J. Reynolds couldn't
    have done that.
         Based on all of the evidence, everything that
    you have heard, I'm asking you to return a verdict
    in favor of R.J. Reynolds.
         Thank you all.
