         MR. ALVAREZ:  Now, we've heard one witness in
    this case from R.J. Reynolds, their executive.  And it
    appeared that he was still trying to wiggle out of a
    few facts that I think have been established or that
    have been established in this case.  One of the things
    that he said if you heard him very clearly, and I
    think it was in response to one of your questions was
    that we've been publishing our research about cancer
    and smoking for 50 years, and we've been telling
    people for 50 years.  Well, that flies in the face --
    number one, it flies in the face of the findings and
    number two it flies in the face of exactly what
    they've been telling the public and we have on video.
         MR. BOYCE:  Your Honor, before we play it, just
    for the record, the same objection on nexus.  If I can
    have a continuing objection, we can move forward.
         THE COURT:  You may, sir, if there's something
    specific beyond that, please make it.
         (At this time, a video was played in open court
    and taken down to the best of the court reporter's
    ability.)
         SPEAKER:  Earlier this week the R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company took out this ad in a number of major 2504
    newspapers and magazines calling for an open debate
    about smoking.  In brief, the ad contends that medical
    studies which show that cigarette smoking causes
    disease are ignoring significant evidence to the
    contrary.
         SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
    cancer, yes or no?
         SPEAKER:  It is not known whether cigarettes
    cause cancer.  It has not been causally established.
         SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
    relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema.
         SPEAKER:  Despite all of the research to date,
    there has been no causal link established.
         SPEAKER:  No causal relationship between
    cigarette smoking and heart disease.
         SPEAKER:  No, as a matter of fact, there are
    studies that while we are accused of being associated
    with heart disease, there have been studies conducted
    over ten years that would say again that science is
    still puzzled over these forces.
         (End of video.)
         MR. ALVAREZ:  So that was not a candid response
    to your question when the facts and the evidence tell
    you that they've been denying that smoking causes
    diseases like lung cancer for over 50 years, and it 2505
    wasn't until 2000 when they were forced to admit.  The
    MSA which you heard some evidence from, the testimony
    from today, from this gentleman, from the tobacco
    company, that was part of litigation.  They were
    forced to stop, and you heard it from Dr. Proctor.
    They were forced to cooperate -- they were forced to
    stop cooperating with the CTR, the TIRC and the other
    trade organizations.
         They were forced to say we have to disband those
    things based on litigation.  That's not something they
    did voluntarily.  They come in here and they make it
    seem like they're a voluntary organization, that we
    cooperate with the government, we cooperate with the
    FDA.  They didn't cooperate with anybody.  They spent
    half a billion dollars, and through 1999, to try to
    prevent legislation, to try to prevent the message
    getting out; that's what they did.  This portrait of a
    cooperative, changed cooperation is a fallacy.  It's
    just not true.
         The purpose of showing you a slide that says that
    they make $0.40 on the pack, what was the purpose of
    that other than you try to feel sorry for them.  What
    was the purpose of getting out evidence to say, well,
    you know, it's part of a public corporation and the
    shareholders are -- our pension fund.  What's the 2506
    purpose of that?  Just think about that.  Why would
    they say that, other than to try to get you to feel
    sorry for them?
         One of the instructions, I think it's instruction
    number three, clearly says, you are to decide the
    amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed to
    R.J. Reynolds as punishment, and here is the other
    thing, and as a deterrent to others.  So in part, one
    of the things that you have to do is think about it.
    How will my punitive damage verdict deter other
    corporations from doing something like this again?
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Legal basis, sir.
         MR. BOYCE:  Misstates the standard for
    deterrence.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Overruled.  Again, you'll
    follow the legal instructions that I have given you.
    Go ahead, sir.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  As a deterrent to others.  You have
    to decide that.  Your verdict has to decide how is it
    going to deter others.  A low punitive damage award
    will not deter corporations that act and behave badly.
         Now, how do you determine punitive damages?  This
    is part of the standard.  The nature, extent and
    degree of R.J. Reynolds' misconduct that caused 2507
    Mr. Schoeff's lung cancer and death and the related
    circumstances.  So you have to decide, listen, should
    they be punished for lying, misrepresenting,
    falsifying, getting this man addicted as a young man,
    giving him false information about the safety of their
    product and the addictive nature of this product so
    that he would rely and continue to smoke for 50 years,
    which caused his lung cancer and caused his death?
         Because this isn't just careless, this isn't
    just, okay, I was careless, you've already decided by
    your verdict that they concealed and omitted
    information and that they conspired with other tobacco
    companies and other organizations to do the same
    thing.  Now, should they be punished for that?  You've
    already said that they should.  You've proven that to
    a higher standard.
         Now, you have to determine what is reasonable in
    light of the evidence.  And, again, you should
    consider the conduct and actions of others including
    Mr. Schoeff.  So you've got to consider this.  What
    happened here?  What happened in this case?  Who
    should be punished?  Why?  How much?  If there is a
    case that screams for punitive damages, it's this
    case.  This is a case that punitive damages stands
    for.  This is a case that merits punitive damages. 2508
         This is not a company that made a mistake.  This
    is a company that intentionally, purposely, knowingly,
    went out of their way to mislead the public and
    Mr. Schoeff, knowing that he was probably going to
    die.  And when a company does that, the law says they
    can be punished and that they -- and it's your
    decision to decide how much should they be punished.
         Another factor you have to consider is whether
    there is a continuing need for deterrence in light of
    any changes in the conduct of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco or
    R.J. Reynolds from the conduct on which you base your
    determination that punitive damages are warranted.  So
    are they a changed, a changed corporation, what are
    they doing differently now?  Well, in 1946 were they
    marketing to children?  Yes.  In 2013, are they still
    marketing to children?  Yes.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.  Same
    arguments we had this morning.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Are they still -- were they
    manipulating levels of nicotine in 1947 when he
    started smoking?  Yes.  Are they doing it in 2013?
    Yes.  What's changed?  Nothing.  Let's look at the --
    this is in evidence, the 2012 Surgeon General's
    report.  This is from the 2012 Surgeon General report. 2509
    It says the tobacco industry's position on the purpose
    of marketing, switching of brands by an adult.
    Tobacco companies have consistently stated that the
    purpose of spending billions of dollars on cigarette
    marketing is to attract and hold current adult smokers
    to their brands of cigarette.  In addition, the
    companies deny that marketing campaigns are intended
    to increase demands for cigarettes among existing
    smokers or to encourage young people to initiate
    smoking.
         The economic value of the amount of brand
    switching that occurs, however, does not justify the
    magnitude of marketing expenditures.  Indeed because
    most brands are owned by a few tobacco companies, most
    switching of brands would not have a substantial
    impact on any one company's profits.  The most
    plausible justification for advertising expenditures
    at the levels that have been observed would be to
    attract new customers to generate long term cash flows
    for the companies.
         In addition, the nature of the imagery used in
    these advertisements clearly appeals to the
    aspirations of adolescents, suggesting that they are a
    target.
         MR. BOYCE:  Same objection, Your Honor. 2510
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  What has changed?  What has
    changed?  They're still doing the same thing.  Again,
    from the same report.  Manufacturers of cigarettes and
    smokeless tobacco products spend a great deal of money
    to market their products in the United States.
    Efforts to constrain marketing by tobacco companies,
    such as the ban on broadcasting, advertising of
    cigarettes in 1971, the comparable ban on broadcast
    advertising of smokeless tobacco in 1986 and the ban
    and restriction contained in the 1998 master
    settlement agreement and smokeless tobacco master
    settlement agreement appear to have had the opposite
    effects.
         The total expenditures on marketing for both
    cigarettes rose in the years following the
    implementation of these constraints as companies
    change their strategies in response.  So the only
    thing that's changed is their strategy to try to hook
    younger smokers.
         MR. BOYCE:  Same objection, Your Honor.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  They haven't changed.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  You're at 14 minutes,
    sir.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm at 14 minutes?  Will you give 2511
    me one more minute after that?
         THE COURT:  I will.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  Thank you.  In their website
    they say they want people to quit.  Really?  Do you
    think they really want people to quit?  If they wanted
    people to quit, they would make a cigarette with low
    nicotine that people wouldn't get addicted to, but
    they know they can't do that because people won't
    smoke them or they do smoke them, but they don't smoke
    them enough and their profits go down.  And that's why
    they don't do it.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Which reminds me of a few sayings.
    The wolf was sick and he vowed to be a monk, but when
    he got well, a wolf was once again a wolf.  Nothing
    has changed.  Sacrifice is at the heart of repentance.
    Without deeds, your apology is worthless.
         On the verdict form, there's only one question
    this time, it's actually, very, very short.  You have
    to decide what the punitive damage award is.  And, you
    know, we want to be reasonable, Ms. Schoeff wants to
    be reasonable, but she wants to make sure that your
    verdict stands for something, wants to make sure it
    deters others, and it punishes them for causing the 2512
    harm to her family.  And we respectfully request that
    you award $25 million.  And you may think that's too
    low, but we urge you not to go above that.  Please do
    not go above 25 million.  Do not.  She doesn't want
    that.  Do not go above that.
         What she wants today and hopefully she'll get it
    and I think she will get it is closure.  Closure.  She
    wants closure in this case.  And it's ironic that on
    today, what today signifies, that she'll get closure.
    Thank you.
