         MR. BOYCE:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it please
    the Court?  Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  This
    is the last time I get to talk to you.  I'm sure one
    of the things plaintiffs don't like about openings is
    I get the last word, and you can probably guess that
    one of the things I don't like about closing is they
    get the last word.  I want to start right where I
    started in voir dire and opening statements and that's
    by thanking each and every one of you for your
    service.
         The price of citizenship is different for people
    in this country.  For some its as easy as paying your
    taxes and going to vote, but for you, you've been
    asked to do more.  You've been asked to put your lyes
    on hold for a couple weeks and come in here and
    resolve this dispute.  And you should all be proud of
    that.  But there's more than just promising to be here
    on time, to catch your bus, to wait in line in
    security.  The most important part of what you agree
    to do is the promise each and every one of you made to 2275
    be fair and impartial jurors, to decide this case
    solely on the basis of the facts that plaintiffs prove
    for Mr. Schoeff.
         And Judge Tuter said it perfectly during
    Mr. Paige's closing remark.  He said we are focusing
    on this smoker, Mr. Schoeff, the only facts you can
    consider as you deliberate in this case are the facts
    that plaintiffs prove for Mr. Schoeff.  And we talked
    about that from the very beginning.  And that's where
    I would like to start, because as I told you in
    opening statements, the facts just don't add up for
    plaintiffs in this case.  On every key issue, the
    facts of Mr. Schoeff's life, the decisions he made,
    and the choices he made and the timing of those
    choices don't fit the claims that Plaintiffs have
    made.  And it's apparent on every key issue in the
    case.
         First is reasons for smoking.  On the left are
    things that the evidence shows Mr. Schoeff said about
    himself in this case.  He said that he liked smoking,
    he said that he enjoyed smoking with his coffee,
    enjoyed smoking with his meals, he enjoyed the taste.
    He enjoyed smoking with his friends, it relaxed him,
    it relieved stress, and he smoked because it helped
    him at work.  That's the evidence of what Mr. Schoeff 2276
    said himself about his own smoking.  What he never
    said, I'm addicted, not once.  I was tricked into
    smoking, not once, and I regret smoking, not once.  No
    evidence of that.  Just doesn't add up.
         It's the same when you get to awareness.
    Plaintiffs just like to assert that Mr. Schoeff
    ignored everything he learned about smoking throughout
    his whole life.  They wave their hand and pretend that
    he knew nothing.  Mr. Paige said this, I wrote it
    down.  He didn't know anything.  That's what they want
    you to believe about Mr. Schoeff.  But look at what
    the evidence was in this case.  First Mrs. Schoeff's
    testimony is on the left.  It really wasn't until the
    late '80s or '90s until he had more firm awareness of
    the health effects.  Think about the evidence, think
    about how that claim does not add up.
         In 1950 Mr. Schoeff's father quit because of
    asthma, told him, I'm quitting because of my lungs,
    1950.  That's a warning from his father.  It doesn't
    get any more personal and any more real than your
    father telling you, I'm giving up smoking because of
    my lungs.  In 1953 Mrs. Schoeff quit.  In the '50's,
    Mr. Schoeff's sister Betty Walker quit.  She quit
    smoking because a doctor told her to quit smoking.
    She told Mr. Schoeff that. 2277
         When we talk about reliance -- I'll get to this
    in a point, it's not just reliance, the instruction is
    perfectly clear, it has to be reasonable reliance.
    You don't get to just ignore these kind of warnings,
    the law does not allow that.  It has to be reasonable
    under the circumstances, and when your sister tells
    you before 1960 that she's quitting smoking because a
    doctor told her to because of health reasons, it's
    impossibly to reasonably rely on statements to the
    contrary.
         In 1957 Mr. Schoeff quit smoking.  I never heard
    a good explanation for this, perhaps it was because
    his daughter Pamela was born in 1957, but he put
    cigarettes down in 1957, he quit for long enough for
    all the nicotine to be out of his body, he quit long
    enough for any withdrawal symptoms he was experiencing
    to be done, and when he went back to smoking, it was
    for reasons that had nothing to do with Reynolds.
    That's 1957.  He quit smoking.
         In 1966 the warning label went on the pack.
    Plaintiffs like to talk about all of the individual
    puffs of a cigarette that Mr. Schoeff took over his
    life, but every single cigarette that he took out of
    any pack from 1966 on had a warning label right on the
    side of it.  Right on the side of it, hundreds of 2278
    thousands of warnings from the tobacco companies with
    each and every cigarette he smoked from 1966 on.  In
    1967 he quit smoking again for two months, all of the
    nicotine is out of his body, any withdrawal he's
    experiencing is long gone.  When he goes back to
    smoking, it's for reasons that have nothing to do with
    Reynolds, nothing to do with the misunderstanding
    about the risks of smoking, and nothing to do with
    Plaintiff's allegations in this case.  He goes back to
    smoking because somebody gives him a cigarette at an
    accident scene.  That's 1967.
         In 1970 the warning labels changed.  Mr. Schoeff
    told you that they talked about that warning label.
    That's 1970.  Mr. Schoeff quits in the '70s, in 1983
    he's told that he has PVD from smoking.  He has
    surgery, nothing will teach you that smoking has risks
    more than being operated on for a smoking-related
    disease.  That happened in 1983.  Plaintiffs pretend,
    well, he smoked filters after that, that's not
    reasonable.  That's not reasonable reliance.  That's
    simply a statement that's made in this lawsuit where
    they want $9.5 million.  He didn't sue anybody, he
    didn't blame anybody, and he never said he regretted
    it in 1983.  But in 1983 there should be no doubt that
    anything after that that they claim is reliance is 2279
    absolutely not reasonable.
         In 1985 he goes to Smoke Enders -- excuse me,
    1983 he goes to Smoke Enders and drops out, and in
    1985 the warning label is changed to say, smoking
    causes lung cancer.  That's the disease he got.  It
    was written on the side of the pack starting in 1985.
    And Plaintiffs would have you believe that it's
    reasonable for him to smoke a filtered cigarette after
    that.
         Did they point you to a single statement that
    said filters were safer in the whole case?  And I'll
    get to this in a minute, but just ask yourselves as
    you sit here right now, can you think of a single
    statement from any entity anywhere that Mr. Schoeff
    saw, just one.  It's 50 years.  They can't point to
    one statement from one person affiliated with the
    tobacco industry that this man actually saw, actually
    saw and actually heard and actually relied on, not one
    statement in the whole case.
         It's the same when it comes to advertising.  At
    trial Mrs. Schoeff testified, sure, we talked about
    advertisement all the time, when the proponents of the
    cigarette companies had all these wonderful ads, how
    cigarettes were.  I showed her her sworn deposition
    testimony when she was here, and she said, look, he 2280
    never showed me an advertisement, he never once in our
    entire lives together pointed out an advertisement to
    me and said, hey, look, look at this great cigarette
    ad, and you said no, not like that.  It doesn't add
    up.  The story they told in court does not add up.  It
    doesn't add up to making Mr. Schoeff a class member,
    and it doesn't add up to $9.5 million for
    Mrs. Schoeff.
         It's the same for nicotine withdrawal.  And this
    is an important point.  Every time Mr. Schoeff put
    smoking down, and even this relapse stuff that they
    talk about, and there's no evidence that he ever
    relapsed or that he was overcome by a compulsion to
    smoke at all.  But two things about withdrawal.
    That's a medical diagnosis.  This is a man who was
    never diagnosed with nicotine withdrawal.
         But secondly, look at the symptoms he experienced
    himself.  First in court Mrs. Schoeff testified that
    he had been captured.  He had a compulsion about it.
    He said to me it felt like a compulsion.  I asked her,
    isn't it true you used to joke with him about his
    nicotine withdrawal?  He would be irritable and
    fidgety, and she said, we would talk about it.  Not
    just talk, you would actually about joke about it.
    She said, uh-huh.  They joked about it.  That tells 2281
    you all you need to know about the severity of his
    withdrawal symptoms.  He was fidgety.
         Mr. Schoeff was a Marine.  When did being fidgety
    become an excuse not to change behavior that you want
    to change?  That's Plaintiff's case.  When he put a
    cigarette down, he was fidgety.  Fidgety.  That's
    their justification for 50 years of smoking.  But
    remember what happened when Mrs. Schoeff was here and
    we talked about withdrawal.  Between them, his
    symptoms were something they joked about, not
    something that they went and got medical treatment
    for, not something that they needed professional
    assistance for, but joke.
         He was cranky.  Did you see any evidence that
    Mr. Schoeff was the kind of man who couldn't put up
    with being fidgety or irritable if he really wanted to
    get something done?  No, he didn't.  There was no
    evidence.
         It's the same with reliance, Mr. Schoeff told you
    that continually -- excuse me, consistently in the
    '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s she would pick out articles
    about smoking and health and show them to her husband,
    but she admitted that it was a one-way street.
    Mr. Schoeff never showed her an article disputing the
    risk of smoking, not once, not one article ever.  She 2282
    just said he believed stuff.  Did she ever point to
    anything specific that he had seen and heard and
    accepted, internalized so that he was making decisions
    based on that?  Not one piece of evidence.
         In their entire time together, he never went back
    to Mrs. Schoeff and said, hey, all those articles,
    you're showing me, look at this one, not once.  Not a
    white paper, not a press release, not a statement on
    TV, not an advertisement, not a commercial, none of
    it.
         And it's the same with ability to control.  When
    it comes to whether Mr. Schoeff had the ability to
    control his smoking, it's right here.  It still
    doesn't add up on all of these issues.  Mrs. Schoeff
    said that he had been captured and that he was
    compelled to smoke.  But look on the right.  This is
    what we asked Mrs. Schoeff about when Mr. Schoeff went
    to work for Dr. Goodman, and I want to make one point
    here.  Dr. Goodman was also Mr. Schoeff's doctor, a
    close personal friend and his doctor.
         And when we asked Mrs. Schoeff, well, why would
    Dr. Goodman put Mr. Schoeff in the house, did he know
    that he would follow the smoking rules?  What did she
    say?  They knew he would find a way.  When it
    mattered, Mr. Schoeff could control his smoking. 2283
    There should be no doubt about it.  He wasn't
    captured, he wasn't compelled to smoke.
         His own friend and his own doctor -- mind you, a
    man who never diagnosed him as addicted.  Dr. Goodman
    never diagnosed him as addicted, never diagnosed him
    as being -- suffering from nicotine withdrawal, not
    once.  Dr. Goodman is on their witness list.  All of
    these treaters are.  Not one physician took the stand
    for plaintiffs and said Mr. Schoeff was addicted, let
    alone that addiction was so substantial, so
    continuous, and so direct that it would meet the
    standards to be considered a legal cause under Florida
    law.
         That's what legal cause is, direct and
    substantial and continuous.  It's but for.  If you
    take that out of the picture, would he still be the
    same guy?  If you take Reynolds out of the picture,
    would Mr. Schoeff have been a different man?  If you
    take nicotine out, were there other things that
    Mr. Schoeff liked about smoking?  That's legal cause.
    But remember Dr. Goodman.  When it was up to
    Dr. Goodman and his own child, his opinion was,
    Mr. Schoeff will find a way.  He knew that Mr. Schoeff
    wouldn't break those smoking rules.
         Quit attempts is the same thing.  Mrs. Schoeff 2284
    testified on direct that he tried so many times I
    don't even remember the number.  She said, he was very
    sincere.  And I asked her about Smoke Enders on
    cross-examination, and she admitted that about half
    way through the program he dropped out.  And we
    learned that half way through the Smoke Enders program
    is when you actually have to quit, that's when you
    reach the point where you've made all your
    preparations and you're going to quit smoking.  He
    dropped out.
         But there's an interesting point here, and you
    probably noticed it yesterday with Dr. Bernstein.  The
    reason Dr. Bernstein didn't know that Mr. Schoeff had
    dropped out of Smoke Enders was it's not in anyone's
    deposition.  It's not in Mrs. Schoeff's deposition
    anywhere, it's not in David's Schoeff's deposition
    anywhere, it's not in Pamela Schoeff's deposition
    anywhere; it's not in any of the depositions in this
    case.  And, in fact, it didn't even come up on
    Mr. Alvarez's questioning of Mrs. Schoeff.
         The first time it came up was on my
    cross-examination.  I'm sure Mrs. Schoeff just
    remembered it in between the examinations, but it's a
    very important point because it shows that addiction
    is not a substantial part of this man's life.  How can 2285
    it be that his wife would forget through two
    depositions and a direct testimony in her own lawsuit
    that her husband had dropped out of a cessation clinic
    if addiction was a substantial and direct and
    continuous cause of his behavior?  That can't be.  It
    doesn't add up.  It can't be that this is a man being
    compelled to smoke, tries to stop and fails, when his
    wife doesn't even remember until I asked her questions
    that he had dropped out of Smoke Enders.
         His own son said the same thing.  David Schoeff
    lived at home from 1959 until 1978.  He lived at home
    for two years after he graduated college in 1982.  He
    testified that he doesn't have a single memory, not
    one memory, of his father trying to stop smoking.  He
    remembers his father talking about it, but he doesn't
    have one memory of an action, an affirmative step to
    change behavior.
         And, remember, Plaintiff's response was, well,
    maybe he wasn't in the driveway when he pulled out.
    And they said it again today, well, Mrs. Schoeff
    doesn't remember the address and maybe they don't
    remember the name of the hypnotist; that's not the
    point we're making here at all.  And I will tell you
    right now, no one is attacking Mr. Schoeff.  I feel
    like I'm the only one defending this man and the kind 2286
    of person he was, but we saw in their argument they
    know how to character assassinate when they want to,
    and it's directed at me.  That's the attack.
         But here, think about what this means.  This is
    his own son.  We're not suggesting that he needed to
    be in the driveway when he pulled out.  We're saying
    that over 35 years he never was there when his dad was
    quitting.  He didn't see it, and the reason he didn't
    see it is that quitting an addiction were not
    substantial parts of Mr. Schoeff's life.  If they
    were, if addiction, some of the other things required
    in this case, were substantial parts of this man's
    life, that evidence would be here.  And it's that lack
    of evidence that prevents plaintiff from meeting their
    burden of proof on just about every claim in this
    case.
         Now, we talked a little bit about the class
    definition.  I'm sure probably most of you have taken
    it to heart and could recite it to me, but basically
    the first question on your verdict form is, was
    Mr. Schoeff addicted, and if so, was that addiction a
    legal cause of his lung cancer and death?  Was he
    addicted, and if so, was that addiction substantial,
    continuous, cause of his lung cancer and death?
         Where is the evidence that Mr. Schoeff was 2287
    addicted?  They didn't bring you a single doctor to
    testify that Mr. Schoeff was addicted, not
    Dr. Goodman, not any of the men that treated him in
    1993 or 1994 or 1995.  They didn't show you a single
    medical record where Mr. Schoeff was diagnosed as
    addicted.
         Think about that for a second.  We have records
    and they're all in evidence and you can look through
    them yourselves, there are records from the '90s when
    Mr. Schoeff is suffering serious problems, heart
    problems and lung problems, and not one of those
    doctors puts in any medical record this man is
    dependent or addicted to nicotine.  Not one.  They
    didn't bring a single doctor to tell you that
    Mr. Schoeff was addicted.
         Doctor Henningfield didn't do it.  He admitted
    right off the bat, I don't have any opinions that
    relate specifically to the individual in this lawsuit.
    His opinions are generic.  Dr. Proctor gave you the
    same admission.  I don't have any opinions specific to
    Mr. Schoeff.  His opinions are generic.  Dr. Villa,
    you're not an expert in addiction.  I am not.  You
    have no opinions regarding whether Mr. Schoeff was
    addicted or not addicted?  Zero opinion.  Those are
    the three experts, no opinions specific to Mr. Schoeff 2288
    and the claim that he was addicted to nicotine for
    more than 40 years.  That is a fundamental failure of
    proof.
         You can't substitute that proof for plaintiffs.
    That's why they want you to think that addiction is
    not a medical diagnosis, but we heard quite clearly
    that it is.  Addiction is a medical diagnosis.  It's
    in the diagnostic and statistical manual, and that
    book, just on a side note, that book has all kinds of
    ailments in it.  Things like depression, bipolar
    disorder, all kinds of mental problems are in DSM-IV,
    including nicotine dependence, but it's because of
    that that you need an expert to apply it in a given
    situation.  Plaintiffs don't want you to do that.
         Think about what Plaintiffs want to do.  They
    found the Fagerstrom test.  They have found a test
    that assumes you're dependent right off the bat.  I
    wish I had tests like this in high school.  You can't
    fail this test.  If you get a zero, you're dependent.
    This test assumes from the outset that you're
    dependent.  But think about what Plaintiffs want you
    to do.  They have found a test you cannot fail and
    they have filled it in with information provided
    exclusively from the woman who is suing Reynolds for
    $9.5 million; that's their addiction evidence in this 2289
    case.  They have filled this in with Mrs. Schoeff.
         They found a test you can't fail, and they have
    Mrs. Schoeff check off the boxes, and he got an eight,
    I think.  What kind of way is that to judge a man's
    life?  We are talking about 40 years of smoking,
    40 years of decisions and choices.  What kind of way
    is that to judge a man's life, to make a medical
    diagnosis with a checklist?  Dr. Bernstein explained
    this very well.  These are not checklists.  He is a
    forensic psychiatrist.  I will confess he didn't
    explain that well in response to my questions, he
    explained it I think a little better in response to
    your questions, but he explained it.  They're like
    Quincy, we probably remember that show, but forensic
    psychiatrists look at all of the evidence.
         That's the difference between Dr. Bernstein and
    the experts Plaintiffs hired.  He's a clinician, he
    treats real people.  And before he makes a diagnosis
    of a mental disorder, he looks at all the available
    facts, sworn deposition testimony, discovery
    responses, everything he can find, medical records.
    He looked at everything.  Henningfield never saw a
    single piece of paper about Mr. Schoeff, Proctor never
    saw anything.  Proctor sat up here and told you, he
    knew the material was available and didn't want to see 2290
    it.  It doesn't matter to his opinion.
         But Dr. Bernstein is different, and he explained
    why Fagerstrom and DSM can't just be filled in as
    checklists, and if you think about some of the other
    mental disorders that are in DSM, I think that makes a
    lot of sense.  You would never diagnose somebody as
    being depressed or having bipolar disorder by checking
    off things on a form; that's not a diagnosis, that's
    not addiction.  And that's why Plaintiffs have such a
    failure of proof in this case.  But more importantly,
    it's this concept of addiction as cause.
         And let me back up for a moment.  Addiction is
    really just a word.  We've heard that there were
    different definitions over time.  For different people
    it meant different things and today we use it to
    describe a variety of activities.  If you doubt that
    the concept of addiction has been watered down,
    remember Dr. Proctor's testimony.  I asked him, isn't
    it true that the State of Florida collects a
    tremendous amount of taxes from the sale of
    cigarettes?  And he said, yes.  I call that the second
    addiction; that's Dr. Proctor.  Dr. Proctor is the guy
    who would ban the sale of cigarettes in this country,
    Dr. Proctor is the guy who testifies repeatedly
    against tobacco companies, and he's the kind of guy 2291
    that for him tax revenue for a state is an addiction.
         That shows you that it's just a word.  It doesn't
    answer the real question that you have to focus on for
    class membership.  And that question is whether
    addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Schoeff's lung
    cancer and death.  And here Plaintiffs have no
    evidence at all.
         Setting aside Fagerstrom, setting aside D SM
    four, setting aside what you decide you want to call
    Mr. Schoeff's smoking, that's up to you, you get to
    decide what you call it, setting all of that aside,
    the real issue is whether that smoking, that
    addiction, was substantial and direct and continuous
    enough to have been considered a legal cause of his
    lung cancer and death.
         Not a single witness in this case testified that
    addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Schoeff's disease.
    Not one.  Not one witness for the plaintiffs said that
    addiction was substantial enough to be considered a
    legal cause of Mr. Schoeff's lung cancer and death.
    Not one witness.  Not even Mrs. Schoeff.  Not one
    witness.  No evidence at all.
         Henningfield admits that everyone can quit.  This
    is the evidence we did hear, well everyone can quit.
    And Plaintiffs write that off and try to pretend it's 2292
    harder for some people and Mr. Schoeff had a tough
    time, but Henningfield admitted that everybody can
    quit.
         He also admitted that there's some people who
    simply don't want to stop.  It is perfectly natural
    for Mrs. Schoeff to wish that her husband had made
    different choices about smoking at different points in
    his life.  But there is no evidence that Mr. Schoeff
    was not this kind of person.  He's not somebody who
    couldn't quit, he's somebody who wasn't interested in
    quitting.  This is legal cause, and that's the but for
    part of it at the bottom.
         These are all of the other reasons that
    Mr. Schoeff gives for his smoking, but I want to fast
    forward and make two points about legal cause.  It has
    to be continuous and it has to be substantial.  And
    just think about two events in this case --
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.  Misstates the standard.
    It says or.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  You guys are guided by
    the legal instructions that I have given to you in the
    back.  Go ahead, sir.
         MR. BOYCE:  We have a chart and we have addiction
    on one side and continued smoking on the other because
    that's basically what you need to find.  You need to 2293
    find that addiction was substantial and continuous
    cause of Mr. Schoeff's lung cancer and death.  You can
    see that this is broken in 1957, he quit cold turkey.
    How can Mr. Paige represent that Mr. Schoeff didn't
    know anything about the risk of smoking when he quits
    cold turkey in 1957?  He quits cold turkey for long
    enough time for the nicotine to be gone from his body,
    for the withdrawal symptoms to be gone, and when he
    goes back, he goes back for reasons that have nothing
    to do with Reynolds.
         He wasn't tricked into resuming smoking, he
    wasn't forced to resume smoking, he made a choice to
    go back to smoking.  That breaks the causal chain.  It
    happened again in 1967.  In 1967 he quit smoking for
    months.  Mrs. Schoeff doesn't know why he quit smoking
    in 1967, she doesn't remember how he quit smoking in
    1967, she doesn't know what his reasons were.  She
    thinks that health might have had something to do with
    it, but she's not sure.  But what's important here is
    that when he goes back to smoking, it has nothing to
    do with addiction, nothing to do with Reynolds, and
    nothing to do with what Mr. Schoeff did or did not
    know about the risks of smoking.
         What's important about 1967 and 1957 is this
    concept of declining risk.  And this is when Dr. Villa 2294
    told you if you quit smoking long enough ago, you will
    avoid problems from cigarette smoking.  Okay?  Your
    body repairs itself almost immediately after you stop
    smoking.  If you quit smoking 20 years ago, the
    relevant risk is significantly reduced.  Doctor villa
    went on, ten years ago, your relevant risk of lung
    cancer would be substantially reduced.  And if a
    person quit smoking for 25 years, the risk of
    developing lung cancer is reduced by 90 percent or
    more.  If Mr. Schoeff had stayed off cigarettes in
    1957, he would have avoided his lung cancer, the same
    for 1967.  He would have avoided the injury that we're
    talking about in this lawsuit.
         This is the Surgeon General's report, this
    document is in evidence, this is AS 29.  If you don't
    like Dr. Villa's testimony, if you're looking for more
    information about what happens when you quit smoking,
    the Surgeon General reported that after 15 to 20 years
    the ex-smoker's risk of dying from lung cancer
    decreases to the point where it closely approximates
    the risk of somebody who never smoked.  That's after
    20 years, that means if Mr. Schoeff had quit smoking
    even in the '70s, his risk would have been down to
    that closely approximating the risk of a nonsmoker by
    1995. 2295
         And the Surgeon General in 1989, which is AS 36,
    said that after 10 to 15 years, the risk of all forms
    of mortalities returns nearly to that of persons who
    have never smoked.  That's the Surgeon General and
    Plaintiff's own expert.
         There's one other point I want to make about this
    declining risk.  This is where Mr. Alvarez accused me
    as being part of the same fraud and conspiracy that he
    accuses my client of.  Nobody in this case told you
    that MAI causes lung cancer.  I stood before you in
    opening statements and said smoking causes lung
    cancer.  There should be no dispute about that.  The
    reason MAI was brought up was because of what
    Dr. Villa told you.  He said that the reason that
    85 percent of smokers never get lung cancer is because
    your body repairs itself daily.  If you smoke a
    cigarette -- if you need a tissue or anything, please
    just let us know.
         If you quit smoking or if you're a smoker, you're
    doing damage to your lungs, but your body fixes that
    damage.  And what Dr. Villa told you was is that for
    Mr. Schoeff it was his opinion that this MAI, this
    lung infection, which is a bacteria growing in his
    chest, prevented his body from doing what it would
    normally do.  That's why MAI is in this case, he's 2296
    suggested MAI caused his cancer.  This is Dr. Villa's
    opinion that this was a guy who before he was ever
    diagnosed with lung cancer had a disease that has no
    association with smoking, that prevented its body from
    doing what it normally does.
         But '57 and '67 quits are important for those two
    reasons.  They break this continuous chain of
    addiction as a legal cause, and they're both at points
    in time long enough ago that Mr. Schoeff would have
    avoided his injury if he had stayed off cigarettes.
         And there he is.  This is the reason that
    addiction is not a substantial cause here.  The only
    cause of Mr. Schoeff smoking was Mr. Schoeff.  That's
    the point of this chart.  Standing between addiction
    and lung cancer is a man, a man who was a CEO and a
    vice president, an executive.  You saw the
    commendation letters where he was commended for his
    ability to discipline himself and make tough
    decisions.  That's the man we're talking about here.
         That's the lifetime Plaintiffs want you to skip
    right over.  They go from 1947 to 1995 with a wave of
    the hand.  He smoked.  There's an entire life in
    there.  He enjoyed it.  Mrs. Schoeff told you that he
    was a proponent of smoking.  Not because he didn't
    know any better, but for him it was something that 2297
    helped him at work, he liked to do it with his
    friends, with a drink, a cup of coffee, perfectly
    normal reasons that people give for doing things that
    may not be in the best interest of their health.  That
    is not drug addiction.  That is not drug addiction so
    substantial as to be considered a legal cause under
    Florida law.
         He didn't try to quit for decades, for decades.
    Decades at a time.  Go back.  Think about that for a
    second.  Let's just focus on 1957.  You may have heard
    this expression, what happened the day after?  What
    happened the next day?  1957 he quit smoking, he goes
    back to smoking for reasons we don't even know about
    in this case, no evidence of what they are.  What
    happened next?  If he's serious about changes in
    behavior, wouldn't you see a quit attempt in '58, '59,
    '60, '61, we go a decade.  '57 to '67, a decade in
    between, it's not a consistent effort, and there's no
    evidence that if Mr. Schoeff would have put in a
    consistent effort that he wouldn't have succeeded in
    quitting.
         He disregarded warnings from his family and
    friends, he was smart and disciplined, goal oriented.
    His own son told you, the goals that he had were
    important to him.  That should tell you all you need 2298
    to know about whether quitting smoking was one of
    those goals.  The goals he had were important to him.
    He controlled his smoking when he wanted to, he was
    able to quit, and he did successfully quit.
         I want to turn for a moment to the findings.
    You've heard about them from the judge, the
    instructions talk about them in this case.  The first
    thing is, the findings do not apply in this case until
    you first determine whether Mr. Schoeff was or was not
    a member of the Engle class.  But even if you find
    that he was a member of the Engle class, the findings
    still don't answer the questions that you have to
    answer in this case.  And that's what you'll find in
    the instructions, there are still significant
    limitations on the use of those findings.
         We talked about these ones in opening, but the
    findings do not establish that Reynolds' conduct is a
    legal cause of Mr. Schoeff's death.  That the Engle
    findings can't be considered until you determine he's
    a member of the class.  But more importantly is you'll
    see on the verdict form the Engle findings don't
    answer the questions you have to answer.
         When you look at the verdict form, you will see
    that you have ten questions to answer, and they all
    work to this requirement of legal cause.  All of the 2299
    stuff that Plaintiffs want to talk about has to be
    connected to Mr. Schoeff by facts, by evidence and
    facts that can be considered direct and in continuous
    sequence, such that it's said that it was a
    substantial impact on this man, a substantial part of
    his life, such that he would have avoided what
    happened to him but for Reynolds.  That's the
    fundamental inquiry.
         If you take Reynolds out of the picture, would
    Mr. Schoeff have been a different guy?  And there was
    no evidence of that.  There was no evidence from any
    witness that Mr. Schoeff was a person who was being
    compelled by a tobacco company to do something he
    otherwise didn't want to do.  Did you see any evidence
    of that?  He's a CEO and a former Marine.  Did you see
    any evidence that this was a guy who was doing
    something he otherwise wouldn't do because of
    Reynolds?  No, you did not.
         This is the verdict form.  I would like to spend
    a moment here going through the verdict form with you,
    and we can talk about some of the questions that
    you're going to have to answer and some of the
    evidence that I think relates to it.  And the first
    one is what we call strict liability, and the question
    here is, were the defective and unreasonably dangerous 2300
    cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds a legal cause of
    Mr. Schoeff's lung cancer and death?  The first point
    I want to make here is Plaintiffs didn't prove to you
    that there was anything wrong with unfiltered
    cigarettes.  They didn't show you a single defect in
    unfiltered cigarettes in the whole case.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  It's
    inappropriate.  It goes against the findings, it's
    questioning the findings.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  Okay.  I have told you
    what the findings are in the instructions, folks, and
    you'll be guided by the evidence as to what the
    lawyers are arguing.
         MR. BOYCE:  They have can't have it both ways.
    You can't have filters being wrong, and then say,
    well, now it's unfilters.  Think about the evidence
    you saw in this case.  Think about what you learned
    about unfiltered cigarettes.  The cigarettes that
    Mr. Schoeff smoked for the vast majority of his life,
    basically that's tobacco rolled in paper.  That's what
    we learned in this case about unfiltered cigarettes.
    If you grow tobacco in your backyard and you roll it
    up in paper, you basically have an unfiltered Pall
    Mall or an unfiltered Camel or an unfiltered Lucky
    Strike.  That's what Mr. Schoeff smoked for the vast 2301
    majority of his life.
         In fact, Dr. Villa told you that when Mr. Schoeff
    switched to filters in the '80s, that that was too
    late to make any difference.  We asked him, if he quit
    smoking in the '80s, is that enough time to reverse
    the damage?  They said, no.  And he also told you that
    smoking for about ten years or less isn't enough to
    increase your risk of lung cancer.  So the filtered
    stuff in the late '80s is not really a part of this
    analysis, what was causing the disease.  But here you
    can see that natural tobacco contains irritants.
    Unfiltered cigarettes.  Both have carcinogens, both
    have nicotine, both have chemicals and cause cancer
    and are addictive and dangerous, that's an unfiltered
    cigarette.  There was no evidence of a specific defect
    in unfiltered cigarettes in this case.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, judge.  These cigarettes
    have already been found by a matter of law to be --
         THE COURT:  Don't make speaking objections.
         MR. BOYCE:  That's not true.  That is totally not
    true.
         THE COURT:  Both of you stop.  The jury will be
    guided by the evidence they've heard in the courtroom
    and the decisions that they make.  You may continue,
    Mr. Boyce. 2302
         MR. BOYCE:  You will see that one of the problems
    with the findings is a lack of specificity.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.
         MR. BOYCE:  There is no finding.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  The findings are as I've
    outlined them in the jury instructions, ladies and
    gentlemen.  This is legal argument, keep in mind that
    both lawyers are entitled to argue what they wish, but
    you must follow the legal instructions as I've given
    to you already.
         Mr. Boyce, you may continue.
         MR. BOYCE:  Thank you, sir.  They've got the
    wrong cigarette here.  It doesn't add up.  They've got
    the wrong guy to try to force into the Engle class,
    but they've also got the wrong cigarette.  For the
    vast majority of his life, he's smoking basically
    tobacco rolled in paper.  They're harsher, more
    difficult to inhale.  You saw -- Plaintiffs like to
    say, well, Mr. Schoeff is just like everybody else.
    He was completely atypical with his brands.  When he
    started smoking, the market share of unfiltered
    cigarettes decreased from 99.44 percent to
    2.8 percent, he stayed with that brand.  Think about
    what that means in terms of the effect that
    advertising would have had on Mr. Schoeff. 2303
         You heard Dr. Proctor admit, unfiltered
    cigarettes were not promoted in advertising in the
    '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s at all.  All of that
    $250 billion that Mr. Paige spent so much time talking
    about is not focused on the brands Mr. Schoeff smokes.
    Advertising can't be a part of it.  He's not smoking
    the brands that are advertised.  He's not even smoking
    the type of cigarettes that are being advertised.
         Nonetheless Reynolds was able to achieve, as you
    heard from Dr. Cook, dramatic reductions from the tar
    and nicotine levels from unfiltered cigarettes.  The
    nicotine levels drop by almost 57 percent we found as
    we talk about on the last line, that an unfiltered
    cigarette is no different in terms of addictiveness or
    dangerous than tobacco rolled in paper.
         The only thing that Plaintiffs have focused on in
    this case that can be considered a defect, I think,
    would be filters and then their allegation that
    Reynolds and other tobacco companies manipulated the
    pH of cigarette smoke to create more free nicotine.  I
    would like to spend a minute talking about both of
    those and why the evidence doesn't allow you to find
    for plaintiffs on this claim of strict liability.
    Remember, there's no defect with the unfiltered
    cigarettes on the evidence in this case, but let's 2304
    just talk about filters for a second.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Judge, can I have a continuing
    objection to this question -- to this statements
    that's inappropriate --
         THE COURT:  You may.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  -- it goes against Engle.
         THE COURT:  You may.  The objection is overruled.
    The jury, again, is guided by the legal instructions
    that I previously gave to them and the evidence that
    has been developed in the courtroom and nothing else.
    Go ahead, Mr. Boyce.
         MR. BOYCE:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Now, let's
    talk about filters for a minute.  Plaintiffs would
    have you believe that Reynolds and other tobacco
    companies went in the back room, decided to make
    filters as part of an effort to hook kids and keep
    people smoking for 50 years.  Did you see any evidence
    of that?  First off, this conspiracy doesn't relate to
    the way they make cigarettes at all.  They compete on
    the way they make cigarettes.  If you think Philip
    Morris will tell Reynolds how they make a Marlboro,
    that's just not true.
         There is no evidence the way they make
    cigarettes, the way they design cigarettes is part of
    this.  It's about statements, information about the 2305
    risk of smoking, nothing to do with cigarette design,
    nothing to do with the way they make cigarettes.
         The evidence in this case was actually the
    opposite.  That Reynolds and the other tobacco
    companies worked with the National Cancer Institute
    for a decade to reduce the risks associated with
    smoking.  It was called the Tobacco Working Group, and
    it was in existence from 1968 to 1978.  Scientists
    from Reynolds, Philip Morris, and Brown & Williamson
    worked in conjunction with the National Cancer
    Institute to reduce the risks of smoking.  They funded
    a massive amount of research on cigarette design and
    modification, and then the TWG was abandoned by the
    government in '78 and Reynolds kept going.
         But what's important about this is all of these
    design features that plaintiffs complain about now,
    filters, porous paper, reconstituted tobacco, puffed
    tobacco, expanded tobacco, all of that, is part of
    this joint effort.  That's where these things are
    coming from, filters, faster burning paper, and
    putting less tobacco in cigarettes; that's part of a
    working group.  That's where these efforts come from.
    They're being developed in conjunction with the
    National Cancer Institute because the joint goal was
    to reduce the risks associated with smoking.  That's 2306
    where it all comes from.
         But there's a very important reason why you don't
    have to spend much time thinking about filters in this
    case.  There's been dispute over when Mr. Schoeff
    switched to filters and which brands may have had
    filters on them, and you can make your own decisions
    about the that evidence.
         But there's one piece of evidence that's not in
    dispute, and that's Mrs. Schoeff's testimony that when
    Mr. Schoeff switched to a filtered cigarette, he
    smoked less.  He smoked less of them.  You can think
    whatever you want to about filters.  In this case, we
    can all agree smoking less cigarettes is better than
    smoking more.  He didn't compensate when he switched
    to a filter, he didn't puff it more deeply or inhale
    it any differently.  She told you, there's no
    difference in the way he smoked filtered cigarettes,
    and that from her perspective, from her perspective,
    it seemed like he was smoking less.  And by that you
    think he was smoking fewer cigarettes per day, is that
    what you're saying?  And Mrs. Schoeff said yes.
    That's all you need to know about filters in this
    case, when he smoked them, he smoked less of them.
         Next his pH.  I just want to spend a moment
    talking about pH.  Plaintiffs obviously like this 1

    because they want you to think that there's freebase
    nicotine in cigarette smoke, and that evidence is not
    here.  And we saw this from Dr. Proctor.  Dr. Proctor
    himself.  They put up this document on direct and I
    had to do it on cross-examination.  I had to show him
    what happens with the pH of smoke, and for those of us
    who were listening, pH scale runs from zero to 14
    roughly, seven's right in the middle.  Okay.  And it's
    a range that determines how acid a substance might be,
    or how base a substance might be.  And seven is right
    in the middle.
         But what's important in this case is that six,
    6.0, a pH of 6.0 is the point where you start to see
    some free nicotine in this smoke.  6.0 is sort of the
    cutoff.  6.5 actually I think is what Dr. Procter
    said.  But in that range.  Below 6.5 there is so
    little free nicotine in cigarette smoke that you don't
    even need to worry about it.  That evidence comes from
    the Surgeon General himself.  The 1979 Surgeon
    General's report.  The pH of the resulting mainstream
    smoke is below 6.5 and that potentially contains only
    protonated or bound nicotine.  If your pH is below
    6.5, there is no free nicotine in the smoke.  Below
    6.5, no free nicotine in the smoke.  And that's what
    Dr. Teague reported here on his graph.
         But here's what's important about the brands that
    Mr. Schoeff smoked.  We asked Dr. Proctor, do you have
    any evidence, have you seen a document anywhere that
    unfiltered Pall Malls, unfiltered Camels, Luckys had a
    pH over six.  He said, no.  I've never seen a document
    that said that.  We asked him about Kool, did you
    study the pH of Kool cigarettes before you testified,
    not apart from the fact that I know virtually all
    modern cigarettes are low pH, low pH.  There's no
    evidence in this case that the pH of a Kool
    cigarettes, the pH of a Lucky cigarette, the pH of a
    Camel cigarette or the pH of a Pall Mall cigarette
    ever got above 6.0.  Free nicotine is a red herring,
    to use Mr. Alvarez's word.
         The next claim on the verdict form -- and I may
    take them out of order.  I think actually negligence
    comes first and strict liability comes after that.
    But I would like to spend a moment talking about the
    claim of negligence, and as you can see here is
    basically the question is, was Reynolds' failure to
    act like a reasonably prudent product manufacturer
    would have under the circumstances a legal cause?  All
    of these focus on direct and continuous and
    substantial cause.  A legal cause of Mr. Schoeff's
    lung cancer and death.  And here the answer is, no, 2309
    for one simple reason.  None of the stuff that
    Reynolds did or didn't do with respect to cigarettes
    made any difference to Mr. Schoeff.
         Now, I'll just give you two examples, the first
    is Eclipse.  Reynolds spent billions of dollars to
    develop a product called Premier and another product
    called Eclipse.  And you might remember I talked about
    this with Dr. Proctor, but the bad stuff in cigarette
    smoke, the stuff that causes cancer and emphysema
    comes from burning tobacco.  If you burn organic
    material, you get some nasty compounds in the smoke,
    and those compounds cause disease.  So Reynolds
    decided to try to make a cigarette that would heat
    tobacco, not burn it.  If the bad stuff comes from
    burning, let's try heating it instead; that's the
    concept behind premier and Eclipse, and they spent
    billions of dollars to try to develop those products.
         Dr. Proctor told you they were safer.  He said,
    look, I would ban the sale of all conventional
    cigarettes.  Well, Plaintiffs talk about credibility
    and bias, remember Dr. Proctor's admission that if it
    was up to him, no American would be able to make a
    choice about smoking or not.  He would take that
    choice away from them and ban the sale.  But he said
    I'll make an exception for Eclipse.  They're much less 2310
    deadly.  I don't think I'm in favor of banning a
    cigarette like Eclipse; that's Plaintiff's own expert.
    Okay.
         That's a different product, but what's important
    in this case is, and this is why Reynolds' negligence
    is not a legal cause of Mr. Schoeff's injury, none of
    this made any difference to Mr. Schoeff.  You heard it
    from his wife, he was never interested in Premier,
    never interested in Eclipse, which came out very late
    in his life, but Premier came out in '88, never
    interested in those products.  And it's the same with
    ultra low products.  Plaintiffs claim that Reynolds
    never made a cigarette that addressed the
    addictiveness of nicotine, and the evidence is
    actually the exact opposite.
         This is a report from Dr. Henningfield.
    Dr. Henningfield is plaintiff's own expert.  He
    reported to the FDA that the amount of nicotine
    necessary to have pharmacological effects is much
    lower, somewhere in the range of 0.2 milligrams.
    That's plaintiff's expert.  If you're below
    0.2 milligrams of nicotine, according to
    Dr. Henningfield, you're not having a pharmacologic or
    drug-like effect from the nicotine.  Okay?  That's
    Dr. Henningfield. 2311
         But remember when we talked about Carlton?  We
    talked about Carlton with Dr. Proctor and Dr. Cook
    brought up Carlton as well.  And the testimony in this
    case was that Carlton brand yields about one
    milligrams of nicotine.  Dr. Henningfield is telling
    you below 0.2, no pharmacologic effect, and Carlton is
    one that when smoked on the machine has .1 milligrams
    of nicotine.  That's a cigarette that is so low in
    nicotine that according to Plaintiff's own expert,
    there's no pharmacologic effect from it.
         This is what I mean about negligence having no
    connection to Mr. Schoeff.  On one hand, Reynolds
    makes a cigarette that reduces the risks of smoking by
    heating tobacco.  On the other hand, Reynolds makes a
    cigarette that's so low in nicotine it doesn't even
    have a drug-like effect.  Mr. Schoeff had no interest
    in either one.  He never smoked a low tar cigarette,
    he never smoked an ultra low tar cigarette, and he
    never smoked a cigarette that he heated tobacco
    instead of burning it.  He wasn't interested in this.
    He's an unfiltered smoker.  That's why any of this
    stuff that Plaintiffs complain about, conduct, should
    have happened then, should have happened now, doesn't
    apply to Mr. Schoeff.
         I want to spend a moment here talking about 2312
    Reynolds publications.  You heard throughout this case
    that Reynolds never said anything about the risks of
    smoking, never published anything, and that it was all
    part of the conspiracy.  I'm sorry, Your Honor, did
    you want to take a break?  I forgot to ask.
         THE COURT:  Is everybody okay?  Yeah, okay go
    ahead.
         MR. BOYCE:  Thank you.  Time and time again
    Reynolds published on the risks of smoking, but I just
    want you to remember the chronology.  The documents is
    in evidence when Dr. Teague writes in 1953 a book
    report that there's a bunch of articles out there
    linking smoking with disease.  Reynolds hires a
    chemist, the guy's name was Dr. Alan Rodgman.
    Dr. Alan Rodgman has been thanked specifically by the
    Surgeon General of the United States.  They hired him
    in 1954, they put him in a lab, spent eight years
    studying cigarette smoke.  When he was done, he wrote
    up all of his findings, they submitted to the Surgeon
    General.
         Huge list of constituents submitted to the
    Surgeon General in 1963, and Reynolds and Dr. Rodgman
    were thanked specifically for their cooperation, but
    Reynolds went further.  These are just some of the
    publications that Dr. Rodgman put out over the years. 2313
    You can see he's writing on cigarette smoke and
    hydroxyl oxides and aliphatic esters and acetates.  He
    gave a speech in 1969 where he not only disclosed all
    the stuff he had found in cigarette smoke, he drew
    pictures of them, and it's in evidence.
         And I will not be able to give you that exhibit
    number until somebody hands it to me, but it's in
    evidence, it's a speech from Dr. Rodgman from 1969.
    You can flip through it, you can see that he drew
    pictures of all of the compounds that he had found in
    cigarette smoke.  Now, remember when Dr. Proctor was
    here and he had the list of bad stuff in cigarettes.
    I said, did you check that list against Dr. Rodgman's
    speech before you call this man a liar, before you
    come in here under oath and call a man like Alan
    Rodgman a liar and a fraud and basically a murderer.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, inflammatory.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Again, folks, if that was not
    in evidence, you should ignore it.  If there was
    testimony to that effect, you can consider it.  You
    may proceed, Mr. Boyce.
         MR. BOYCE:  I asked Dr. Proctor, did you check
    your list?  Did you check this list before you told
    this jury this was stuff that was in cigarette smoke
    that people didn't know about?  Did you check it 2314
    against Dr. Rodgman's speech, and he said no.  I said
    do you think there's anything that's on your list that
    isn't in Dr. Rodgman's speech?  And he said, I think
    polonium-210 is probably not on there.  What did we
    do, we flipped right to the index, we look up
    polonium-210, it's right there.  Polonium-210, listed
    by Dr. Alan Rodgman in 1969 in a speech to the
    American Chemical Society.
         That's publications, but again, none of this is
    making a difference to Mr. Schoeff.  He's over here,
    this doesn't add up.  We have a debate with the public
    health community, and then we've got a man who's
    making his own decisions about his own life and
    perfectly able to control his own behavior when he
    wants to.
         Reynolds published on methods to find more bad
    stuff in cigarette smoke, and we talked about that
    with Dr. Proctor.  And we talked about how with
    Dr. Proctor Reynolds also published on pH, how to test
    smoke pH and how to find bad stuff in cigarette smoke,
    and this is just a summary of some of the publications
    that are in evidence in this case.
         Now, I want to turn now to the claims for fraud
    and conspiracy in this case.  There's two of them in
    here, and both of them have some severe limitations on 2315
    them.  But fist you heard from the judge this morning,
    after January 1 of 1969 you cannot bring a claim that
    Reynolds failed to warn you about the risks of
    smoking; that's in the instructions.  You'll see it
    quite clearly.  After the warning label goes on the
    pack, January 1, 1969, no more claims that you failed
    to warn me.  They're gone.  It's federal law.  It's
    called preemption, you may have heard me say
    objection, preemption during this trial, but that's
    what that is.  As a matter of law, no claims that you
    failed to warn me after 1969.
         The other limitation here is that reliance has to
    be reasonable.  It's not enough to say, well, he
    believed the other stuff.  We asked him, well, what
    was the other stuff?  I don't remember.  That's not
    sufficient evidence.  They have to connect a statement
    to Mr. Schoeff and you have to determine that his
    reliance on that statement was reasonable.  Reasonable
    under the circumstances, and denial is not reasonable.
    If you know something to be true, it can't be
    concealed from you.  That's the law.
         The third limitation is this date range that the
    plaintiffs talked about.  In this case Plaintiffs have
    to prove to you that Reynolds made a statement after
    May 5th, 1982, that Mr. Schoeff saw and heard and 2316
    relied on reasonably to his detriment.  And let's just
    think about that window for a second.  May 5th, 1982,
    that is 32 years after Mr. Schoeff's father told him,
    I'm quitting smoking because of my lungs.  32 years
    after his father says, I'm quitting smoking because of
    my asthma.
         His sister quit smoking before 1960.  That's
    almost 25 years after his sister calls him up and
    says, doctor told me to quit and I just quit and guess
    what, my husband Frank just quit, too.  That's
    evidence that you need to think about before you even
    look to see if it's possible for Mr. Schoeff to rely
    on something after 1982.
         But there's one more point I want to make here.
    He's diagnosed with PVD in April of 1983.  The doctor
    brings him into an office, tells him you got a disease
    from smoking and I need to operate on you.  Anything
    after that is not reasonable reliance.  There's no
    evidence that Mr. Schoeff saw anything in this initial
    matter, but after that PVD diagnosis and his leg
    surgery, it's impossible for him to rely on any
    statements about the risks of smoking.  That gives
    Plaintiffs a window of basically May of 1982 to April
    of 1983 for both of their fraud claims.
         No failure to warn after 1969, but on these fraud 2317
    claims because of Florida law, that's basically their
    window.  And look at the evidence.  Did you see any
    statements from 1982 specific to 1982?  And if you
    did, did you see any evidence that Mr. Schoeff saw
    them or heard them or relied on them reasonably to his
    detriment?  It is not enough for Plaintiff to take the
    stand and say, he didn't believe it.  He thought
    filters were safer.  There has to be specificity here.
    They've got to show you some statement, make some
    effort to connect the dots.
         And here is what the evidence actually was in
    this case.  Nobody had even heard of the Frank
    Statement.  Mrs. Schoeff told you, I never even heard
    of the Frank Statement, no evidence that Mr. Schoeff
    saw it.  Not any evidence that Mr. Schoeff ever saw
    any statement on CTR or TIRC or the Tobacco Institute
    or press releases or white papers or interviews or
    statements or statements about smoking and health or
    statements about smoking and addiction, not one.
         And there was an important piece of evidence, I
    think, that underscores all this.  We asked time and
    time again -- I'm sorry, can you guys keep it down,
    just a little distracting.
         MR. PAIGE:  I'm so sorry.
         MR. BOYCE:  Just hard for me to concentrate. 2318
    There's one piece of evidence that underscores this
    complete lack of evidence here, and that's what David
    Schoeff said.  David Schoeff said that after his dad
    was diagnosed with PVD, he never once came to him and
    said I was tricked, son.  Don't be like me.  Don't do
    what I did, don't make my mistakes.  Instead David
    said the exact opposite.  My dad thought it was up to
    me to make my own choices about smoking.  How can that
    be evidence of a man who has relied to his detriment
    on these statements?
         You heard in this case time and time again about
    all of the settlement, all of the documents are on the
    website, Plaintiffs keep pointing out, well, they're
    put up there because of settlements, that's where all
    this conduct has been addressed, this generic
    objection to the way the tobacco companies behaved
    over the years, that debt's been paid.  This is
    Mr. Schoeff's case, and if they can't prove to you by
    a preponderance of all the evidence that he saw it,
    heard it and relied upon it, they can't prevail on
    these claims.
         The date limitations are the most important ones.
    No failure to warn after 1969 and no fraud if it's not
    after May of 1982, and because of the PVD diagnosis
    it's a very small window.  Just as importantly as what 2319
    Mr. Schoeff didn't see is what everyone else in this
    country did.  And we talked about this repeatedly
    throughout this case, but truly the amount of
    awareness in this country about the risks of smoking
    is staggering.  Staggering.
         You heard Dr. Proctor admit that the polling
    numbers that they get when they ask people both if
    they're aware of the risks of smoking and if they
    believe the risks of smoking are historic, historic
    levels of awareness.  The kind of polling you can't
    get if you ask people who gave the Sermon on the
    Mount.  The type of polling data you can't get if you
    ask people, who is the president of the United States.
    That gives you some indication of what's going on with
    respect to everybody out there and what people knew.
         And remember what Mr. Paige said.  Mr. Paige
    would have you believe he didn't know anything.
    Mr. Schoeff didn't know anything, ignored his dad,
    ignored his sister, ignored his doctors, ignored his
    wife, ignored what was written on the side of the
    pack, ignored the warning labels and the ads, ignored
    everything.  He didn't know anything; that's what
    Plaintiff's position is.  This is the evidence in this
    case.
         Now, I want to go through first Mr. Schoeff's 2320
    personal awareness, and I'll quickly summarize the
    general awareness evidence I have in this case.  But
    this is just Mr. Schoeff, his father, Mrs. Schoeff
    quitting, Mr. Schoeff quitting in '57, aware of the
    government warnings, Mrs. Schoeff telling him to stop,
    Mr. Schoeff quitting in the '60s, his doctors warning
    him, discussing the '79 or the 1970 Surgeon General's
    warning, his children telling him.  He knew smoking
    was bad for his health.  The fact that he chose to
    disregard those warnings is not proof that Reynolds is
    a legal cause of what happened to him.
         We know the public information campaign worked
    because of the quitting statistics.  From 1955 to
    1965, 17.6 million people quit smoking in this
    country, the vast majority of them did so cold turkey,
    you heard from Dr. Proctor and others in their
    opinion, the vast majority was probably addicted,
    probably dependent.  From 1955 to 1965, 1.6 million
    people quit.  And from 1964 to 1979, that number
    explodes to 30 million people.  30 million people out
    there get the message and quit.
         And it's obvious that they got the message
    because it goes back to before this -- back two
    centuries, it goes back to the late 1800s.  We heard
    this from Dr. Proctor.  Dr. Proctor admitted that in 2321
    his opinion he would not be surprised to learn that in
    Illinois and Indiana and Florida school children were
    being caught that nicotine was addictive and that
    smoking caused cancer in the '30s.
         He told you there was even more prominent in the
    Lutheran church.  Lutheran schools were teaching kids
    that nicotine was addictive and that smoking was
    deadly back in the '20s.  We heard repeatedly how
    serious Mr. Schoeff took his Lutheran faith.  He went
    to Lutheran schools in Indiana and Illinois.  Indiana
    and Illinois banned the sale of cigarettes, so did
    Florida.  The three states this man lived in banned
    the sale of cigarettes way back in the late 1800s or
    early 1900s.
         Guys, I'm sorry.
         THE COURT:  Folks, please, be quiet.  Go ahead,
    Mr. Boyce.
         MR. BOYCE:  In 1906 Florida reported that
    cigarette smoking is looked upon by all smokers as the
    worst form of tobacco addiction.  That's 1906.  1906,
    we had 45 states in this country in 1906, I looked it
    up.  45 states, 1906.  Mr. Schoeff isn't even born and
    Florida is reporting that tobacco is an addiction.
    None of this is a secret.
         We talked about Tex Williams in 1947.  This is 2322
    the year Mrs. Schoeff meets Mr. Schoeff, 1947.  The
    number one song in the country, number one song in the
    country was Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette.  And
    the lyrics as we saw talk about nicotine being
    addictive and smoking being deadly.  It's going to get
    you to the pearly gates.
         In 1950, Reader's Digest starts to publish on the
    risk of smoking.  Dr. Proctor says, well, there are
    only 36 articles.  Think about the titles of these
    articles, think about the evidence that we got from
    Dr. Proctor on cross-examination that the Surgeon
    General himself said Reader's Digest had done a
    profound job of educating the American public about
    the risks of smoking.  Titles like, I Quit Smoking,
    Cancer By the Carton, Nicotine Knockout, that's the
    Gene Tunny article we talked about.  Are You a Man Or
    a Smokestack, that's in the '30s and '40s, well before
    Mr. Schoeff is a regular smoker.
         Move forward and we talked about the 1953 article
    in Life magazine where the skin paintings are
    recorded.  This is Life magazine in 1953.  This is the
    same year Mrs. Schoeff quit smoking, 1953.  In 1955,
    if we can play this clip, please, Tammy, this is
    what's being reported by Dr. Hammond of the National
    Cancer Institute. 2323 ability.)
         SPEAKER:  In 1952, Doctors Hammond and Horne of
    the American Cancer Society began an extended study of
    the smoking habits of American men.  Here is
    Dr. Hammond reporting on the results of the first two
    years.
         SPEAKER:  It is now established in my opinion
    beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking
    greatly increases the probability of developing lung
    cancer.  In my opinion people should be warned of the
    danger, and they are being warned.  What they then
    want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is
    their own business.
         (End of video.)
         MR. BOYCE:  That was 1955.  1955.  Mr. Schoeff
    was 24 years old.  In 1957 the Surgeon General's
    position was we've informed the public and the
    National Cancer Institute said the media had done an
    excellent job.  Dr. Proctor waves his hand and writes
    that off, as if none of us knew smoking was bad for us
    back then.  He waves his hand, do you remember what he
    said, these are bureaucrats, patting themselves on the
    back, that's the Surgeon General and the head of the 2324
    National Cancer Institute in 1957.  Remember,
    Mr. Schoeff quit smoking in 1957.  You doubt for a
    minute that this message was getting through to him
    personally?  Remember the dates of his quits.
         In 1964 the Surgeon General's report reports
    quite clearly that cigarette smoking is causally
    related to lung cancer in men.  In 1965 Florida Health
    Notes report that nearly all Floridians have heard
    about the Surgeon General's report.  They've got
    pictures with a skull coming off the end of the
    cigarette, and remember that the Schoeffs remember the
    '64 Surgeon General's report.  Mrs. Schoeff remembers
    it herself, even though it came out 11 years after she
    quit smoking, she remembers the news report about it,
    she remembers the report itself, and she remembers
    discussing the report with her husband, Mr. Schoeff.
         In 1966 the warning label goes on the pack.
    1966.  It's a year before the first Super Bowl, three
    years before we walked on the moon.  Smokers are being
    warned about the risks of smoking right on the side of
    the pack.  We've got the public service announcements,
    this one from Bill Talman, and just to remind you,
    Dr. Proctor on direct wanted you to think that there
    were powerful PSAs back in the '60s.  He suggested
    that this was a recent phenomenon, that it was in 2000 2325
    or so.  He's talking about presentism.  It's only been
    later years where we had powerful PSAs that would
    really be effective for people.  I just want to remind
    you about some of the messages that were coming out in
    PSAs in the late '60s and you make your own decision
    about whether this is a powerful message or not. ability.)
         SPEAKER:  This is the house we lived in.  This is
    Billy, he's (inaudible).  Steve, home from college,
    Barbie looking after her brother Timmy.  Debbie who
    will soon graduate from high school, Susan our
    youngest.  And my wife Peggy, who looks after all of
    us.  And that's me, Bill Talman with a friend of mine
    you might recognize.  You know, I didn't really mind
    losing those courtroom battles, but I'm in a battle
    right now I don't want to lose at all because if I
    lose it, it means losing my wife and those kids you
    just met.  I've got lung cancer.  So take some advice
    about smoking and losing from someone who's been doing
    both for years.  If you don't smoke, don't start.  If
    you do smoke, quit.  Don't be a loser.
         (End of video.)
         MR. BOYCE:  That's from the '60s.  There's no 2326
    presentism problem with that message.  That's a
    powerful a message as anybody would need to know that
    smoking causes deadly diseases, and Mr. Schoeff is no
    different.
         We get to 1970, the warning label now changes,
    this is the one that Plaintiffs acknowledge is a
    warning, they like to call the one in 1966 is caution,
    we talked about with Dr. Proctor what that difference
    was.  I still don't understand it, but nonetheless,
    1970 it says warning.  We get to Ed Asner in the '70s
    and this is the Great American Smokeout.  Before we
    play the clip, Tammy, remember that Mrs. Schoeff
    remembers the Great American Smokeout.  She had
    stopped smoking in 1953, and she remembers the
    publicity around this event, and just to refresh your
    memories, this is what Mr. Asner said about what the
    Great American Smokeout was designed to do. ability.)
         SPEAKER:  Hi, I'm Ed Asner, last year the
    American Cancer Society asked me to quit smoking, just
    for a day.  I said, okay, but just for a day.  That
    was November 16th.  Well, I got through it, so I tried
    again on November 17th and 18th and 19th, and you know 2327
    to this day I still haven't had a cigarette.  Why
    don't you try it?  Join the Great American Smokeout
    this November 15th.  Tell yourself, it's just for a
    day.
         (End of video.)
         MR. BOYCE:  That's in the '70s, we get to 1985
    and these are the warning labels that we talked about,
    smoking causes lung cancer, smoking by pregnant woman
    may result in fetal injury, cigarette smoking
    containing carbon monoxide and quitting smoking now
    greatly reduces serious risk to your health.  And we
    talked also about the Yul Brynner advertising that
    came out in the '80s, another powerful message that's
    being given to the American public.
         There's one last point I want to make awareness,
    if you have any doubts about it, remember what Dr.
    Proctor said.  Dr. Proctor told you that in America
    people think smoking is so dangerous that they will
    answer yes if you ask them does smoking cause a fake
    disease.  Do you remember that?  He said, I think it
    was -- deceptive, do we have that clip?  We may not.
    He made up some word, I remember one of the court
    reporters asked me what it was, I said it's a made-up
    word, I don't know how to spell it, it's a made-up
    word.  It's a made-up disease. 2328
         People in this country are so convinced of the
    risk of smoking if you ask them does smoking cause a
    fake word, they say yes.  That's a staggering level of
    awareness.  We've got personal awareness from
    Mr. Schoeff's own life and overwhelming general
    awareness.  That's the fundamental reason that any
    reliance in this case is unreasonable.  But more
    particularly, if you look at this window from May of
    '82 until April of '83, there's no way Mr. Schoeff
    could have reasonably relied on anything, and there's
    also no evidence that he saw anything.
         The last point on these two forms -- these two
    interrogatories that I want to make is Plaintiffs take
    zero responsibility for any of this.  When they stand
    up here and tell you that they take some
    responsibility in this case, Mr. Paige told you that
    the way they see this case, the way they think they've
    pled it and the way they've asked the Court to
    organize the verdict form, they don't take any
    responsibility on the claims of fraud and concealment.
    And what that means on the issues about what
    Mr. Schoeff knew about smoking and when he knew it,
    Plaintiffs claim Reynolds is 100 percent responsible.
    That's Plaintiff's position.
         You don't have the ability to allocate fault on 2329
    those claims.  If you think Mr. Schoeff bears any
    responsibility for what he knew about smoking and when
    he knew it, you have to put no on both of those forms.
    There's no other way around.  That's the burden
    Plaintiffs have chosen for themselves in this case.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, improper
    statement.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. BOYCE:  That's the burden they've staked out
    for themselves on those two claims.  If you think
    Mr. Schoeff bears any responsibility for what he knew
    about smoking and when he knew it, you have to answer
    no on fraud and you have to answer no on concealment.
         Your Honor, I just have two more topics, might I
    request a two or three-minute break to organize?
[#DELETED RECESS#]
         MR. BOYCE:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Welcome back,
    members of the jury.  Just two more topics to talk
    about.  And I want to talk briefly about Plaintiff's
    claim that Mrs. Schoeff should be awarded punitive
    damages in this case.
         There's a few issues to consider when we talk
    about punitive damages.  The first is:  Who can
    punitive damages be awarded to.  In this case,
    punitive damages can only be awarded to Mrs. Schoeff. 2334
    You can not award punitive damages to public health
    agencies, you can't award it to anti-smoking
    organizations or smoking cessation clinics or other
    smokers or anyone but Mrs. Schoeff.
         And so that's one fundamental limitation on
    punitive damages in this case.  The only person that
    you can give them to is Mrs. Schoeff and that they
    would be in addition to any compensatory damages you
    might determine are warranted.
         The second is:  What is the purpose of punitive
    damages?  And there's only two that are recognized
    under Florida law.  One is to punish for past conduct
    and one is to deter future conduct, and I would like
    to spend a minute talking about both of those:  Why
    there's no need to publish Reynolds and why there's no
    need to deter future conduct.
         But first, I want to show you a limitation.  This
    is the standard of proof for punitive damages, and
    it's different than preponderance of the evidence.
    And let me just take a minute to remind you.  The
    scales of justice are not the burden of proof.  We
    talked about this and the instructions make this
    perfectly clear for you.
         That's not Lady Justice.  Lady Justice is
    blindfolded.  That relates to the promise each and 2335
    every one of you made under oath to treat the
    defendant the same way you treat the plaintiff.
    That's why the scales of justice are equal.
         Every defendant and every plaintiff are entitled
    to the exact same treatment in a court of law in this
    country.  That's not the burden of proof.  This is the
    burden of proof (indicated).  It's all Plaintiffs.
    The Defendant comes in at zero on every claim.  They
    have to prove each and every element, each and every
    claim to a preponderance of the evidence.  From zero
    to 51 percent, not from 50 to 51.  There's no slight
    tipping of the scales when it comes to the burden of
    proof.  That's just preponderance of the evidence.
         Punitive damages is something much different.  It
    has to be clear and convincing, precise, explicit,
    lacking in confusion.  Such weight that it produces a
    firm belief or conviction without hesitation.
         When you consider whether punitive damages are
    entitled to -- I don't think you'll get that far on
    the verdict form, but if you do, this is the standard
    that applies.  It has to be without hesitation.
         More importantly, you cannot consider any of the
    evidence that Plaintiffs spent so much time talking
    about.  When you consider the issue of entitlement to
    punitive damages, the Court is going to explain to you 2336
    that in determining whether punitive damages may be
    warranted, you have to focus on conduct which
    plaintiff has proven caused Mr. Schoeff's lung cancer
    and death.
         400,000 deaths, stories about marketing to kids.
    None of that stuff being considered for punitive
    damages in this case.  If Plaintiffs haven't connected
    the evidence specifically, through clear and
    convincing connections to Mr. Schoeff, you cannot
    consider that evidence on this interrogatory.  Only
    evidence that they have connected specifically to
    Mr. Schoeff can be considered for punitive damages in
    this case.
         So we have a different burden of proof, and we
    have a fundamental requirement that you must focus
    exclusively on evidence related to Mr. Schoeff.  You
    cannot focus on conduct for harm to others or
    simply -- the one point I forgot, cigarettes are a
    legal product in this country.  Whether you like
    cigarettes, you don't like cigarettes, they're a legal
    product in this country.  Reynolds cannot be punished
    for selling cigarettes or manufacturing cigarettes or
    marketing cigarettes.  And so we've got some serious
    limitations on what you can consider, if indeed you
    get this far on the verdict form. 2337
         Now, first, I think there's a variety of reasons
    why Reynolds should not be punished, but the first is
    all of these organizations are long gone.  CTR is
    gone, TI is gone, TIRC is gone, Claude Teague is gone.
    We talked about this with Dr. Proctor.  All of the
    guys that signed the Frank Statement were born in the
    1800s and have been dead for decades.
         Mr. Heimann, on that video that we see time and
    time again, that video was taken in 1986.  Six years
    after he retired from the American Tobacco Company.
    He retired in 1980.  He's been dead for decades.
         All of those men are gone.  They no longer work
    at the companies, they're no longer affiliated with
    the companies, and the organizations that made these
    statements -- TI, TIRC -- they have been disbanned for
    years.
         More importantly, Reynolds' website now says that
    smoking causes disease and is addictive.  I told you
    in opening statements that I was not going to waste
    your time debating some of the things that tobacco
    companies had said over the years.  They're
    unacceptable.  There's no point in me wasting your
    time trying to defend them.  They're unacceptable
    statements then, they're unacceptable statements now.
         But you have to remember, when you think about 2338
    punitive damages, it's not connected to Mr. Schoeff.
    You can't consider it.  It's a fundamental limitation
    about this phase of this trial.
         Last, any debate about whether smoking causes
    disease or smoking can be addictive simply can't
    happen again.  For starters, Reynolds published on
    addictiveness of nicotine way back in 1963.  I just
    want to make sure that people understand that.
         This is the article we talked about with Dr.
    Proctor.  It was done in conjunction between the
    American Cancer Society and CTR.  It says right there:
    Heavy cigarette smokers appear to be true addicts.
    This is some of the stuff that Dr. Proctor wanted you
    to think that CTR did meaningful research and TI never
    did anything.
         Here is an article published in the American
    Journal of Psychiatry, a year before the Surgeon
    General's report, saying that heavy smokers are true
    addicts.  That's some of the stuff that CTR did.  Some
    of the other stuff that CTR published thousands of
    studies, they're cited in the Surgeon General report
    600 times.
         How can CTR's research be totally unconnected to
    the risk of smoking and the effects of nicotine when
    their articles are published in the peer review press 2339
    and cited in the Surgeon General's reports more than
    600 times?  CTR-funded research at universities like
    Yale and Harvard and Duke, the American Medical
    Association.  We talk about how they work with the
    National Cancer Institute.
         This is the stuff that you don't get to see until
    the defense brings it up.  We talked about the Green
    Monster, which was Larson, Haag & Silvette.
    Dr. Proctor admitted that at its time, it was the best
    bibliography of smoking and health literature ever
    compiled.  And it was compiled by the American Tobacco
    Company.  And then they gave the to the Surgeon
    General.  It has chapters on disease and death and
    lung cancer and emphysema, carcinogens in smoke and
    addiction.  It was relied on specifically by the
    Surgeon General in 1964.  There's more than 20,000
    articles summarized in the Green Monster.  They named
    it the Green Monster because it's so big.
         Premier and Eclipse, we talked about this with
    regard to the strict liability claims.  But Reynolds
    spent $2 billion developing these products.
    Plaintiffs always like to point to this $500 million
    figure, those are the donations made to CTR, TI and
    TIRC by three companies over 60 years.  Three
    companies, 60 years, $500 million total. 2340
         Reynolds alone spent more than double that
    developing cigarettes that their own witness said were
    much less deadly, safer cigarettes.  That does not
    deserve to be punished.  This decreased the biological
    activity, and even though Premier failed in the
    marketplace, Reynolds kept going, developed Eclipse,
    and Eclipse is sold today.
         But the most important reason that punitive
    damages aren't warranted in this case is that there is
    nothing to deter.  Reynolds has changed its conduct.
         This is Reynolds' website today.  Smokers can go
    there and they will be told that cigarette smoking is
    a leading cause of preventable death.  Cigarette
    smoking decreases your risk of lung cancer, heart
    disease, bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious
    diseases and adverse health conditions.  This is
    Reynolds' website today.
         Reynolds tells people that if they are worried
    about smoking or have questions, to rely on the
    Surgeon General.  Go to the American Cancer Society,
    go to the American Lung Association.  If you have any
    doubt, go to those organizations, listen to those
    public health officials.  This is Reynolds' website
    today.  Nothing to deter.
         The best course of action for tobacco consumers 2341
    concerned about their health is to quit.  That's
    Reynolds' website.  If somebody gets that message from
    Reynolds today and wants help in quitting, there are
    links on this website where they can get cessation
    assistance.  You could link right to the American
    Cancer Society, right to the Centers for Disease
    Control, right off Reynolds website today.
         Reynolds has changed.  The ingredient list is
    right there on the website, all of them.  You can
    search by brand, you can search by ingredient.  If you
    want to know which ingredients are in your particular
    cigarette, you go in and you search by brand.  If you
    want to know if a particular ingredient is in
    cigarettes, you can go and search by ingredient.
    That's Reynolds' website today.
         Rely on the Surgeon General.  Here's what's in
    cigarettes.  And if you want and are worried about
    this, the best thing you can do is stop.
         Now, I just have one more topic I want to talk to
    you about and I'm sure most of you can probably guess
    what it is, but it's the fundamental issue of
    responsibility and control.
         At the end of the day, that's what all of the
    questions in this case come down to.  Who was in
    control of Mr. Schoeff's behavior and who's 2342
    responsible for the consequences of that behavior.
         Plaintiffs told you that they think it's
    85 percent Reynolds, 15 percent Mr. Schoeff.  And
    Mr. Paige explained how he came to that calculation.
    But what that means, if you do the math, there's 20
    cigarettes in a pack.
         Plaintiff's position is that Mr. Schoeff is
    responsible for three cigarettes out of every pack he
    smoked and Reynolds, a tobacco company -- a tobacco
    company that he never heard say anything about the
    risks of smoking -- is responsible for the other 17
    cigarettes.  That's Plaintiff's position on two of
    their claims alone.
         They take no responsibility on what he knew about
    smoking, but with respect to his smoking, they think
    Reynolds is 85 percent responsible.  17 cigarettes out
    of a pack are on Reynolds, three are on Mr. Schoeff.
         But more importantly, time and time again,
    remember the issue of control.  Remember that
    Mr. Schoeff was able to control his smoking when he
    wanted to, and that's why the Dr. Goodman story is so
    important.
         Dr. Goodman is a doctor.  He treated this man for
    his cancer.  He treated him for his diseases at a time
    when Mr. Schoeff is supposed to be smoking.  If 2343
    anybody would have concluded that this was an addict
    compelled to smoke such that you could think that
    addiction was a substantial cause of his lung cancer,
    it would have been Dr. Goodman.
         Dr. Goodman didn't testify in this case, Dr.
    Goodman doesn't have a single medical record where he
    diagnosed Mr. Schoeff as addicted, Dr. Goodman doesn't
    have a single medical record where he diagnosed
    Mr. Schoeff as being subject to nicotine withdrawal.
         And most importantly, when it came to
    Dr. Goodman's own child, his daughter, what did he
    say?  Mr. Schoeff will find a way.  I know he won't
    break my rules.  I know he can control himself when he
    wants to.  That's Dr. Goodman's opinion about
    Mr. Schoeff smoking, and that's why the evidence in
    this case is so clear that Mr. Schoeff was the kind of
    man that can control his smoking when he wanted to.
    He quit when he wanted to, he controlled smoking when
    he wanted to, and he smoked when he wanted to.  He is
    the one driving the bus.
         Plaintiffs like to pretend that Mr. Schoeff got
    on a smoking highway in 1947 and never had a chance to
    get off.  That's what's so frustrating about that
    Surgeon General's chart.  It goes from addiction to
    lung cancer.  It has all kinds of errors for DNA 2344
    mutations and some of the genes they think are
    involved in cancer creation.  There's no exit on that
    chart.
         We know real life is not like that.  We know that
    every single cigarette he smoked was a choice he made
    himself, every one of those cigarettes is an exit off
    the highway that he could have taken.  And Reynolds is
    not blocking him from the exits.  That's not real
    life.  Real life is different.
         In real life people do have control.  In real
    life Mr. Schoeff had control, and in his real life, he
    chose to smoke, and that's the second issue,
    responsibility.
         Did you hear any evidence from any witness ever
    that Mr. Schoeff was the kind of man who was not
    willing to take responsibility for the consequences of
    his actions?  That's why we brought up the lawsuit.
         That instruction that Mr. Alvarez read you
    relates to wrongful death cases, it does not relate to
    personal injury cases.  It's for wrongful death.  When
    somebody passes away, the estate gets to decide
    whether there's a lawsuit or not.  It has nothing to
    do with personal injury.
         In 1983, if Mr. Schoeff wanted to sue, he could
    have sued.  In 1990, if he wanted to sue, he could 2345
    have sued.  And remember there's no claim for PVD in
    this case.  Plaintiffs are not seeking damages for
    PVD.
         Do you know why?  Mr. Schoeff didn't want to sue
    for it.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  It's outside the
    evidence, ladies and gentlemen.  Disregard the remark.
         MR. BOYCE:  There is no claim in this case from
    damages on PVD.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  Okay.  There's not.
    Overruled.  Focus on this case, folks, and focus on
    the evidence in this case and wrap up, Mr. Boyce.
         MR. BOYCE:  There's no claim in this case for
    damages from his heart trouble.  None.  Those are the
    diseases he could have sued for if he wanted to and he
    decided not to.
         But time and time again, we heard from witness
    after witness that smoking, for Mr. Schoeff, was a
    choice.  A choice he made and a choice he was
    comfortable with.  And here is the evidence.  We've
    talk about all of the people in his life, and he knew,
    he knew had smoked, knew had quit, never reached out
    to it. 2346
         The fact that he's in control is clear.  What's
    also clear is he's simply not motivated to change his
    behavior.  These are all people who have stopped
    smoking that Mr. Schoeff never asked for help.  And we
    talked about Monograph 15.  That explains quite
    clearly, according to the National Cancer Institute
    the difference between Betty Walker, who quit smoking,
    and Mr. Schoeff, who kept smoking, is not addiction.
         The difference between Mr. Schoeff's father, who
    quit, and Mr. Schoeff, who kept smoking, is not
    addiction.  The difference between Mr. Schoeff and
    Frank Walker, and his own son, is not addiction.
    There's no difference when it comes to the amount of
    smoking, the time they smoke in the morning, or
    addiction.
         People make difference choices at different
    times.  For some people, you get a health scare from
    smoking, put them down cold turkey, and never go back.
    Mr. Schoeff wasn't that guy.  But there's no evidence
    in this case that the difference between Mr. Schoeff
    and the people who make different choices was
    addiction.
         Look at it this way, we ask time and time again:
    Tell us about what he did to quit, tell us about what
    he did to quit.  And I understand this is a long time 2347
    ago.  We asked multiple witnesses, and basically what
    we have is he quit in '57, '67, two trips to a
    hypnotist in 1970, and Smoke Enders in 1983.
         From 1947 to 1983 we have about five attempts to
    quit smoking.  Just think about that for a second.
    That's almost 40 years.  Almost 40 years and five
    things, that's almost once a decade.
         Look at it this way:  If you met somebody in 1947
    and they said:  I really want to get a job.  And you
    bumped into him again, 45 years later, in 1995, and
    they said:  You know what, I still really want to get
    a job.
         And you go:  It's been 45 years.  What did you do
    to get a job for the last 45 years?
         And they said:  Well, I looked for a job once in
    1957, I looked for a job in 1968.  There were two
    times I looked in 1970, and I think I looked for a job
    for a little bit in 1983, but the job program I was
    in, I dropped out of.
         Your conclusion would be that this is a person
    who doesn't want a job.  And look at this chart again.
    Because this is what this really means.  Not only did
    he not try to find a job, he's surrounded by people
    who got jobs and never once asked a single one of
    them:  How did you do it?  I can't get it done.  How 2348
    did you do it?  Help me out.  Help me out, Dad.  Help
    me out, Sister.  Help me out, Son.  His own son.
         That's evidence of a lack of motivation to change
    behavior.  And there's nothing wrong with that.  That
    is what Plaintiffs miss.  There is nothing wrong with
    the choices Mr. Schoeff made for himself.  The problem
    comes in when you try to pretend that they're not his
    choices and that he's being controlled by a tobacco
    company.
         It's not just the Schoeffs that look at smoking
    as a personal choice.  It's the Surgeon General.  Time
    and time again.  Personal choice in '78.  Personal
    choice in '82.  Cigarettes and addictive behavior, but
    it's up to the individual to stop in '86.  We keep
    seeing the clips of Dr. Koop.
         Dr. Koop's own website makes it perfectly clear:
    You are the one who has control over your behavior.
    The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump
    into your mouth, nor are you going into a
    brain-induced hypnotic trance and light a cigarette.
    That's Dr. Koop's website today.  Today.
         In 2010, the Surgeon General says it again.  No
    one can make you quit and no one can do it for you.
    It's the same thing Mrs. Schoeff said.  Mrs. Schoeff
    testified that into the '90s, into the '90s, a decade 2349
    after her husband is diagnosed with PVD, she continued
    to buy him cigarettes.
         And the reason she said that she bought him
    cigarettes was not because she remembered some old ad
    with Lucille Ball.  It was because for her, she
    thought whether to smoke or not was a decision
    Mr. Schoeff had to make for himself; that's why she
    bought him cigarettes in the '90s.  After he had
    gotten sick from smoking, she continued to buy him
    cigarettes because for her, it was his decision to
    make.
         David Schoeff said the same thing:  When he found
    out you were smoking, he never told you not to smoke.
    No.  This is in the '80s.  This is in the '80s when
    David is smoking.  The bottom:  He let you make your
    own decisions about smoking when you were in college.
    Correct.  That was Mr. Schoeff.
         And when Mrs. Schoeff was on the stand, she
    described her husband as somebody who believed that
    smoking was his choice to make, and Mr. Schoeff
    believed that it was his decision about whether to
    start or continue or stop smoking.  That's the
    evidence of choice.  That's the evidence of
    responsibility.
         And that's why Reynolds is entitled to a verdict 2350
    in its favor in this case, the Schoeff case, a man who
    could control himself when he wanted to, and a man who
    did quit.
         There's three key facts I would like you to
    remember.  Plaintiffs get the last word and I need one
    of you to go back and just remember a few key facts as
    you go through the evidence, remember that.
    Mr. Schoeff never said he was tricked into smoking.
    Not even in 1995.  He never said he regretted it.  And
    he never blamed anyone for his smoking.
         He taught his kids the exact opposite of
    Plaintiff's theory in this case:  You're responsible
    for your actions.  You're in control.  And you can
    change your behavior and you choose not to, you're
    responsible for the consequences.  That was
    Mr. Schoeff.  And that's why we brought up the lawsuit
    issue.
         That's why we asked Mrs. Schoeff:  He just wasn't
    that kind of guy.  And her answer right there at the
    bottom.  Right, right, yeah.  That was my husband.
    That's why Plaintiffs haven't met their burden of
    proof in this case, because fundamentally, throughout
    their lives, smoking was not a driving force of
    Mr. Schoeff's behavior.
         One last piece of evidence.  Mrs. Schoeff told 2351
    you that in 1992, her husband quit smoking.  We had
    some debate about this, we have the hospice records
    that said he might have quit for a year in 1994.
    Mrs. Schoeff remembers him quitting, I think, for two
    weeks in 1992.
         So there's some discrepancy about the dates.  I
    think David and Mrs. Schoeff both testified that they
    thought Mr. Schoeff may have been telling the hospice
    people that he had quit for a year when he was really
    smoking.
         But regardless of the dates, there's one point I
    want to point out here.  We asked Mrs. Schoeff:  What
    did he do to quit in 1992?  She didn't know.  We
    asked:  How long did he quit?  I don't know, but I
    know he started smoking again.
         This is the important one.  This is 1992.
    45 years into it.  This is almost a decade after the
    PVD surgery.  She knows he quit, she sees him smoking
    again.  We said:  What did you say to him?  She goes:
    I don't remember.
         How can addiction be considered a substantial
    part of Mr. Schoeff's life when in 1992, his own wife
    doesn't even remember talking about it with him.
    Mrs. Schoeff remembers that he ripped one filter off
    one cigarette one time in 45 years.  She doesn't 2352
    remember what she said in 1992 when he went back to
    smoking.
         The only explanation for that, the only
    explanation that makes any sense is that between the
    Schoeffs, smoking was a choice, smoking was something
    he was responsible for, and smoking was not a
    substantial part of what made this man the man he was.
         Remember Mr. Schoeff.  Remember all he
    accomplished.  Remember his abilities and his
    dedication and his discipline and his intelligence as
    you deliberate in this case.
         And I think if you keep that in mind, you will
    see that Plaintiffs haven't met their burden of proof
    on any of their claims, and they certainly haven't
    proved to you that Mr. Schoeff is a member of the
    Engle class.
         Ladies and gentlemen, thank you, again, for your
    time.  I appreciate your attention.  I know how hard
    it is to sit in those chairs and listen to people talk
    for hours on end.  So thank you for your attention,
    your patience on behalf of myself and the team,
    Mr. Alden, Ms. Theriot, Ms. Castle dean.  Thank you.
