         MR. BOYCE:  Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
         THE JURORS:  Good morning.
         MR. BOYCE:  It's nice to see all of you again.  I
    want to start where I left off yesterday, and that's
    by thanking you for your service.  I'm not going to
    stand here and tell you that I'm not disappointed with
    your decision, but I respect it, Reynolds respects it,
    we're not going to relitigate it in this case.  But I
    want to make sure you all understand that we
    appreciate the time you put into this case.  Coming
    here to court every day is something that we all agree 2513
    on, and I want to start where I left off yesterday by
    thanking you for that.
         Now, in this part of the case, there are some
    limitations that guide what you have to focus on.  One
    of the difficulties for me in this phase is I don't
    know exactly what your verdict was based on.  I would
    like to have the opportunity to discuss it with you,
    but I don't know right now specifically what evidence
    you applied and considered significant from Phase 1.
    And so because I'm not certain about that, I want to
    spend a minute to make sure you understand the impact
    of what you've already done so far.
         Your verdict and the speed with which you reached
    it have already sent a powerful message to Reynolds, a
    powerful message to me, a powerful message to
    Reynolds, and a powerful message to the other tobacco
    companies.  You cannot deter other corporations.  If
    you read the instructions in this case, the deterrence
    is for only other similarly situated, okay, so it has
    to be somebody connected to the tobacco industry.
    It's not for corporations in general.
         And I will tell you that awarding $10.5 million
    to Mrs. Schoeff has already sent that message.  There
    is no need for additional money in terms of this point
    of communicating your rejection of Reynolds' conduct 2514
    and your opinion on who was responsible for
    Mr. Schoeff's smoking.  That message has been sent.
    That message has been received, and that's why
    Dr. Borgerding was here.
         I don't know exactly what's behind it so I can't
    comment on the evidence specifically, but I want to
    make sure that the sheer size of what you did in
    compensatory phase and the speed with which you did so
    has sent a powerful message already, both to Reynolds
    and to the other tobacco companies.  There should be
    no doubt about that.
         Secondly, I want to make sure that this -- you
    understand this is a different phase.  You have
    already fully compensated Mrs. Schoeff for her loss.
    Nothing in this phase will change the decision that
    you've already made.  You've awarded Mrs. Schoeff the
    money that you determined was necessary to fully
    compensate her for her loss.  And in this phase, any
    additional money that you might award will go
    exclusively to Mrs. Schoeff, but I want to make sure
    you understand that this is above compensation.  Even
    though it's above compensation, the only person you
    can award punitive damages to in this case is
    Mrs. Schoeff.
         Now, we talked about that a bit in Phase 1.  You 2515
    cannot award punitive damages to set up a smoking
    cessation clinic, you cannot award punitive damages to
    the American Cancer Society or the Surgeon General or
    public health agency, and you cannot award punitive
    damages to anyone other than Mrs. Schoeff.  And that's
    why Judge Tuter explained to you that in this phase
    you can only consider the evidence that Plaintiffs
    proved was connected to Mr. Schoeff.  Because the
    money is going to go exclusively to her.
         For other reasons that the judge explained to
    you, you've got to focus just on the evidence that was
    part of your verdict in Phase 1, that you believe
    plaintiffs have connected specifically to Mr. Schoeff.
    It can't be about other smokers, it can't be about
    statements that happened after he passed away, and it
    can't be about conduct that you don't think has been
    connected to him.
         Mr. Alvarez gives me a good example of this when
    he played the video from 1984.  That's Reynolds' CEO
    on Nightline in 1984 disputing the risks of smoking,
    the guy's name is Ed Horrigan, I believe.  There's no
    evidence that Mr. Schoeff ever saw that statement or
    heard that statement or was exposed to that statement
    in any way.  That kind of statement, regardless of
    your opinion of that statement from the Phase 1 2516
    deliberations, that kind of statement that has no
    connection to Mr. Schoeff cannot be the basis for a
    punitive damages award.  And these restrictions all
    flow out of this fundamental fact that this is money
    that will go exclusively to Mrs. Schoeff.  That's the
    focus of it, and that video is a good example of what
    you cannot consider in this phase of the trial.
         Now, the next point I want to make is as Judge
    Tuter explained to you, there is no requirement that
    you award additional money in this phase.  Again, your
    finding from Phase 1, both with respect to
    responsibility, the amount of your compensatory award,
    more importantly, just the finding of entitlement
    alone sends another message.  There is no requirement
    because we're in this phase that you actually award
    more money.  And I want to make sure you understand
    you'll see that on the verdict form, but here there is
    nothing that because we're in this phase of the trial
    that requires you to put additional money on the
    verdict form.
         There are two purposes of punitive damages, we've
    talked about them repeatedly, one is to punish
    Reynolds for past conduct and one is to deter others
    similarly situated, not just others but others that
    might be similarly situated to Reynolds.  And I want 2517
    to start with punishment.  First, again, Reynolds has
    been punished.  Reynolds was punished by your Phase 1
    verdict.  That is a significant amount of money, and
    that's why we brought up the other cases.  I don't
    want anyone here to feel sorry for Reynolds.  I want
    to make sure you understand why we talked about three
    things.
         You cannot punish the people that were behind the
    conduct you found objectionable in Phase 1, they're
    gone.  The only people left are the shareholders that
    own the company today, the men and women that work
    there and the shareholders that own RAI stock today;
    that's why I made that point.  Those are the only
    people left for you to punish.  Those are the people
    who will pay the compensatory award and they will pay
    any additional money you choose to award in this phase
    if you make that decision.
         But that's why that point is brought up.  Ed
    Darr, Paul Hahn, Ed Horrigan, Claude Teague, Addison
    Yeaman, those men and women have been gone from
    Reynolds for decades.  You cannot punish them.  You
    can only punish the people that are there today, and
    that's one reason I would submit punitive damages are
    not warranted in this case.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.  Misstatement of the law 2518
    about punishing the people.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  Again, you'll be guided
    by the legal instructions that I've given you when you
    make these decisions.  Go ahead, sir.
         MR. BOYCE:  The point I want you to understand is
    we've talked about how the conduct you found
    objectionable in Phase 1 has to be connected to
    Mr. Schoeff to be considered in this phase.  The
    people responsible for that conduct cannot be punished
    by your verdict in this phase, they're gone, and I
    want to make sure you understand that, and that's the
    point about shareholders and what those shareholders
    are because it's not like the days where the Cullmans
    owned Philip Morris.  This is a different time.  This
    is a publicly traded company, and that's the point
    about shareholders.
         Secondly, that's the same point with respect to
    who makes money off a pack of cigarettes.  Reynolds is
    not in this business with themselves, they're in this
    business with the State of Florida, they're in this
    business with the government, they're in this business
    with every state.  That's the point of the chart.  We
    didn't want anyone here to think that Reynolds made
    $5.50 from a pack of cigarettes.  They simply don't.
    The vast majority of that money goes to governments 2519
    around the country, and they spend money as they see
    fit.  I don't want any of you to think that that was a
    suggestion for you to feel sorry for Reynolds.
         And let me tell you one more thing, you cannot
    punish Reynolds if something I said offended you.  If
    I said something during this trial that you didn't
    like or something about my performance you found
    objectionable, you cannot punish the men and women of
    Reynolds for that.  If I did, I apologize, but I want
    to make sure you understand, that if you have an
    objection with my performance, my arguments, my
    presentation of the case, you cannot hold that against
    the men and women of Reynolds today.  That is not a
    proper purpose for punitive damages, and I want to
    make sure everybody understands who is there in the
    past, who is there today, and who is available to be
    punished on the fist legitimate purpose for punitive
    damages.
         The second part is the deterrence, and that's why
    we brought Dr. Borgerding here today.  We wanted to
    make sure you understood that Reynolds respected your
    verdict and we wanted to make sure that you understood
    the way Reynolds operates today.  And there are a
    variety of things that have changed.  First, the FDA
    regulates all aspects of the tobacco business now. 2520
    The conduct that could be behind your verdict in Phase
    1 cannot happen anymore.  It's not just that Reynolds
    has changed, it's that there's no need to deter this
    type of conduct because the FDA is in charge now.  The
    FDA controls the way cigarettes are manufactured, the
    FDA controls the way cigarettes are marketed, the FDA
    controls the way cigarettes are designed.  The stuff
    that goes into tobacco is controlled by the FDA.  All
    of that stuff is now subject to federal regulation.
    And because of that, because of that regulatory
    constraint, there is nothing left to deter.  Reynolds
    isn't making these decisions anymore.
         Now, Reynolds has changed, and that's the point
    of the website, but I want to make sure you understand
    that with respect to the FDA, the fundamental reason
    that punitive damages aren't warranted for purpose of
    deterrence in this case is because Reynolds isn't in
    charge of those decisions anymore, the FDA is.  And
    that goes for all of the products.  Every single
    product that Reynolds makes, cigarettes, other tobacco
    products, nicotine replacement therapies, all of
    that's subject to FDA regulation and FDA control.
         And you heard Dr. Borgerding explain that
    Reynolds doesn't fight that, Reynolds doesn't try to
    avoid site inspections or not have the FDA come by, 2521
    Reynolds doesn't make statements disputing the FDA's
    regulation; that's not happening anymore.  The FDA is
    the one that is making these decisions, and that's a
    fundamental reason why deterrence is not necessary in
    this case.
         The second reason deterrence is not in this case
    is Reynolds has changed.  That website is voluntary.
    You heard Dr. Borgerding explain that CTR and TI and
    TIRC and those organizations were disbanded as a
    result of the master settlement agreement.  But what
    he didn't get a chance to say is that the website is
    voluntary.  And he didn't get a chance to say it
    because I forgot to ask him, but I will tell you that
    the website is up there voluntarily.  There is no
    lawsuit, there is no injunction, there is no
    requirement from the government that Reynolds maintain
    that website and that Reynolds include the statements
    that it does on that website.  That is a voluntary
    change of conduct.
         And it's the same with the links to other
    information that are available on the website.
    Reynolds has that website and it tells smokers to quit
    voluntarily, it links them to agencies that will help
    them quit voluntarily, and it provides all of the
    information that a smoker who's thinking about smoking 2522
    or stopping could possibly need to make an informed
    choice.  And that change, that fundamental change on
    disclosure and assistance is voluntary.  And so we've
    got the FDA and we do have voluntary change.
         THE COURT:  Three minutes.
         MR. BOYCE:  The last thing I want to mention is
    Reynolds doesn't market its products any longer.
    There are no more billboards.  You know from the
    evidence in Phase 1 that there hasn't been a
    commercial on TV about tobacco products for more than
    40 years.  There are no more advertisements in
    magazines or newspapers.  There is simply no more
    print advertisement for Reynolds products anywhere.
         There is also no more sponsorship.  I'm sure you
    remember the days of the Winston cup, that's been over
    for decades.  You don't see tobacco signs in sporting
    events anymore, there's no more sponsorship of events,
    and there's no more print media.  All of that has been
    changed, and I will tell you that the environment in
    which Reynolds tries to promote its products today
    prevents them from putting out advertisements that you
    might have found objectionable and for making
    statements about products that you might have found
    objectionable in the past.  That has all changed.
    There is nothing related to what happened to 2523
    Mr. Schoeff and the conduct based on the evidence in
    this case that needs to be deterred.
         But lastly I want to make sure you understand,
    awarding $10 million to one person does deter any of
    the conduct you found objectionable.  That verdict
    alone serves the purposes of punishment and
    deterrence, and if you review the jury instructions
    carefully, you will see that you cannot award punitive
    damages to try to bankrupt a company, you cannot award
    punitive damages to try to put a company out of
    business, and that's the reason we talked about how
    many people are waiting for their day in court as
    potential members of the Engle class.  There's 6,000
    of them in Florida.  If each one of them gets
    $10 million that's $60 billion --
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Sustained.
         MR. BOYCE:  The point of that, the cases that are
    waiting to be tried, that you need to keep in mind is
    if there's a windfall to one individual, it will
    prevent --
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Focus on this smoker, Mr.
    Boyce.
         MR. BOYCE:  That was the point of talking about 2524
    all the other cases, I want to make sure you don't
    think anyone is trying to make you feel sorry for
    Reynolds, that's the point of bringing up all the
    other people that are waiting for their day in court.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  You need to sum up, sir,
    you've had your time.
         MR. BOYCE:  Thank you, Your Honor.  The last
    thing I would like you to think about when you
    deliberate in this case is what would be accomplished
    by awarding more money to Mrs. Schoeff.  Would that
    send a more powerful or different message than the
    message you've already sent.  And I think the answer
    to that question is no, and that's why I would
    respectfully submit that you should put a zero on this
    verdict form in this phase of the trial.
         You can be confident that your message was
    powerful from Phase 1, you can be confident that it is
    a punishment, you can be confident that it is a
    deterrent, and you can be confident that other people
    situated like Reynolds have heard that message.  That
    message came through loud and clear.
         And the last point I want to make is I know in
    Phase 1 you found that Reynolds was responsible for
    75 percent of Mr. Schoeff's smoking and that 2525
    Mr. Schoeff was responsible for 25 percent of the
    cigarettes he smoked over 40 or 45 years.  Those
    reductions don't apply to any award you may give in
    this case.  So the comparative fault reduction will
    not apply to a punitives award, but I do want you to
    understand that from Reynolds' perspective, from the
    perspective of the other tobacco companies, what you
    have already done in this case serves any purpose that
    can be accomplished by an additional award of money
    exclusively to Mrs. Schoeff.
         Ladies and gentlemen, this is the last time I get
    to talk to you.  I want to take a moment, Wuva, it's
    an honor to give the last closing argument you'll hear
    in your career.  Thank you, again, for your time.  I
    appreciate it.
