         MR. PAIGE:  May it please the Court.  Good
    morning.  So this is our last opportunity to speak to 2192
    you all, as the Judge said.  And I mean this, we all
    know -- everybody knows how busy everybody is and the
    time that you guys put in to listening to everything,
    we have appreciate your patience and being here.  And
    on behalf of Joan and Alex and Robert, we do
    appreciate and I know Kevin Boyce and I think very
    highly of Kevin, and I know he also appreciates
    everybody being here, coming in when you're not
    feeling well, you all have your own families, your own
    lives, your jobs and to give us your attention and
    your devotion is important.  And we do appreciate it.
    This couldn't happen, you know, people like Joan
    Schoeff could never have a day in court, you know, if
    it wasn't for people exercising their duty and coming
    here and being willing to do -- a lot of people are
    not willing to do it.  So thank you.
         This is an important day for both parties, and
    you guys have heard a lot, you probably know a lot
    more about nicotine and addiction and smoking than you
    did before you started.  And you certainly know a lot
    more about it than people knew about it in the 1950s
    and 1960s and 1980s and 1990s.  And, you know, when
    you go back to your lives tomorrow or the next day,
    hopefully, you know, there might be one more day of
    trial, but whatever you do, all we ask is that you 2193
    follow the law and you follow your hearts and you do
    what's right, and we know you'll do that.  And I think
    when you see what the law is in this case, he
    explained it, but I'm going to go through a little bit
    with you, I think some of the decisions will be easy
    for you all.
         But this is something that as you go on with your
    lives, you may remember some of this and we appreciate
    you being here very much, but the real issue here, and
    I'm going to get to class membership in a second, but
    the bottom line what you get to determine here today
    as jurors, as six, seven ordinary citizens from the
    community, regular people, you get a chance to come in
    here and be the judge, and you get to decide today
    whether it's okay in America for large, powerful
    corporations to do what they want, to have no rules,
    no compliance, no regulation, to lie, to abuse their
    power, to use all their money and their resources and
    their greed, all the while knowing that people are
    dying.  That teenagers are getting addicted, teenagers
    are getting addicted to a drug, and they know what the
    end result is going to be.  And you decide today
    whether you're going to accept that or whether they
    should bear some responsibility.
         Whether they bear -- you know, the very first 2194
    pleading that we filed, Mrs. Schoeff, and I believe
    this, that addicts bear some responsibility.  At some
    point in time and I'll talk about that.  But you
    decide today whether a corporation with the power, the
    money, whether they can just lie and get away with it
    or whether they should be accountable to some degree.
         The first question and the most important thing
    is about class membership, as you all know.  And this
    is not a class, as the judge explained to you, it was
    a prior lawsuit, it took a year, there was a lot of
    evidence in that case.  And it was in the '90s when it
    was filed, it pertained to people, it doesn't pertain
    to everybody, it pertained to people like Jim Schoeff
    who started smoking in the '40s and '50s when things
    were different.  And in that trial they were still
    disputing, in the '90s it had to be proven in that
    trial that nicotine was addictive, they denied that.
    It had to be proven in that trial in the '90s that
    smoking caused lung cancer, they denied it.
         So right now the first question to you all, is
    this gentleman, like the other people in the '40s and
    '50s, a member of the class.  You know, back in the
    '40s and '50s, they invited them in, he was a
    teenager, they wanted him to smoke, they wanted him to
    be a member of the class.  He was a member just like 2195
    everybody else, and now that he's exercising his
    rights, they don't want him to be a member anymore.
    But to be a member -- well, before I talk about that,
    I want everybody to really think in your heart of
    hearts before I get to the jury instructions, if you
    think this gentleman smoked for 50 years because he
    was addicted to nicotine or did he do it for the taste
    and whether you think his lung cancer was from
    smoking.  And I ask you, if you answer those two
    questions the way I think you'll answer them after
    hearing everything, your answer to whether he's a
    member of the class, whether he belongs with these
    other victims, with these other victims of the tobacco
    industry is going to be very clear to you all.
         So this is the first question, and I'll try to
    stand out of your way.  So this is the question,
    somebody is a member of the class -- it doesn't apply
    to somebody who started smoking in 2000 or 2005.  It
    applies to people who started smoking in the '40s and
    '50s when things were different.  And if you did and
    you became addicted -- and I'll talk about legal
    cause -- and it caused your lung cancer and death,
    you're a member of the class.  It's that easy, that's
    the law.  It doesn't have to do with fault.  Class
    membership, see, this is the -- this is the confusion 2196
    here.  Okay?  The case is tried as you can be excluded
    from the class if you accept some responsibility.
    That has nothing -- you will not see one word in here
    about if you don't like smokers, they can't be a
    member of the class, or if you don't like tobacco
    companies, you have to be a member of the class, or if
    you admit fault, you can't be a member of the class.
    Fault is not an issue here.
         Fault of the parties is an issue later, and I'll
    talk about that and I'll talk to you about comparing
    fault, percentages of fault, and why Mr. Schoeff does
    bear some responsibility, but that's not even -- we're
    not even there yet.  And they know that, so when they
    talk about, oh, well, he didn't have enough willpower,
    he was too weak, or he should have stopped sooner, he
    should have tried harder.  All addicts should try
    harder.  If this case was about can addicts quit,
    nobody would be a class member, and they know that.
    And that's not right.
         If this case was about whether addicts should try
    harder, nobody would be a class member.  They know
    that.  That's why they tell you this.  This case is
    clear.  They make like this is about James Schoeff.
    This is not about James Schoeff to them.  They hired
    Dr. Bernstein, you heard from him.  He said nobody is 2197
    a member of the class, he's testified to all these
    trials, nobody is a member of the class.  All these
    people can't be identical to Jim Schoeff.  They don't
    want anybody to be a member of the class.  They lost
    Engle when they denied these things, and now they
    don't want to be bound by them.  They had a fair trial
    already.
         If you believe Dr. Bernstein, and that's their
    witness, you know, that's who they rested their case
    on, Dr. Bernstein, if you believe him for all the
    money he makes, for all the ad -- and I don't begrudge
    him for advertising, if that's what he wants to do and
    he doesn't want to publish and he wants to come to
    court and testify and that's who they want to hire,
    they made an issue with Dr. Bernstein, they said,
    Dr. Bernstein, you know, Dr. Benowitz and Dr.
    Henningfield, they testify for the plaintiffs, don't
    they.  They're free to hire whoever they want, they
    could hire Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Henningfield.  But
    they don't like what they have to say.  They could
    hire anybody.  When you see the Surgeon General
    reports in evidence, you go look and see how many
    different addiction experts in the country contribute
    to those reports.  I mean, there's hundreds of them.
    They could hire anybody they want.  If they want the 2198
    truth, they could hire them, R.J. Reynolds, but they
    choose to hire Dr. Bernstein, he made $80,000, and he
    told you nobody is a member of the class.  So that's
    their defense.  So again, this is not part of this.
         And here we get to a legal cause.  Addiction is a
    legal cause, I don't want you to get confused on the
    words or what lawyers say and what they don't say.  It
    says what it says, it means what it means.  To be
    determined as a legal cause, addiction has to produce
    or contribute substantially to producing the lung
    cancer, so that you can say and they define for you,
    what does it mean to produce substantially?  If you
    can say, but for the addiction it would not have
    occurred, then we're not here.
         So did the addiction play an important role?  Did
    the nicotine addiction play an important role here?
    Did he smoke cigarettes for 50 years, a pack a day,
    first thing in the morning, and relapse all those
    times because he liked the taste or did the nicotine
    play an important role?  Did Philip Morris, R.J.
    Reynolds, Lorillard, Brown & Williamson, American
    Tobacco, do you think they knew that nicotine played
    an important role?  Because today they tell you
    nicotine didn't play an important role at all.  They
    say addiction -- we don't sell addiction, we're not 2199
    selling nicotine.  Well, if that's the case, take the
    nicotine out, lower the nicotine levels, make the
    cigarettes -- why don't they -- I mean, think about
    it.  They have choices.  They make billions of dollars
    these companies, isn't it okay if they make a few less
    billion.  Five or ten billion dollars.  Make less
    money.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  There's no record
    evidence about any of that, sir.  Don't give your
    personal opinions.  Stick to the evidence.
         You'll disregard any comments regarding the
    wealth of any corporation, there was no evidence in
    that trial regarding that.
         Go ahead, sir.
         MR. PAIGE:  If nicotine is not important, they
    can lower the nicotine levels, make it not addictive.
    If nicotine is not important, they can remove the
    nicotine, and they could sell a product like that if
    they really wanted to make it about choice.  If they
    really wanted to give teenagers a free choice, whether
    they want to be making addicts, if they were going to
    be giving cigarettes to young people in the military,
    giving cigarettes to school kids, giving cigarettes to
    teenagers, if they really wanted to make it about 2200
    choice, give them cigarettes without nicotine in it so
    they don't have to be addicted.
         But for the addiction, do you really think Jim
    Schoeff was so different than everybody else?  They
    know statistically people do not smoke a pack a day
    for 50 years, they don't do it.  They don't do it
    unless they're addicted to nicotine.  It never
    happens, not even a -- it's not even like -- I mean,
    nobody can say that.  It just doesn't happen, so for
    you to exclude him from the class, you would have to
    decide that somehow he was different from everybody
    else, nicotine had no effect on this kid, didn't have
    any effect at all, and exclude him from the class
    because that's what they want you to do.  All we ask
    that you do is follow the law; that's all we want.
    And I'm sure that's what Mr. Boyce wants, and if you
    follow the law, the answer has to be easy.
         Again, if you apply the facts, nicotine
    addiction, you smoke because you're addicted, it
    causes lung cancer, it causes death.  You all have
    seen that.  And this is R.J. Reynolds' documents.
    They know -- it's funny because now they say nicotine
    is not important when they know -- when we get to this
    part of the case, now it's no longer important,
    nicotine doesn't mean anything.  But this is what 2201
    they're saying in the documents in the '60s and '70s,
    this is the information they were concealing from
    people, they weren't admitting this, they weren't
    telling people this, they were concealing it.  They
    knew it was important, they knew they could have done
    things differently.
         After the '64 Surgeon General report, think about
    it, they could have helped people.  They could have
    opened up smoking clinics, they could have helped
    people and said look, we apologize, we didn't know our
    product was so addictive, we didn't know we were
    killing so many people.  Let's do the right thing
    here, let's not sell cigarettes to teenagers anymore,
    let's make it an adult decision, ask people in their
    20s, 30s, 40s to start smoking, they won't, they know
    that, and let's help these kids get off nicotine
    because they had that opportunity.  Maybe they
    wouldn't be such a big industry, but they would have
    an industry, they could have done that if they wanted
    to, that was their choice, they didn't want to do
    that.
         For a typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is
    the dominant desire, the important thing, not taste.
    In designing a cigarette, the dominant specification
    should be nicotine delivery.  Nicotine is a potent 2202
    drug.  The industry is based upon the sale of an
    attractive dosage of nicotine.  So to them internally,
    you know, Mr. Boyce represents R.J. Reynolds and I
    like -- I respect Mr. Boyce immensely, I really,
    really do.  I'm not saying that, I really do, but he's
    not R.J. Reynolds.  He's not the cigarette company;
    that's not who he is.  He works for them, they have a
    right to hire whoever they want to hire and they hired
    a very good lawyer, but they will not admit that this
    nicotine is important, and that's what drives their
    business.
         This is what the NIH, NIDA, CDC, World Health
    Organization, this is not just me or Dr. Henningfield,
    everybody agrees nicotine is highly addictive.
    Cigarettes are designed for addiction.  This is what
    keeps people smoking, even when they want to quit.
    You know, these are organizations.  You know, it's a
    little insulting when Dr. Bernstein gets up here and
    he disagrees with everybody.  He won't agree with
    anybody, except R.J. Reynolds.  You know, National
    Institute of Health, the CDC, and the World Health
    Organization, what is their motive for saying these
    things if it's not true?  They spend millions of
    billions of dollars, probably, researching this to
    help people, and, you know, he just won't agree with 2203
    them.
         This is the Surgeon General of the United States.
    Like heroin, cocaine, nicotine changes the way your
    brain works and causes you to crave it more and more.
    These powerful cravings make it hard for you to think
    of anything else.  Nicotine addiction is a disease.
    It is a disease.  It's a brain disease.  Everybody
    agrees, even Dr. Bernstein did agree with that.
    Nobody chooses to be an addict.  Nobody says, hey, I
    want to be addicted to nicotine.  I want to be
    addicted.  I want to be an addict.  That's not what
    happens.  They get these kids when they're young,
    their brains are different, they're not thinking,
    they're not smart enough.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor, relevance to
    Mr. Schoeff.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PAIGE:  And then when they get old enough,
    they're addicts and then they have a lifelong struggle
    with addiction, that's what happens.  That's their
    business model.  Is it a good business model?
    Probably not.  Has it been good for them?  Yes.
         This is the definition of addiction:  A chronic,
    relapsing brain disease -- this is NIDA -- by
    compulsive drug use, despite harmful consequences. 2204
    You know, they tell you that Mr. Schoeff did something
    wrong because he didn't quit when he knew he was sick
    or he didn't quit hard enough when he should have.
    You know, that's part of the disease of addiction.
    These people, they rationalize.  They make up excuses.
    That's how the addict's brain works, and so the
    cigarette companies know that.  You know, they know
    that.  That's why in their internal documents they
    talk about, let's provide these addictive smokers with
    crutches and rationale so they continue smoking.  Who
    would do that?  You get somebody who started to smoke
    when they're a kid, you know they're addicted, you
    know it's a brain disease, and you know that they want
    to quit or they should be hearing from their family
    they should quit, and then you're going to go out and
    you're going to spend $250 billion advertising from
    1940 to 19 -- to 2004, that was the number in
    evidence, $250 billion.  That's $15 million every day,
    you know, convincing these smokers with crutches and
    cues of how healthy and glamorous and good it is what
    they're doing.  That's not right.
         Here is Mr. Schoeff, started at age 15,
    95 percent of addicted smokers start as teens, they
    know that, that's their target.  The younger you
    start, the more likely you are to become addicted. 2205
    They know that.  Most regular smokers are addicted.
    You know, you could smoke two, three cigarettes a day
    and they say that's not enough to cause addiction.
    You've got to get over five or ten, I think
    Henningfield said over five cigarettes where you're
    getting enough nicotine to the brain.
         When you're smoking a cigarette, you get ten hits
    of nicotine.  Nicotine is a drug, so if you're smoking
    a pack a day, or two packs a day, you're getting 200,
    400 hits of nicotine to that brain every day.  That's
    why nicotine, when you're not smoking it, people are
    like, where is my nicotine.  That's why they wake up
    in the morning and they haven't had nicotine for eight
    hours, the first thing they do is smoke because they
    need to get that nicotine back into their brain.
    That's why when they go to church and they sit through
    a service and as soon as church is over and they pray
    to God and they thank God for being here, they run out
    and they put a cigarette in their mouth.  That's what
    an addict does because he needs the nicotine, and they
    know that.  And they capitalize on it.  They take
    advantage of it.
         You know, she tried cold turkey many times and he
    relapsed.  It's something -- they make that as there's
    something wrong with him.  He didn't have enough 2206
    willpower, he wasn't strong enough, he was a weak man.
    You know what?  Every addict can try harder.  If he
    tried ten times, I will tell you he should have tried
    20 times, if he tried 20, he should have tried 40.
    But relapsing is not the fault of an addict, that's
    not their fault.  They know that, that's why, you
    know, they put these cues out there, they want the
    smoker to see this.
         It's a lot harder back then to smoke when you
    didn't have Chantix, you didn't have Zyban, you didn't
    have the patch that was just coming into effect, the
    gum was just coming out back then.  You could smoke
    everywhere.  You go to an office, people are smoking,
    you go to a movie, people are smoking.  Could you
    imagine how hard it was to quit smoking in the '70s
    and '80s when they didn't have any of these aids to
    help people and everybody was smoking everywhere?  It
    wasn't easy.  I'm not saying that's an excuse, but
    that's the shoes you have to put Mr. Schoeff in.  You
    have to put him in those shoes.
         He attended Smoke Enders course, and finally, you
    know, at the end, he's on oxygen, he's dying, and he's
    crying, the cigarettes got the best of him.  If he's
    not addicted to nicotine, I submit to you that nobody
    is.  Nobody is addicted then, because that's what 2207
    addiction looks like.  That's what nicotine addicts
    do, that's what happens to their lives, and that's how
    the cigarette companies succeed.  And after he dies,
    they're on to the next one.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  We are only focusing on
    this smoker, sir.
         MR. PAIGE:  We played the video deposition of
    Dr. Henningfield, you saw his qualifications, you
    know, we played video depositions of him and Dr. Cook
    for you all.  Dr. Cook is from R.J. Reynolds, because
    they give what's called a generic testimony, it's a
    class action, so they're busy people and they can't be
    coming to court all the time, so we take it one time
    and their opinion is pretty much about nicotine and
    how it works, applying to everybody.  But he had
    impeccable credentials, I believe, and he says the way
    to really tell if somebody is addicted, forget about
    the DSM, which he was on the committee to write the
    DSM, forget about the Fagerstrom, forget the NIDA
    definition, if somebody smokes the first thing in the
    morning and they're smoking 25 cigarettes a day, it
    indicates heavy addiction.  So that's from
    Dr. Henningfield, he's done a lot of research in this
    field. 2208
         If you don't want to go with the NIDA definition
    or Dr. Henningfield, we have the DSM, and when we
    spoke to Dr. Bernstein about it, you know, I think it
    was -- I mean, I think it was clear, now, I may be
    biased because I'm doing the examination and I don't
    really sit in your shoes, but to me it seemed clear
    that withdrawal, I mean, I can go through it, he was
    smoking first thing in the morning, had had those four
    or five withdrawal effects, the example given by the
    DSM to make this is that most people who start as
    teens don't expect to be smoking five years later, let
    alone 50 years later.  He did try to cut down, you
    know, many, many times.
         This example given by the DSM is people who leave
    church or movies or things that smoke, work, et
    cetera, and finally continuing despite knowing that
    you have a problem.  And that's the -- you know, the
    rub with addiction is that they try to say this is a
    characteristic of being addicted.  You know, if you
    weren't addicted, they wouldn't smoke, so they know
    that smokers smoke -- if you're going to smoke despite
    the fact that you know you may die, despite the fact
    the fact that your doctors are telling you you're
    going to die, they want you to believe you do that
    because you choose, you're a risk taker, you don't 2209
    care about your life.  But the people who study
    addiction, they know that people really do that
    because of addiction and how nicotine works with the
    brain.
         And finally the Fagerstrom test, you know, we
    know that if you go through these questions, this is
    what Dr. Benowitz said, he said anybody could apply
    this test.  He would get three points, you know, he
    was having a difficult time in movies, restaurants,
    church, he was leaving.  This one we don't know, in
    all fairness, we couldn't ask him, so I can't know
    what the answer to that is.  Even if he smoked --
    maybe he smoked more than a pack and a half, or even
    if you give him this right here, it's only two points.
         Mrs. Schoeff said he smoked more during the
    morning, and we know he smoked when he was sick.  And
    if you use the score of the Fagerstrom that is applied
    by scientists and researchers, he would have a very
    high addiction level.  And this you've seen many
    times.  The fact that he smoked while he was sick is
    no different than many other addicted smokers, it's no
    different.  You know, half the smokers who undergo
    lung cancer surgery resume smoking, they relapse.
    Even after having their larynx removed, they relapse.
    So these are people, this is not particular to 2210
    Mr. Schoeff.
         Mr. Schoeff, and, again, he bears some
    responsibility, but we can't vilify him because he
    relapsed, you can't vilify the guy because he's doing
    what nicotine does to him.  He didn't know back in
    1945 that there was cyanide and arsenic in his
    cigarettes.  He didn't know back in 1945 when he
    started that they would start manipulating the
    nicotine on him.  He didn't know that the filters
    didn't work, he didn't know all that.  And I'm sure
    when he woke up in the morning, he didn't say, boy, I
    want to be addicted to nicotine.  That wasn't his
    choice.
         Again, they know how important it is to their
    business, you know, they brag in their documents --
    well, not brag, but they recognize in their documents,
    without nicotine our market would collapse.  We would
    lose our jobs.  They're not concerned about -- you
    never found the document that said, you know, with
    nicotine in our cigarettes, I feel really bad, people
    are dying, what should we do to help them.  No, what
    they say is, without nicotine we're going to lose our
    jobs; that's what they're writing about.
         You know, they talk about here, this is R.J.
    Reynolds document, 1820, it's in evidence, it's a good 2211
    document, important document.  But, you know, they
    don't say in this document, you know, boy, we
    shouldn't manipulate the nicotine because people are
    getting sick and people are dying.  They talk about,
    hey, we have to keep selling nicotine because we can't
    be comfortable without it because without it we could
    be out of business overnight.  That's what they're
    concerned with; that's the problem here.  They're
    greedy, and they're liars.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained, sir.  That's your personal
    opinion.  Based on the evidence, sir.  Base your
    argument on the evidence.
         You'll disregard that remark, ladies and
    gentlemen.
         MR. PAIGE:  Well, they're saying here that
    they're concerned with their jobs and their money, and
    if you find he's a class member, you'll be bound by
    the finding that they concealed material information.
    So based on those facts, you determine what weight
    you'd like to give it.
         This is how nicotine addiction causes disease.
    Once you have nicotine, you know, you're inhaling all
    these chemicals.  We know 45 percent of all long term
    smokers will die, 450,000 Americans die every year. 2212
    That is a tragic figure.  This is a chart they show us
    the difference between a social smoker and a nicotine
    addict.  And a social smoker who is smoking a pack per
    month, he might get 120,000 exposures to nicotine
    during his life.  But somebody who is addicted who is
    smoking a pack and a half over 50 years is getting 5
    million, almost 500,000 lifetime exposures, that's the
    number of inhalations of ten inhalations per
    cigarette, he's getting 5.5 million hits of that drug
    into his brain over his lifetime.
         Again, the Surgeon General, they recognize what
    an important part nicotine addiction, you know,
    nicotine addiction plays in causing lung cancer, and
    here it is in his own words. ability.)
         SPEAKER:  We should also give priority to the one
    addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more
    than 300,000 Americans each year.
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  So I want to just go back quickly to
    legal cause.  So this is the issue of whether he's a
    member of the class or whether you agree with R.J.
    Reynolds and you exclude him from the class.  It's 2213
    simple; you just follow this law.  And, again, if the
    nicotine addiction played an important role, whether
    he was smoking a pack a day for 50 years, is that the
    reason he got lung cancer?  And, you know, again, it
    doesn't say here that it has to be the only reason.
    Okay?  It doesn't say, you must pick between nicotine
    addiction or you must pick between choice.  There is a
    place for that.  That's what I want to be very clear
    about.
         There's a place where you're going to get to
    apportion fault.  But they don't say that nicotine
    addiction has to be the only factor.  It doesn't say
    nicotine addiction has to be, you know, you can't
    consider other factors.  All it says, and this is the
    law that you're bound by, did nicotine addiction play
    an important role, that but for the addiction would he
    have gotten lung cancer or would he have just
    considered smoking that much and gotten lung cancer
    anyway just because -- and if that was the case, why
    would he just not smoke nicotine with a cigarette.
         So if he was addicted to cigarettes and if it was
    a legal cause, he is a class member, and that's
    important here because class membership is important.
    The whole trial, it's a yearlong trial, took many
    years, 2006 or 2007 these people from the '40s and 2214
    '50s were permitted to file these lawsuits.  And once
    you're a member of the class, you're permitted to file
    these lawsuits, they are bound.  They can't come in
    here and say they didn't conceal, they can't come in
    here and say they didn't have a conspiracy, they can't
    say that anymore.  They're not allowed to.  And we did
    a two-week trial.  That trial was almost, I think it
    was 11 months, there was a lot of evidence showing
    what they -- more of what they did than what you have
    seen.
         These are the findings that they're bound by,
    that they cannot deny them and they can't stand up
    here and say that, you know, we were a careful
    corporation, we did our best because they were
    negligent.  They can't say that our products work, it
    was a good product, it wasn't defective, we didn't
    manipulate the nicotine, the filters were, they can't
    say that anymore because they were found to have done
    that.
         They can't say they didn't conceal important
    information, you know, they can't say that about
    addiction.  They knew about it.  They talk about, oh,
    we cooperated with the Surgeon General, we cooperated
    with NIDA.  That's all been determined already, you
    know, they did not cooperate.  We showed you that one 2215
    document before '64 where they were saying, oh, we
    know about all these cancer-causing agents and then
    they go to the Surgeon General and say we can't find
    any.  They were playing games, and that's why we
    played that one video for you where they said our
    lobbying forces are powerful and we go to Capitol Hill
    and we never lose a battle.  They are powerful, and
    they know it.  And that's why they have more
    responsibility, that's why they needed more
    compliance.  There was no FDA regulation of their
    drug, they could do whatever they wanted.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Legal basis?
         MR. BOYCE:  Misstates the basis.  There is FDA
    regulation.
         THE COURT:  Once again, folks, you will be guided
    by what the evidence in the case was.  You didn't hear
    evidence to it, you'll disregard the remark.
         You may continue, sir.
         MR. PAIGE:  There was no FDA regulation in the
    '40s, '50s, '60, '70s, '80s and '90s, zero.
         MR. BOYCE:  Same objection.
         THE COURT:  Again, folks, you'll follow the
    evidence in the case.  Overruled.
         MR. PAIGE:  They were free to do what they 2216
    wanted, they did what they wanted, they didn't share
    their internal research with the government, they
    didn't come forward and tell the truth, and they lied
    and they lied for a reason.  And they were
    probability.  Internally they never doubted what they
    were doing.
         So this is the first question you'll be asked.
    This is one I think clearly you must find for the
    plaintiff.  This is an Engle finding, you know, they
    place cigarettes on the market, they were defective,
    and you are to find if he got lung cancer by smoking
    their defective product, they're responsible.  They
    don't accept responsibility for it, but they are
    responsible by law.  In order to be regarded as a
    legal cause, the defective product need not be the
    only cause, and that's what I was talking to you
    before, the comparative fault.  You know, you can
    still consider the fault of Jim Schoeff, but that
    doesn't mean that they don't bear some responsibility.
    Just because we accept responsibility and they don't,
    that doesn't mean they're not responsible.  They don't
    accept responsibility, they don't.  They have to be
    found responsible.
         So was there any other evidence of anything else
    other than their defective product that caused his 2217
    lung cancer, there's not.  So that's clear, that's
    100 percent clear.
         So now I want to talk about conduct, the conduct
    of the parties, what they were doing, you know, why
    we're here, what Mr. Schoeff did, what he did wrong,
    you know, when he acted -- at what point should
    Mr. Schoeff did something differently, and that's
    important in this case.  And I accept that, and I
    agree with that.  But this is, you know, there's two
    parties in this dance.  There's really four parties,
    you know, there's R.J. Reynolds, American Tobacco,
    Brown & Williamson, and you have Jim Schoeff.  You
    have Jim Schoeff and you have these three companies
    with all their money and all their power, all their
    manipulation of nicotine, all their marketing, all
    their lies, all their filters, and you have Jim
    Schoeff.
         So we're going to compare the fault of the
    parties, and it's up to you.  What I suggest, you
    don't have to agree with, you don't have to agree with
    what I suggest, I'm going to -- maybe the numbers I
    give are wrong and you can fix them, whatever you want
    to do, but I'm going to show you how I see this.
         Okay.  So this one I submit to you is an easy
    question -- I have a certain amount of time, so at 2218
    some point they cut me off, not like yesterday.  I
    probably went a little too long, but today at a
    certain point --
         THE COURT:  33 minutes.
         MR. PAIGE:  -- I have to sit down, so I want to
    make sure I don't lose track.  So here's how they
    started.  This is the beginning of Mr. Schoeff, where
    he lived, what he was exposed to.  This is in
    evidence, this is around the time he was born, but it
    shows what they were doing.
         And they were going after teenagers, let's line
    up the most popular students, let's line up the most
    popular customers.  And they knew the key to their
    business.  They know the key to their industry -- they
    know the keys.  There's two keys to their business,
    really:  Nicotine and kids.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PAIGE:  And so that's their business model:
    Nicotine and kids.  And even into the '70s, we're
    still talking about it and I believe with Mr. Boyce
    brought something up like:  Oh, we pulled the
    Flintstone ad off the TV.  And Dr. Proctor talked
    about, well, even into the '80 and '90s, we still have
    internal documents about how they teenagers with Camel 2219
    cigarettes.  So they know the keys to success.  They
    know it and there's no secret about it.  They're well
    aware of it, well aware of it.
         Hire is how they participated -- you know, this
    is the FTC report in 1967.  It's in evidence.  But it
    talks about:  Many youngsters consider smoking to be
    an acceptable, socially desirable activity.
         That's how Jim Schoeff -- you know, we talk about
    his fault.  We have to talk about him.  That's why we
    talk about presentism.  We have to talk about how he
    grew up, what he saw.  You know, this is 1967.
    They're talking about most youngsters are -- you know,
    they're not really understanding how dangerous it is,
    and by looking at the ads, they're not being told that
    once they start, they may never be able to stop.  You
    know, they're not being taught that, they're not being
    told that.
         That's the responsibility of the cigarette
    company.  That really is.  It's their product.  Their
    product.  You know, for somebody who has kids, if
    there is somebody who has kids, and there is a product
    that's being marketed to that child, they want product
    manufacturer to be honest and tell them what's really
    going on, and be careful about it, be careful about
    it. 2220
         This is some of the ads that you've seen.  I'll
    play a quick little -- ability.)
         MALE SPEAKER:  Tens of thousands of doctors,
    Doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of
    the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were
    asked:  What cigarette do you smoke, Doctor?  The
    brand named most was Camel.  Yes, according to this
    survey, more doctors smoke Camels than any other
    cigarettes.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Do you inhale?  Then you're better
    off smoking Philip Morris, and here's how you can
    prove it.  Light up a Philip Morris, take a puff, get
    a good mouth full of smoke and slowly let the smoke
    come through --
         MALE SINGER:  They're sure to please, besides
    they look so handsome under the Christmas tree.  So
    easy to give, so good to get, smoke Camels.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Don't miss the fun of smoking,
    don't miss the fun of smoking, smoking is a pleasure
    with Pall Mall.  Don't miss --
         MALE SPEAKER:  The great outfielder Mickey
    Mantle.  What do you say, Mickey? 2221
         MALE SPEAKER:  It's not hard to say why more
    folks enjoy Camels than other brands --
         MALE SPEAKER:  I got a better idea.  Let's take a
    Winston break.
         MALE SPEAKER:  That's it.  Winston is the one
    filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a
    pack.  Winston has got that filter blend.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Yeah, Fred.
         FEMALE SINGER:  Why don't you settle back and
    have a --
         FEMALE SPEAKER:  Do you think cigarette
    manufactures had something to do with that?
         MALE SPEAKER:  Yeah, I think.
         FEMALE SPEAKER:  Cigarette manufactures don't
    make movies.
         MALE SPEAKER:  But what do you think?  That the
    movie maker just showed Marlboro on his own.
         FEMALE SPEAKER:  Perhaps the movie maker was a
    Marlboro smoker.
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  So when you talk about negligence,
    were they acting reasonable?  Were they a reasonable
    corporation?  Were they doing things the right way?
    Were they doing things the honest way?
         You know, it's sad what they did, and they had a 2222
    trial about it and they were already deemed to be
    negligent.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Stick to the evidence in this
    case, sir.
         MR. PAIGE:  Well, if he's a class member, the
    evidence in this case is that they were negligent, and
    they were not careful, they were careless, and that's
    a finding.
         You know, so they have this environment where
    they're portraying smoking as healthy and fun and
    safe.  And we know that in 1953, there's this mouse
    painting study that comes out, and they're well aware
    of it, and they know about it.
         When we take about opportunities and choice and
    control, you know, they talk about:  Oh, Mr. Schoeff,
    he's not a class member because he wasn't -- remember
    he was saying, he wasn't a drug addict running around
    the streets out of control.  You know, if that's what
    you have to be a class member, you have to be some
    drug addict running around the streets out of control,
    that's what they were saying, that they were out of
    control.
         When you talk about motivation, you have to
    think:  What motivated them to lose control over what 2223
    was right and wrong?  Why would they be motivated to
    do what they did?
         And so they hold this meeting, and you know, they
    know in the meeting -- they talk about how lucky they
    are that cigarettes are addicting.  They talk about,
    boy, we should try to produce the first cancer-free
    cigarette.  They know that in 1953.  It's not a secret
    to them.
         You know, they have an obligation then, and
    that's what I'm talking about.  At that time they had
    a choice.  You know, they could have come forward and
    say:  We might make less money, but let's work with
    the public, let's work with kids, let's work with
    smoking officials, let's get resources out there.
    Let's make this about choice.  Let's not make it about
    addiction.  Let's not do that.
         So they issued a Frank Statement, and they say
    there's no proof -- this is what they told the
    public -- there's no proof cigarette causes lung
    cancer.  And that's how they started.
         And it's like when you tell a lie and it keeps
    going and going and going, it gets worse and worse and
    worse.  And it has a snowball effect.  And it started
    in 1953.  That's when they made the first choice to
    lie. 2224
         And they had many opportunities, many times, that
    they could have, you know, changed their mind, you
    know, other people could have came in and told the
    truth.  And they didn't want to do that.
         So here is what they knew about smoking.  This is
    in their internal documents.  It's not like they
    didn't know.  This is all before the Surgeon General
    report.
         Carcinogens are found in practically every class
    of compounds.  Obviously the evidence accumulated to
    indict cigarette smoking is overwhelming.  The
    evidence against it is scant.  Cigarettes have certain
    unattractive side effects.  They call it an
    unattractive side effect is that they cause cancer.
         So internally, they know that.  They know this
    internally.  So they have this information.  They know
    they're marketing to kids.  They know their product is
    addictive.  They know that kids are dying.  And they
    have this opportunity to do the right thing.
         And internally, instead, they start talking about
    getting this CTR, the TIRC, the TI, all those
    organizations that they try to tell you:  Oh, we were
    helping with research, we were cooperating.  Oh, we
    had all these scientists that were working for us, and
    they were really looking for the cure of cancer. 1

         You know, this was -- it was a scam, and they
    know it.  And inside they're talking about this.  They
    talk about it.  They're talking about it's a
    successful defensive operation.
         Here is the one -- this is in 1964, when the
    Surgeon General's report coming out:  We have to give
    smokers a crutch and rationale to continue smoking.
    You know, Dr. Bernstein yesterday said that would be
    the worst thing to do to an addict.
         You don't want to tell an addict that it might
    not be proven, you will remove the dangerous things.
    They knew that.  Obviously, the key word is confusion.
    Anything about that can work to our advantage.
         And this is in 1968.  They knew that they were
    lying.  They knew it.  And they knew that one day --
    they knew one day we would be here.  This document,
    PT02130, they're talking about:  One day, we're going
    to be subject to the charge and the finding that we're
    making false statements to sell cigarettes.
         And they did it on purpose.  That's when we talk
    about do they do it intentionally or was this is
    mistake?  They were doing it on purpose to sell
    cigarettes and make money.  You know, they put profits
    over human lives, corporations.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PAIGE:  Corporations have responsibilities.
    You know, they have -- they're accountable.  You
    cannot blindly just put profits over human lives.  You
    know, these are people.  You know, they're real
    people.
         Jim Schoeff was a husband.  He was a father.  You
    know, he had kids.  You know, these are teenagers,
    they're marketing to, brothers and sisters.  You can't
    do that.  You cannot, in our society -- it's not
    acceptable to put profit over human lives.
         You know, the important story is to cast doubt,
    and doubt is our product.  You know, so they knew
    this.  They knew it worked with addicts, they knew it
    would keep them out of trouble, and they knew this was
    for them, for their interest, they were motivated to
    keep this doubt and confusion going.  That's what
    motivated them, and I submit to you that they lost
    control.  They lost control over what was right and
    wrong, they had no why would what they were doing, and
    they wanted to make money.  And here is some of their
    public statements. ability.) 2227
         MALE SPEAKER:  If it was found by somebody
    looking under the tobacco industry research grant, it
    would be made public immediately and just as broadly
    as we could make it and then efforts would be taken to
    attempt to remove that substance or substances.
         MALE SPEAKER:  If we do find anything that we
    consider harmful -- and so far we have not -- we'll
    remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure
    of your favorite cigarette.
         MALE SPEAKER:  We want to be the detectives just
    as much as the Surgeon General and the AMA and we'll
    cooperate in every way.  Well, obviously a filter
    takes out certain tar and nicotine.
         I don't think the industry admits there are any
    bad elements.  If there are bad elements through our
    laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the
    AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find
    them.  And if they are found, they will be removed.
         MALE SPEAKER:  We do talk to the question of
    whether or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not
    believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't
    accept that because when, as and if, any ingredient in
    cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to
    human health, we are confident that we can eliminate
    that ingredient. 2228
         MALE SPEAKER:  Do you believe that cigarettes are
    safe?  Have they been proved to be safe, Mr. Cullman.
         MALE SPEAKER:  I believe they have not been
    proved to be unsafe.
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  In all these statements they went on,
    I'm going to show you more, they went on to -- that
    was up until 1970, that last statement.  But, you
    know, for somebody who is addicted, you know, they
    say:  Oh, Jim Schoeff, you know, I don't dispute this.
    He knew people who quit.  He knew people who quit.  He
    should have known better.  You know, Jim Schoeff, he
    knew it was bad for him.  He quit.  Once he quit, he
    shouldn't have relapsed.
         But they know that these statements -- that's
    what you do to an addict, that's how you take
    advantage.  That's how you take advantage.  You know,
    Jim Schoeff, he is at fault, in part, but his fault,
    what he bears the responsibility for, was he had an
    addiction, he was weak, he wasn't strong enough, but
    he wasn't a liar, and he didn't do it on purpose.
         And that's the difference between him and them.
    You know, that's the difference between him and them.
    They went out, they did this on purpose, they knew
    what they were doing, they were educated, they were 2229
    more educated than him about this, and they did it on
    purpose.
         Here's more, you know, I'm kind of trying to do
    this in chronological order, they talk about the CTR,
    you know, this is the CTR, this research, they're
    supposed to be looking for great things to help
    people.  You know, all this money they're spending,
    you know, to raise awareness of cancer, so they say,
    let's face it, we are interested in evidence that
    denies the allegation that smoking causes cancer.
         That's why we showed you -- you might not
    remember this -- but there was a video of ducks
    getting cancer in Philadelphia Zoo, and they say it's
    really the pollution, pollution causes lung cancer --
    I don't know if you recall that or not, but that's
    part of their research, that's what they would do.
         Here, this is a really good document -- and
    you're going to get too much evidence to look at
    everything, but it talks about for 20 years, we have
    employed a single strategy to defend ourselves on
    three major fronts.
         So this was their strategy.  They didn't want to
    get in trouble with litigation, politics or public
    opinion.  That's what they wanted to control.  That's
    what they wanted to manipulate.  That's what they used 2230
    their power and resources for.  And it's been a
    brilliant -- they call it a brilliant strategy that's
    been executed and helping them win battles, but they
    know it's not going to be a victory forever.
         Again, they know we're going to be here one day.
    You know, they're building their companies.  It's like
    in America everyone wants to work hard, we all want to
    work hard, and everyone wants to -- look, Dr.
    Bernstein said he was a truck driver at one point.  I
    was a roofer at one point.  We all want to work hard
    and get to where we want to be in life.
         But it doesn't mean you can do whatever you want.
    You can't cheat and lie and steal and get to the top
    and say, hey, okay, I'm here, I mean, that's not
    right.  That's not fair.  That's not fair in the
    society of proper people.  It doesn't work that way.
         So -- but they talk about here, it was really
    just a holding strategy, you know, and all that is
    going on, they're building their industry about
    creating doubt without actually denying it.
         They talk about the CTR and the TIRC was really a
    shield, they acted as a front for them, and all along
    they know that nicotine is more addictive than heroin
    and they know -- this is the another thing where
    they're inconsistent.  This is their lawyers in 1980. 2231
    Our lawyers are telling us we can't really with a
    straight face -- can't with a straight face --
    legitimately tell the jury that is about free choice
    if somebody is addicted.  They know that in 1980.
    That's 33 years ago.
         33 years ago they're still arguing the same
    thing.  Still the same defense, still the same doubt
    and confusion, nothing has changed with the date on
    the calendar to them.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Mr. Paige, is that a good
    place to stop or do you have something else you want
    to talk about?
         MR. PAIGE:  No, this is good.
         THE COURT:  Why don't we take -- we're going to
    break this up so that we can take a stretch break and
    a restroom break and certainly let this young lady
    rest her fingers.  So we're going to take a little
    shorter break if we can, this morning, ten minutes.
    Please step back in the jury room.  Don't discuss
    anything we've been talking about in the jury room.
    We got quite a bit more to go this morning.  So we'll
    be in recess ten minutes, please.
         (Jury out at 10:31 a.m.)
         THE COURT:  You have expired 49 minutes, sir.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Judge, I know you sustained a 2232
    couple of objections regarding Mr. Paige is saying
    that the defendants are liars.  There is case law --
         THE COURT:  I didn't say sustained an objection
    when he referred to the documents that called them a
    liar, sir.  I sustained the objection when he gave a
    personal opinion about someone lying.  Personal
    opinions are not relevant.  You can comment on the
    evidence and that they lied in these documents, but
    you can not say your own personal opinion about
    someone, how you feel someone might have lied or
    cheated or whatever.  You can comment on the evidence.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  I missed the distinction.  I
    apologize.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Other than that you're
    okay.  We'll be in recess.
         (A break was taken.)
         THE COURT:  How much longer are you going to go?
    You have 48 minutes.  In 12 minutes I might give you a
    one-hour warning.
         MR. PAIGE:  I'm going to go an hour -- I mean, I
    was going to go an hour and 15, give him 15.
         THE COURT:  In 12 minutes I'm giving you a
    one-hour warning.  So then if you want to take another
    15, you'll have an hour and 15.  He'll have 25 or
    30 minutes.  Kevin is not going to take that long. 2233
         MR. BOYCE:  No, sir.
         THE COURT:  You've gone 48 minutes, in 12 minutes
    I'm going to give you a one-hour warning.
         MR. PAIGE:  I'll speed up.
         THE COURT:  You don't have to speed up, but
    that's the clock.
         BAILIFF:  Jurors coming in.
         (Jury in at 10:43 a.m.)
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Everybody is all coffeed up
    there, we're all ready to go.  You can all be seated
    in the courtroom.  Mr. Paige has the remaining time
    and we'll hear from the defense.  So Mr. Paige.
         MR. PAIGE:  So, you know, just to be clear.  At
    this time they're internally discussing these things,
    there was no doubt in their minds, there was no
    confusion in their minds about how addictive nicotine
    was and that their product caused cancer, they knew
    it.  They knew it, and they knew that they were
    getting people addicted.  They knew about manipulation
    of nicotine, they knew those things.  But what they
    were telling the public was a different story, because
    they knew with addicts this would work and with kids
    and teenagers and addicts that this story that they
    were selling would work.
         (At this time, a video was played in open court 2234
    and taken down to the best of the court reporter's
    ability.)
         SPEAKER:  The cause of lung cancer is as yet
    unknown.  In fact, no one knows what causes lung
    cancer.
         SPEAKER:  And as far as I'm concerned the bottom
    line is that we simply don't know.
         SPEAKER:  The case is still open.  The jury has
    not come in.
         SPEAKER:  It may not be harmful, you're not
    convinced.
         SPEAKER:  It may be or it may not be.  We don't
    know.
         SPEAKER:  It is not known whether cigarettes
    cause cancer, has not been causally established.
         SPEAKER:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
         SPEAKER:  I don't know if they do or not.
         SPEAKER:  I'm not in a position to give you a
    does or does not answer.
         SPEAKER:  We don't know what causes cancer in
    general right now, so I think that we may find out
    what causes cancer and we may find out some
    relationship which has yet to be proven.
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  So there's really two things you can 1

    take from this, you can take one thing away and say
    these people are much smarter than Jim Schoeff.  And
    they don't know.  They had their doubts, so how could
    they say that Jim Schoeff didn't have his doubts.  Or
    you could say that they were lying, which is what the
    documents say, and they were doing it on purpose
    because they knew that they could sell their product,
    an addictive product, by creating doubt and confusion,
    and they knew that.  And that's why they did it.
         There was no mistake, they knew, and they knew it
    worked.  And they say, oh, there's no evidence that
    any of this worked on Jim Schoeff.  They didn't spend
    $250 billion, 250 -- imagine if they would have taken
    that $250 billion and taken half of it to educate
    people about the truth.  If they would have taken half
    of that money to set up smoking cessations clinics, to
    take half of that money and look to inventing smoking
    aids to help people really have a choice.  They don't
    care about that; that's the thing.  They really don't
    care.  They care about money, and they don't care
    about other people, other families.
         Jim Schoeff, they never cared about Jim Schoeff.
    They never cared about Joan Schoeff, and I want to say
    this, she's an elder lady, 79 years old, 80 years old
    and she's doing her best.  She got --
    cross-examination is not easy.  Kevin, it's his job,
    he did a good job, but some of the things that they
    said about her, you know, that you bought your husband
    cigarettes, you were buying him cigarettes and your
    husband knew and, you know, she was doing the best she
    can to recall anything.  Oh, your husband, he didn't
    want to file a lawsuit in 1983.
         You know, the truth of the matter is if he would
    have filed a lawsuit in 1983, that would have been a
    decade before Engle was even filed.  He would have
    been probably the first successful suer of a lawsuit
    against a cigarette company.  It was 20 years --
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Once again, folks, this
    is not in evidence.  You can't discuss things that are
    not in evidence, Mr. Paige.
         MR. PAIGE:  I can tell you this, I'm proud of
    Joan for bring this lawsuit, and I know, and I know,
    look, this is about justice, it's about doing what's
    right and wrong, and she would be the happiest woman
    in the world if her husband walked through the doors
    and they can leave here and leave us all alone.  That
    can't happen.  Her husband is probably looking down
    right now and he's proud of her for doing this right,
    for bringing this lawsuit.  And I am proud of you for 2237
    doing this.
         So the next question on the verdict form is about
    negligence.  Was there carelessness, you know, they
    were negligent.  That's not in dispute anymore, they
    were negligent.  They didn't act like a reasonable
    drug manufacturing company, they didn't act like a
    reasonable company that's selling an addictive drug,
    they didn't do that right.
         So was that a legal cause?  And it says here, it
    doesn't have to be the only cause, it can act in
    combination with acts of others, and that's what we're
    going to talk about, his acts, I promise I'm going to
    get there, it's next, I'm going to talk about it next.
         But this is where they say nothing they said
    matters, and it's interesting, this is the chart --
    you look at the beginning, before they started all
    their conduct, before they started their lies, before
    they started their $250 billion advertising campaign
    in 1940, this is the lung cancer rate in our country.
    It's almost zero.  Okay?  And for them to come in here
    now imagine in 1953 if they would have taken that
    $150 billion or $250 billion and helped people, we'd
    be down here right now.  And for them to now say that
    nothing they said mattered, nothing they said affected
    anybody, why in the world would they go to Congress 2238
    and lie under oath, why in the world would they spend
    $250 billion if nothing they said mattered to anybody.
         They knew from their own polls that there was 25
    million smokers that didn't believe that smoking
    caused lung cancer as late as 1964, and the other 25
    million -- they had 25 million who had they had
    convinced and they had another 25 million they just
    had to give them some doubt, some reassurance, hey,
    even if you believe it, don't worry, we're working on
    it, we're going to remove it, we're going to give you
    a filter.  They knew what they were doing.  FTC
    report, 1967.  They say nothing they said mattered.
         Cigarette smoking -- cigarette smoking is without
    question the greatest single public health problem
    this nation has ever faced.  This is what they
    created.  They created this.  The cost in human lives
    is staggering, it's staggering.  450,000 people every
    year, Jim Schoeff is one of them, just one, and they
    say nothing they said mattered.  They don't think they
    could have done it, we couldn't have done any better,
    we did the best we could, we did all we could to help
    people.  You know, we were responsible, we helped --
    we put the warnings on the packs, you know, people --
    nicotine is natural in tobacco.
         You know, they think they did the best they could 2239
    with all their power, all their resources, you know,
    come on, come on.  Five decades, five decades of
    opportunity after opportunity, you know, we put
    warnings on them.  Well, they should have done more,
    they could have done a lot.  They could -- again, it
    doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out what's
    right and what's wrong here.  So we submit to you
    respectfully that this answer is clear, that their
    conduct did matter.  You know, their conduct did
    matter, and I submit to you that it's clear.
         I want to say this with the jury.  There's seven
    individuals in the jury, each of you have your own
    minds, your own backgrounds, your own, you know,
    opinions, and I'm sure you all know this, you seem to
    all get along good.  But when you go back in the jury
    room, everybody's voice counts, everybody needs to be
    heard, and I trust that everybody will go back there
    and work hard and follow the law and make sure that
    you work well with one another and follow the law.
    And if you do that respectfully we believe that these
    questions should be answered yes.
         Now, I want to talk about Jim Schoeff's
    responsibility because when we filed our first
    pleading in this case, we said he accepted
    responsibility.  And I want to be clear what that 2240
    means because what we said is we accept some
    percentage of responsibility in relationship to what
    they did for the negligence and strict liability
    claims.  The intentional torts when they lied, when
    they did things on purpose, that's a different ball
    game.  But when things are done carelessly and with
    their defective product, we accept some
    responsibility.  And I want to be clear what that
    means, though, because there were things that they
    did, you know, that were important, too.  You know,
    they made a defective product, they knew it was
    deadly, they knew it was addictive, they manipulated
    the nicotine, that was important.  That was a
    substantial cause of what happened here.
         You know, they talked about, well, if he would
    have quit in 1967, we wouldn't be here today.  Well,
    we wouldn't be here today if you didn't market to kids
    and have nicotine in your product in 1945, we wouldn't
    be here today if you would have told the truth and
    helped people.  So they lied, they manipulated
    nicotine, they targeted teenagers, there's a lot of
    things that they did that played an important roles in
    causing this man's death.  They provided filters that
    didn't work as reassurances, you know, they did a lot.
         And I would say this to you and this is what I 2241
    believe the evidence is, in my heart I believe this,
    but you may disagree with me and if you do, that's
    fine.  Some of the things I suggest is really what I
    think, what I think the evidence has shown, I could be
    wrong, I am wrong a lot of times, so you're not going
    to hurt my feelings if you disagree with me, but what
    I'm suggesting to you is if you break this case down
    into 50 years because we have 50 years of smoking,
    right, so if you take it the first 20 years represents
    40 percent of the time, the next 30 years represents
    60 percent of time, if my math is right.
         So he started smoking in 1945 and the warnings,
    the Surgeon General, all that happened around 1965, so
    the first 20 years, if you look at what he did wrong,
    he did nothing wrong.  He did absolutely nothing wrong
    the first 40 years.  I mean, the first 20 years.  So
    the first 40 percent of fault of apportionment of
    fault has to lay on R.J. Reynolds, American Tobacco,
    and Brown & Williamson, they have to be responsible.
    Because they were the ones who got a kid hooked, they
    were the ones who lied, they were the ones who, you
    know, did the things that they did.  And he did
    nothing wrong.
         If you think he did something wrong during the
    first 20 years, then apportion fault for that, but 2242
    during the first 20 years he smoked, this is what the
    world he was living in was, he was living in that
    society, everybody was smoking, doctors were smoking.
    60 percent of doctors smoked I think Proctor said.
    Athletes were smoking, people looked up to these
    people.  Willy Mays, Hank Aaron, Joe DiMaggio,
    reputable people were all smoking.  He was doing what
    everybody was doing.  They didn't have Chantix and
    Zyban and patches and gum.  The first 20 years he did
    nothing wrong.
         After the first 20 years when we get to 1965 and
    we'll use those as round figures, I think the
    warning -- the Surgeon General report came out in '64,
    the cautions came out in '66, the warnings were in
    '70, but that was a time period where they both had
    choices to make, they both had opportunities.  These
    are large corporations with money and
    responsibilities, and they had responsibility, too.
         So if you look at the next 30 years at 60 percent
    of the time, so how do you apportion the fault during
    the 60 percent of the time -- yeah, 60 percent of the
    time, how do you apportion that fault between three
    powerful corporations, American Tobacco, Brown &
    Williamson, R.J. Reynolds, and Jim Schoeff?  How do
    you divide the fault?  How do you divide the 2243
    responsibility between somebody who has an addiction
    who is addicted and people who are fuelling the
    addiction?  To somebody who has a disease and somebody
    who is manipulating nicotine to get the disease to
    continue, for somebody who thinks that filters are
    helping them, to the other parties who know that
    filters are a scam?
         So how do you apportion fault during the last
    30 years, 60 percent of the time?  And I submit to you
    respectfully -- well, let me show you.  And, again,
    this is what they say about addiction.  Look, there
    are things that talk about, you know, smoking is your
    choice and smoking is -- you make the decision and I
    get that.  I get that.  Any addict whether you're a
    heroin addicts, a cocaine addict, but when he was a
    16-year old boy, he did not say, I want to be a
    50-year long addict.  He did not know what he was
    getting into.  It's not fair, it's not fair what they
    did to him.
         THE COURT:  One hour and a minute warning.
         MR. PAIGE:  15 more minutes; right, Your Honor?
         THE COURT:  Whatever you wish to take.
         MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Here is what the '67 FTC
    government report says, you know, people don't realize
    when they begin smoking that smoking is no longer a 2244
    matter of free choice.  Look, if somebody starts -- if
    I start -- not me, if somebody started smoking
    tomorrow who was an adult who knows everything we know
    now and they start smoking, that's a free choice.  I
    get that.  If somebody started smoking in 1945 when
    they were 16 years old, they didn't know about arsenic
    and cyanide, they didn't know the filters didn't work,
    that was not an informed choice, that wasn't an
    informed choice.
         And if somebody wakes up in the morning and says,
    I choose to quit smoking, which Jim Schoeff did many
    times.  He said I choose to quit smoking today, I want
    to quit smoking, it's not that easy when you're an
    addict.  You know, some addicts they can do it, they
    can.  Other addicts -- everybody can do it, and he
    should have tried harder.  I don't dispute that.  We
    don't dispute that.  Every addict should try harder
    and bear their share of responsibility, but not when
    you get lied to over and over and over and over again;
    it's not right.
         The Tobacco Institute's own documents, their
    lawyers tell us it's not a free choice, and this is
    the '89 Surgeon General report.  You know, they show
    you the reports from '82, '84, '86.  '89 they say two
    factors refute the argument that smoking is a free 2245
    choice, most smokers start as teenagers, like Jim
    Schoeff, and then become addicted, like Jim Schoeff.
    And so he did have choices, but it's a choice that you
    make where you rationalize because you're addicted.
    It's not that easy.  It's not that simple.  That's why
    the CDC, Surgeon General, all these governments are
    spending all this money researching it, they're
    looking into things like genetic factors and how can
    we help and what other aids can we get to help people
    quit.  They're really spending a lot of time on this
    and they don't do it because, hey, it's up to you to
    quit if you want, don't quit if you don't want, it's
    not that simple.
         So you're going to have to apportion fault
    between R.J. Reynolds and Jim Schoeff.  And then what
    I submit to you is, again, the first 40 percent of
    time, the first 40 points go to R.J. Reynolds because
    he did nothing wrong, and the last 60 points, I submit
    to you, because they're three powerful corporations
    and he's one man, he should bear 25 percent of that
    fault.  And if you take the math and you -- I think I
    did this correctly, if you take that math, it turns
    out that R.J. Reynolds should be willing to accept
    85 percent of the responsibility here.  They should be
    willing to do that based upon the facts of this case. 2246
         Now, you may find that it's more or less, the
    numbers are different.  I respect whatever you do, and
    so does Joan Schoeff.  But I wanted to show you how I
    got to that number, I didn't want to just throw a
    number on the board.
         These are the fraud findings.  They can't deny
    this anymore, you know, they purposely concealed
    information and they purposely entered into an
    agreement with the other tobacco companies to lie
    about the addictive nature of their product and the
    health effects of their product.  They did it on
    purpose, they did it for money, and they did it all
    along knowing that people were dying.  I mean, that's
    a poor business model.  That's a socially immoral
    business model, you know, I don't know what is.
         I mean, this is a company of grown men who are
    going home to their families every night, and
    meanwhile when they're at work they're talking about
    how we're going to conspire to lie to people about how
    addictive and deadly our product is so we can make
    more money for our families.  And these other
    families, you know, we don't really care what happened
    to them.
         So one of the questions is, you know, what did
    they do, what was some of their fraud, this is the 2247
    filter fraud.  They knew the illusion of filtration,
    they're calling it an illusion back in 1967.  1970's
    they know, this is an R.J. Reynolds document.  The
    smoker of a filter was getting as much or more
    nicotine as he would have got from a regular
    cigarette.  He abandoned the regular cigarette,
    however, on the ground because he thought it was a
    reduced health risk.
         So that's what they did to these addicts, they
    say, hey, it's coming out, more people are believing
    it, we'll give them this filter.  But they knew it
    didn't work.  That was the lie, that was just another
    lie.  The FTC commented on it, and it just -- they
    just said that the filters, you know, didn't work, and
    in 2010 the Surgeon General wrote, by the 21st century
    it was apparent that five decades of evolving
    cigarette design had not reduced overall disease risk
    amongst smokers and new designs were used by the
    tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and
    cessation efforts.
         So they say he should have tried harder, he
    should have tried harder, he didn't try hard enough,
    but they were using these filters to assure him that
    he didn't have to try harder because it's removing the
    dangerous ingredients.  That's their lie, that's 2248
    another one of their lies, and they wanted people to
    believe them, and they knew people were believing
    them.
         We have to prove for the fraud claims, for the
    fraud claims we have to prove that there was reliance
    and we have to prove that there was some reliance
    still into the '80s and '90s.  If he stopped relying
    before 1982, they're excused for all their fraud,
    that's the law in this case.  And I submit to you that
    the evidence in this case is that their lies continued
    through 2000 and it would be -- he was smoking filters
    in the '80s and there is evidence and I'll get to it
    of his reliance even after '82 into the '90s.
         But here is what they said about people relying,
    and then I'm going to show you a gentleman who is a
    typical smoker in the '80s, what he believed. ability.)
         SPEAKER:  Throughout your tenure with American,
    and it was not only American's position but your
    position that cigarettes weren't injurious to health;
    is that accurate?
         SPEAKER:  Through my tenure?
         SPEAKER:  Yes. 2249
         SPEAKER:  Yes, that is so.
         SPEAKER:  That's something American Tobacco
    wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
         SPEAKER:  Yes.
         SPEAKER:  That's a statement that American
    Tobacco takes great reliance on.
         SPEAKER:  We issued that statement, yes.  We
    wanted them to believe it.
         SPEAKER:  And as far as you're concerned, a
    person is justified in relying on that statement?
         SPEAKER:  Yes.
         SPEAKER:  Truck driver Dennis Gaines, a
    grandfather said --
         MR. PAIGE:  1986.
         MR. BOYCE:  Just an objection on this one,
    relevance.
         THE COURT:  It's overruled.
         SPEAKER:  You know they say it cause cancer and
    heart disease, do you believe that?
         SPEAKER:  No, I don't.  Not in my heart, I can't
    believe it.
         SPEAKER:  You can't believe that it's bad for
    you.
         SPEAKER:  No.  We look back at it, people that
    make the cigarettes and I felt like the one that make 2250
    the cigarettes should know what they're doing.
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  So that's an ordinary citizen in
    1986.  The prior person was a tobacco executive.  They
    knew in 1982, '83, '84, '85, '86 people were relying
    upon them.  If not why would they keep lying?  Why
    would they go to Congress and lie in 1994?  Here is
    Jim Schoeff's reliance.  He trusted R.J. Reynolds, he
    rationalized his smoking and his failure to succeed by
    telling his family, you know, it was unproven when he
    would fail, you know, he would say, hey, it's not
    proven, it's not proven.  We don't know for sure.  You
    know, so he had doubt, and that's what they wanted,
    doubt.
         He smoked filters to keep himself safe in case it
    was ever proven, he smoked filters in the '80s and
    '90s, that's his reliance, he's relying upon them.
    They concealed and he did not understand how addictive
    nicotine was.  He didn't know, you know, you went to
    Smoke Enders, you went to the hypnosis twice, well, if
    he had known how addictive it was, what he was
    battling, he would have probably done a lot more or
    tried to at least.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection.  Speculation.
         THE COURT:  Overruled. 2251
         MR. PAIGE:  He didn't know that they manipulated
    the nicotine and pH levels to sustain his addiction.
    He didn't know anything, so he's smoking these
    cigarettes, his smoking of the cigarettes is his
    reliance that they're giving him a safe product.  And
    he has doubt and he doesn't know what they know.  He
    doesn't know -- they want you to believe that he knew
    everything, that he had no doubt, no confusion.  He
    knew that filters were safe in the '80s and '90s or
    not safe, that he knew they weren't manipulating
    nicotine, and he had no doubt.  When they had no
    doubt, when they had no doubt that it was okay to go
    to Congress and lie in 1994.  He did, you know, there
    is evidence that he did continue relying to some
    degree on some of the information they continued
    concealing.
         So these are the questions on the verdict form,
    they ask you about his reliance, and, again, did he
    have, it says, did they conceal -- did any of the
    concealment, any, see, that's the thing, any, did any
    of it occur after May 5th, 1982?  And that's all that
    he has to prove.  Obviously he relied before '82, but
    did he still have some trust, some belief, some belief
    and misunderstanding based upon what they were doing
    after '82. 2252
         And the same is true about the conspiracy, did
    any of the acts continue after 1982 that he relied
    upon, did anything, or did he know in 1982 that he
    would have been a man ahead of his time if he knew
    what we know now, but did he -- did any of the acts,
    anything taken in regards to the conspiracy regarding
    the health effects or the addictive nature occur after
    May 5th, 1982, or was he a cat out of the bag, did he
    know at that time that the filters were not working,
    did he know at that time that smoking definitely
    caused lung cancer, did he know at that time that
    nicotine was highly addictive, and did he know at that
    time that they were manipulating the nicotine levels
    by adding chemicals to the cigarettes?
         How much time do I have left?
         THE COURT:  You have taken an hour and
    12 minutes.
         MR. PAIGE:  I have three minutes left.  I might
    go a minute over, or two.
         The last question here is punitive damages are
    warranted.  Punitive damages are very important here
    because this is the thing where you say, are we going
    to punish a corporation, you know, the child does
    something wrong, do you pat them on the back and tell
    them, hey, it's okay, we're okay with your conduct, or 2253
    do you tell them, look, you need to not do this.  And
    punitive damages are important in our society because
    corporations need to know that they can't just do
    whatever they want.  Corporations can't just get a
    free pass.  They're no better than anybody else.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained on that phrase.  Keep to
    the evidence.
         MR. PAIGE:  And so, you know, they need to know
    that it's unacceptable to choose corporate greed over
    human life.  They need to know it's unacceptable to
    lie knowing that people are going to die just so they
    can make money.  You know, just because a product is
    legal doesn't mean that you can manipulate, doesn't
    mean that you can lie, doesn't mean that you want to
    do with your power and your resources.  You know, you
    can't just tell them, if you pat them on the back
    today and tell them it's okay, it's a big
    misunderstanding, we forgive you, they get a free
    pass.
         Other companies are watching, other cigarettes
    companies.  One of the reasons for punitive damages is
    so other companies know they can't get away with this.
    Philip Morris, Lorillard, they were part of the
    conspiracy, and they're watching, they want to know 2254
    what you're going to do, too, because they want to see
    if they get a free pass for this behavior, and it's to
    deter, deter other corporations from doing what they
    did.
         You know, this is the -- I just want to say by
    your verdict you can tell them that, you know, in our
    society are they really above the law or are they
    going to be held accountable.  They haven't agreed to
    be accountable for anything, so the only way they'll
    be accountable is if you guys hold them accountable.
         Here is, again, this is the nicotine stuff, and
    it just shows how intentional their misconduct was,
    how intentional their lies were.  You go back in 1963,
    they know about nicotine, they know how addictive it
    is, and they go to Congress in 1994.  1994 they won't
    even admit to being responsible for lying. ability.)
         SPEAKER:  If you raise your right hand.  Do you
    swear that the testimony you're about to give is the
    truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
         (All said I do.)
         SPEAKER:  Please consider yourself to be under
    oath. 2255
         SPEAKER:  Let me begin my questioning on the
    matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.  Let
    me ask you first, and I would like to just go down the
    row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not
    addictive.  I heard virtually all of you touch on it,
    and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not
    addictive?
         SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is not addictive,
    yes.
         SPEAKER:  Mr. Johnson.
         SPEAKER:  Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine
    clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
    addiction, there is no intoxications --
         SPEAKER:  We'll take that as a no.  And, again,
    time is short.  I think each of you believe nicotine
    is not addictive.  We would just like to have this for
    the record.
         SPEAKER:  I don't believe that nicotine for our
    products are addictive.
         SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is not addictive.
         SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine is not
    addictive.
         SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine is not
    addictive.
         SPEAKER:  And I, too, believe that nicotine is 2256
    not addictive.
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  I think that pretty much -- and just
    so you know, American Tobacco Company, Brown &
    Williamson, they were all there, and that concludes my
    time.
         Mr. Alvarez, I have one minute here left pretty
    much, and thank you all.  It's been nice meeting you
    so to speak, I haven't really met anybody, but it's
    been a privilege to be here in front of you all.  I
    really thank you, you have so much power, so much
    responsibility to do the right thing, to let them know
    that they cannot be excused for this.  And I know Alex
    has a little bit to say, but thank you all so much.


         MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.  Good morning.  I've
    only got 15 minutes, so I'm going to be brief.  Some
    of the executives that you saw were from other
    companies, but one of the instructions you're going to
    hear -- you probably heard that you'll take it back
    with you -- is that R.J. Reynolds is responsible for
    the acts of its co-conspirators that are done in
    furtherance of their agreement.  Okay?
         So whatever the other companies did, they're
    responsible for, as long as it's done in furtherance 2257
    of the conspiracy.  So I want you all to be clear on
    that point.  There was another issue that you were
    probably looking at, which was on the verdict form
    that said, you know, May 5th, 1982, and you're
    probably saying:  What happened on May 5th, 1982?
    Nobody has heard any evidence about May 5th, 1982.
    Well, it has some legal significance to the case, but
    it doesn't have any factual significance to this case.
    Okay?
         So what we want you to do is look at the evidence
    before and after 1982, and we will submit to you
    before 1982 and even after 1982, he still relied.  He
    still relied on the tobacco companies' statements and
    omissions about the health effects and addictive
    nature of smoking.  He continued past 1982, May 5th of
    1982 -- that's clear from the record.  That's what Ms.
    Schoeff testified to, that's what the evidence in this
    case was.
         And the significance of that is, if you answer
    yes to that, you get to answer the last question,
    which is, through clear and convincing evidence, are
    punitive damages warranted?
         So in order to get to the punitive damages issue,
    you have to answer yes to either one of those reliance
    questions on May 5th, 1982.  And I want you all to be 2258
    clear on that.  Okay?
         Now, Gary didn't have a lot of time -- or he had
    more time than me, but with regards to the burden of
    proof -- and we have the burden of proof.  And we have
    to prove things to you by the greater weight of the
    evidence.  Okay?  And I know some of you may have some
    questions about that.
         But just think about the greater weight of the
    evidence is who proved their case just slightly more
    than the other.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Again, analogies are fine.  You'll
    stick to the laws and the instructions.  Go ahead.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  It's the greater weight of the
    evidence.  Whoever proves it that way has proven their
    case to you by the greater weight of the evidence.  I
    submit to you that we've done even more than that.
    That if the scales of justice were here right now, we
    outweighed and met our burden more than we needed to,
    not just slightly.
         MR. BOYCE:  Same objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Now, you also heard some
    instructions about it's legal to sell cigarettes, it's
    free speech and things like that.  But if you listen 2259
    very carefully, the last sentence of that instruction
    said what?
         It said:  Statements made by R.J. Reynolds as
    part of the public debate concerning the health
    consequences or addicted natures of cigarettes are
    protected speech.
         However, false, misleading, or deceitful
    statements and misrepresentations made as part of a
    public debate regarding smoking and health are not
    protected free speech.  You cannot lie and say false
    things.  You could sell your product; you just can't
    lie.  And that's why we're here.
         Okay.  Part of the strategy is to try to cast
    doubt in your minds about several things in this case;
    that's part of the strategy.  Cast doubt in your minds
    about several things.  Okay?
         Cast doubt that smoking causes lung cancer.  That
    was the whole purpose of the cross-examination of
    Dr. Via saying this lung infection, MAI, was really
    the cause of his lung cancer, when there's no
    scientific basis or medical basis for that opinion.
    It's just to put and plant a doubt in your mind.
         The second thing that was done in this trial is
    that facts were misrepresented, whole statements
    weren't put in context.  We're going to talk about 2260
    some of those in a few minutes.
         What they did is they attacked the credibility of
    Ms. Schoeff, and basically said:  You didn't -- you're
    not really telling the truth.  You can't tell us that
    he really went to Smoke Enders you can't really tell
    us that he tried hypnosis.  He really didn't try.
    They attacked the credibility of this witness,
    attacking.  What's the best offense -- I mean what's
    the best defense is a good offense, and they took it
    to her.
         And then the second thing -- or the last thing
    they did is they took extreme positions in this case.
    Extreme positions like that medical causation thing,
    that lung cancer in this case was not caused by
    smoking but was caused by some infection when there's
    no medical basis for that.
         Now, look at the instructions when you get back
    there about addiction and what legal cause means.  And
    if you find one word in there about choice or control,
    then they're right.  But you know what?  You're not
    going to find it.  You're not going to find a single
    word in the instruction that defines legal cause by
    that definition.
         This is the definition.  Legal cause -- addiction
    is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it 2261
    directly and in the natural and continuous sequence
    produces or contributes substantially to producing
    such loss, injury, or damage so that it can be
    reasonably said that but for the addiction, the loss,
    injury, or damage would not have occurred.  There's
    nothing in there that says choice at all.
         Now, let's compare the quality of the expert
    witnesses that you heard here.  Dr. Proctor, extremely
    well-educated professor from Stanford University.
    Stanford is like the Harvard of the West.  In fact, he
    even taught at Harvard.  Who has made it his life work
    to study the tobacco.  He's published, he's hired by
    the government in cases against the tobacco companies,
    a man who knows what he's talking about.
         Then Dr. Via, and who is Dr. Via?  A man who went
    to Harvard Medical School, who trained at the NIH, the
    National Institute of Health, who has six board
    certifications -- he's the only physician in the
    United States of America who has six board
    certifications.  Okay?
         Who do they bring?  They bring a doctor who
    advertises on the Internet that he's an expert in 150
    different types of fields, who has never written one
    paper, one article, one letter to the editor on
    nicotine addiction.  Not one. 2262
         Burden of proof.  Weigh the evidence.  Who do you
    believe more?  Who has more qualifications?  And just
    because someone can come in here and testify doesn't
    mean that he's qualified.  You decide that.  You are
    the -- he's the judge of the law.  And you know why we
    stand up when you all come in?  Because you all are
    the judges of the facts.  You judge it.
         So they take these extreme positions that lung
    cancer caused an infection without any -- no medical
    doctor -- it's not like they don't -- they can't call
    a doctor.  They called no physician, no scientist, to
    say that his lung cancer was caused by something other
    than smoking.  They didn't.  Because if they could
    have, they would have.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  And here is the -- this Dr.
    Bernstein that Gary vigorously cross-examined is what
    we say in the legal profession -- you may call it
    something else -- okay, he basically -- his basic
    opinion is unless you're brain damaged, you're not
    addicted.  That's an extreme position that no health
    authority in the United States of America or any place
    in the world accepts.
         So you got to wonder why would they call someone 1

    with such extreme positions to come into court and say
    that?  Because he's beating their drum.  This is the
    instruction you're going to get about expert witness:
    In this case you heard opinion testimony about certain
    technical subjects and about medicine.  Regarding
    experts, you may accept such opinion testimony or you
    may reject it.
         Well, I think you should reject Dr. Bernstein's
    extreme opinions that are not accepted in the United
    States of America as mainstream science, or give it
    the weight you think it deserves considering the
    knowledge, skill, and experience, training or
    education of the witness.  Who -- he has none, he's
    never published one article on nicotine addiction.
         Or the reasons given by the witness for their
    opinions expressed and all other evidence in this
    case.  Well, we know he has 80,000 or 70,000 reasons
    why he came in and testified the way he did.
         Here is another red herring.  This is subtle, the
    way it's been -- the way it's been done.  They go:
    Well, you know, in 1983, you know, your husband wasn't
    the kind of guy that would have sued the tobacco
    company in 1983 when he found out he had PVD.  He's
    not that kind of guy.  Suggesting that she's doing
    something he wouldn't want her to do.
         And that's a red herring.  Because in 1983, they
    were still beating that drum, and he was still
    believing that what he was smoking and what he was
    doing wasn't harmful to his health.
         But if it was, he was going to use filtered
    cigarettes, and who created that world?  Jim Schoeff
    didn't create that world; they created that world.
    Spending half a billion dollars from the CTR, the
    TIRC, and the TI to get that message out.  And another
    250 million -- billion -- billion dollars in
    advertising to cement it.
         So the law -- you all swore an oath to follow the
    law.  That law says that under Florida law, the
    decision whether to file a lawsuit for a wrongful
    death rests solely with the representative of the
    estate, which in this case is Joan Schoeff.
    Misrepresented facts.
         They took facts out of context, they read her
    answers to interrogatories to say that.  You didn't
    think that she was addicted.  You said he wasn't
    qualified, but they didn't read the first sentence
    where it said:  Yes, I do think he's addicted, but I'm
    not a doctor.
         But they conveniently cut that part out.  They
    misrepresent facts.  That he relied on public 2265
    statements in advertising.  They make it seem, after
    they cross-examined her for an hour and a half, make
    her think that she didn't say what she -- I had to
    read back in her depositions.  She was there for two
    days, testifying.  Okay?  That she did say that, and
    she did say it.
         They tried to make it seem that he didn't go to
    hypnosis because she didn't remember the address
    50 years later of where it was, or that he didn't
    attend Smoke Enders because she couldn't remember if
    it was two, three, four, five weeks that she said he
    went because she couldn't remember the exact date 30
    or 40 years later.
         Now, addiction does not require a medical doctor
    to come in here to say this person is addicted.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay?  That's not the requirement,
    you're not going to see it in any of the instructions
    because you are the judges of the facts.  And you know
    who decides that?  You decide that.
         And this instruction says, your job is
    exclusively to determine what the facts are.  You may
    use reason and -- this is my favorite word because I
    use it over and over again -- common sense to reach 2266
    conclusions.  You may draw reasonable inferences from
    the evidence.  It's your job to decide that.
         And you heard from Dr. Henningfield, who is one
    of the world's most well recognized experts on
    nicotine addiction.  Now, they did this declining risk
    argument to say:  Well, if he would have stopped
    smoking in 1966 or 1970, he wouldn't have gotten lung
    cancer.  Do you remember that?
         Well, guess what -- first of all, the risk still
    increases after you've been smoking at 40 years of
    age, which he was in 1970.  Okay?  That's what the
    statistics show.  But guess what?  Guess what also is
    important in 1966 and 1970?
         Had they told the truth and come clean and told
    everybody and taken the nicotine to a lower level,
    they don't make their cigarettes addictive, you
    wouldn't be here either.
         And why did they wait until 2000 to tell the
    truth?  Five years after this man died.  Now, if he
    smoked a pack and a half a day, okay -- you got to
    think there's 20 cigarettes in a pack, so that's 30
    cigarettes in a day.
         Let's assume he slept for eight hours.  That
    means he's awake for 16 hours; right?  If you're awake
    for 16 hours and you're smoking 30 cigarettes a day, 2267
    that's about two cigarettes an hour.  Let's put it in
    context.  That's like you're smoking almost two
    cigarettes every hour for 16 hours while you're awake.
    You're not addicted?
         I call this the hypocrisy of it all.  For
    50 years, they go to the public.  They say:  Smoking,
    there's no proof that smoking causes cancer.  We don't
    know.  I mean, you heard them say it over and over
    again.  We played those clips for you; right?  We
    don't know, it hasn't been proven, we don't know what
    it is.  Over and over and over that's the message that
    they were sending everybody.
         And then they come into this court and they do a
    180 and they say:  Well, you should have known that
    smoking caused cancer.  Well, wait a minute.  You told
    people for 50 years that you couldn't prove it, it
    doesn't cause it, and then you come into court and you
    say that you should have known?  That's the hypocrisy
    of it all.
         I'm going to talk to you about damages because at
    the end of the day, you have to decide whether to
    award damages to Ms. Schoeff and what's reasonable and
    fair in light of the evidence.  Okay?
         And the question is, Question Number 9:  Please
    state the total amount of damages sustained by Joan 2268
    Schoeff for the loss of her husband's companionship
    and protection and for her pain and suffering as a
    result of James Schoeff's lung cancer and death.
         Well, I mean, this is the part we have to talk
    about money.  I don't like to talk about money.  We
    have to talk about money.  But before we talk about
    money, let's look at the loss.  Okay?
         Because everyone wants to have what they had.  A
    long, loving, caring relationship and marriage.  Do
    you know how hard that is?  Do you know how hard it is
    to the married for 45 years to someone you still love
    every day?
         Everybody wants that.  She was privileged.  She
    was privileged to have that.  She met him when she was
    16 years old, and they married at 18.  They were
    together for 45 years.  He was 63 years old when he
    died.  That's two years before his retirement age.
         What people their age look forward to, what they
    work for, what they wanted, was to spend their golden
    years together.  And there's nothing more beautiful
    than that, than watching a couple that has reached
    that plateau walking down the street and holding
    hands.  There's nothing more beautiful in the world
    than that.  And that was taken away from her.  That
    was taken away from her. 2269
         So I'm proud of you, too, because it's not easy
    for an 80-year-old woman to take on R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company.  And we did our best, and I just hope
    it was enough for you and for this case.  And I
    think -- we think that $9.5 million is reasonable and
    fair in light of the evidence.  And you may think it's
    too much, you may think it's not enough.  It's up to
    you to decide.  To you, you, you, you, you, you to
    decide what's fair, right, and reasonable in light of
    the evidence.
         They showed you a picture of Jim Schoeff in the
    middle with the silhouette, remember, and they said:
    What's missing here is him.  He's involved in this,
    remember?  Where's him.  Do you remember in their
    first slide they had like a silhouette of Jim Schoeff,
    where is Jim Schoeff in all this?
         Well, when they started this conspiracy and they
    continued in 1994 with this conspiracy, he was right
    there.  He relied, he listened, he believed.  And do
    you know what that cost him?
         Thank you.

         MR. PAIGE:  I remember my first trial -- well,
    you wouldn't find that funny.  But I always remember I
    sometimes say the wrong thing, morning and afternoon.
         But anyway, you know, Mr. Boyce had a lot to say
    and really, you know, they want this case to come
    down -- they want you to make a choice.  They want to
    make it hard and fast.  You can't have it -- it's got
    to be addiction or choice.  You know, you smoke
    because you're addicted or you smoke because it's a
    choice.
         And that's not the way it is.  That's not the way
    it is, that's not the evidence, and that's not what
    the law says.  And I trust that when you look at the
    law, you will see that his arguments, if you followed
    the law, his arguments don't even come into effect
    until you get to the comparative fault phase of the
    trial.
         But he did use an analogy that I thought was
    interesting, he said if you bumped into Mr. Schoeff
    during the years and you asked him how many times he
    quit during the 50 years, you know, you all heard the
    evidence.  If you really believe that he only tried
    five times, you know, that's your right. 2354
         But he's a very effective lawyer and he has a
    very effective way of saying things, but doesn't mean
    he says it doesn't mean it's right and doesn't mean
    that's what happened in the case.
         But could you imagine, can you put this up,
    please, if you bumped into a tobacco executive -- I
    want to use the same analogy -- you bump into a
    tobacco executive in 1947.  And then you see him in
    1953 and he says to you:  We care about our customers,
    we care about our customers so much, their health is a
    basic responsibility of us -- to us.
         And then you bumped into that person 50 years
    later, in 2010, and you say:  Hey, what have you been
    doing for the last 50 years about that basic
    responsibility that you recognized?  What did you do
    for the 50 years and you found out for 50 years
    they've been lying and cheating and watching people
    die.
         And they said:  But, look, we shouldn't be
    punished because in 2013 we now have it on our
    website.  We put it on our website now, so don't
    punish us.  That's not okay.  That's not okay, what
    they did.  It's the same doubt, confusion, you know,
    controversy, and that's what they did.  They didn't
    put it up on the website until long after the Engle 2355
    case.
         And now they come into court in these Engle cases
    and say:  Look how good we are now.  You know, we
    shouldn't be punished.  Don't punish us.  You know,
    we've changed.  Well, they need to be punished for
    their past conduct.
         You know, if you had somebody who did really bad
    things for 50 years and they came to court -- and they
    got away it -- and finally they changed their lives
    and they get caught and they say:  But don't punish
    me, jury, please don't punish me because I'm changed.
    It's like, no, you have to -- in our society you have
    to accept accountability.  It's like you can't have --
    you have to have the courage to follow what you did,
    and they don't want to do that.
         They have no courage and they won't accept
    responsibility and they've killed people and
    Mr. Schoeff is one of them.  And when they talked
    about losing control and who was motivated, they lost
    all control.  They were motivated by money, and I
    think that's so clear in this case.
         They talk about 1983, he didn't file a lawsuit.
    That was 17 years before any of this conspiracy came
    out in documents.  It was decades before Engle was
    even filed.  To this day, I will tell you I honestly 2356
    do not think anybody has anybody recovered on a PVD
    case against a tobacco company.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Outside the evidence.  No
    personal comments.  Comment on the evidence.
         MR. PAIGE:  He would have been a pioneer ahead of
    his time, by decades, if he would have sued the
    tobacco company in 1983.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor.  The
    litigation goes back to the '50s.
         THE COURT:  Stop, sir.  What's your comment, sir?
    You made reference to this.
         MR. PAIGE:  For PVD and prevail, before the
    documents, the conspiracy and all that came to light.
    And it would have been -- you know, it would have been
    unheard of, and they know that.  They know that.
         So when they sit up and tell you:  Oh, he didn't
    sue in 1983, believe me, that's the lawyer talking.
    That's the lawyer talking.  You know, I have a lot of
    notes.  These guys give me notes.  I know I'm not
    going to get through this.  This is a note to me.  I
    can't even read it.
         Talking about -- this whole thing about addiction
    not being a legal cause or a medical cause.  There's
    things in the 2010 Surgeon General report where they 2357
    talk about there's a fundamental consensus that
    there's no real criteria for diagnosing addiction, and
    then they cite to the DSM, they cite to the
    Fagerstrom, they cite to the heaviness of smoking
    index.  There's all these different ways you can
    diagnose addiction.
         And there's no requirement that we have to bring
    a doctor report.  It's not required.  They know that.
    If we had to bring a doctor report to prove addiction,
    Judge Tuter would let you know, and he would let us
    know by throwing our case out of court.  There's case
    law that we can use a generic deposition of
    Dr. Henningfield, just like we did, and the jury can
    determine whether someone is addicted or not.  It's
    been affirmed on appeal and this is the way we do our
    case.  And they know that.  He knows that.
         But I also submit to you if you rely on
    Dr. Bernstein, I think clearly, when I went through
    the DSM through it with him, it was clear when I
    showed the examples from the APA, that our client met
    six of the seven criteria anyway.
         The next -- you know, they talk about -- this is
    it.  This is the legal cause instruction.  Did the
    addiction play an important role?  You'll read it for
    yourself, and but for the addiction, would he have 2358
    smoked.  They talk about, you know, if he was strong
    enough to be a Marine, he was strong enough to be a
    CEO.  He wasn't.  And this is one addiction he could
    not beat.  It happens with successful people.  It
    happens.  People struggle with addiction who are very
    successful in our country.  And I could name them.
    There are successful people.
         You know, it happens to everybody.  It doesn't
    matter whether you're a man or woman, black or white,
    rich or poor, successful or not successful, addiction
    is a disease.  You know, they say this person was not
    addicted.  He wasn't forced to smoke, he knew people
    who quit.  He heard smoking was bad.
         You know, they will say that about everybody,
    that's the point.  They don't want anybody to be a
    member of the class.  They create this class, they get
    people in the class, they get them addicted, and then
    they throw out the same excuses in every case and say,
    well, you can't be a member in our class.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, Your Honor, move to
    strike.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  The comments about the class,
    I sustain.  It's stricken.  Keep going, Mr. Paige.
         MR. PAIGE:  The next thing -- do I have another
    thing?  They said something about filters, I'm going 2359
    to go through this quick.  I probably only have, what,
    seven minutes.
         They said they never advertised fitters as being
    unsafe -- I mean, as being safe.  These are all their
    tricks about filters.  It's all in evidence.  You
    know, you'll read these this if you like.  Can you go
    back out?  The bottom two right, you know, Viceroy is
    an R.J. Reynolds product, talks about how safe filters
    are.  You know, so they did that.
         And the instruction on the product defect
    specifically says -- this is the Engle instruction.
    The Defendant -- it doesn't say the Defendant placed
    filtered cigarettes on the market that were defective.
    And, in fact, if you find for punitive damages, they
    will have a corporate representative here -- I can't
    wait to ask him, if I get that privilege, if he will
    admit that filtered cigarettes were defective, because
    he won't.  They won't admit anything is defective, I
    assure you.
         So did they place cigarettes on the market that
    were defective, or they did, that's the law.  It
    doesn't only apply to filters, some filters, et
    cetera.  They talked about Premier and Eclipse.  This
    is what the Surgeon General writes about Premier and
    Eclipse.  You can do the last paragraph.  You know, 2360
    more recently tobacco -- this is their great
    invention, Premier and Eclipse.
         More recently they've been promoted these
    cigarettes, Premier and Eclipse, and then it says at
    the bottom:  Both human and machine testing indicate
    that these products provide no clear benefit to users
    over conventional cigarettes, and they found at the
    levels -- you know, they deliver the levels of key
    lung and cancer -- toxins.
         So, you know, a lawyer can say anything to you.
    He can stand up here and tell you whatever he wants.
    But that's the real deal about Premier and Eclipse.
    And if Premier and Eclipse is so safe, why not spend
    some of that $250 billion marketing Premier and
    Eclipse, you know?  That's not reality.  He talked
    about burden of proof.
         How much time do I have left?
         THE COURT:  Five minutes, six minutes.
         MR. PAIGE:  He talked about burden of proof, and
    I just want to explain a little bit about burden of
    proof.
         If it was a criminal case, our burden would be
    beyond a reasonable doubt.  And that's because
    somebody's liberty would be at stake.  Somebody would
    be going to jail.  Freedom.  In this case, we're talk 2361
    about money damages.  There's no restoration.  We
    can't bring back Mr. Schoeff.  It's not possible.
         So the only thing we have is compensation; that's
    what the law provides.  Fair and reasonable
    compensation.  And when you have that, the burden of
    proof in a civil case is by the greater weight of the
    evidence.  What do you believe more likely than not.
         If it was a criminal case, and I was a football
    player, I would have to get to the 99-yard line.  In a
    civil case, I have to get across the 50-yard line.
    And that's the burden.  Nobody is going to go to jail
    here.
         I can't even read it.  This one is not easy.
         So punitive damages, the reason for them was to
    punish for past conduct, and he says:  Oh, you can't
    deter us because we're already a better corporation.
    Look how good R.J. Reynolds is now.  But that's not
    it.  It's to deter others.  It's to deter others.  So
    other corporations see that you can't get away with
    this.  That's part of it.
         To punish them, if they deserve to be punished
    for what they did, and it's to deter.  So other people
    don't do what they did.  You know, they built their
    company on lies, they profit on lies, and it's the
    same company today, it's a different date.  I look 2362
    forward to talking to the R.J. Reynolds corporate rep.
    I hope I do.
         The last thing I want to do is the PSA -- they
    keep showing the PSAs.  And remember in 1967, it was
    for a few years.  They had to run the PSAs, three TV
    commercials, to one PSA for a short period of time.
    Tobacco then took them off the air and then they put
    their money in other advertising and that was the end
    of the PSAs.
         MR. BOYCE:  Objection, misstates the evidence.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  The jury will be guided
    by what they heard from the evidence.
         MR. PAIGE:  Now we have PSAs.  So I want to show
    you the difference between what impact it has -- the
    three for one.  I'm going to do a little clip -- not
    the whole commercial because I don't have enough
    time -- little clips of two commercials with the PSA,
    and another commercial, and then what a PSA today
    alone looks like. ability.)
         FEMALE SINGER:  Why don't you settle back, and
    have a full-flavored smoke.  Settle back with a
    Marlboro. 2363
         MALE SPEAKER:  Like father, like son.  Think
    about it.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Let's take a Winston break.
         MALE SPEAKER:  That's it.  Winston is the one
    filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a
    pack.  Winston has got that filter flavor.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Yeah, Fred.
         MALE SPEAKER:  It's a Winston cigarette.
         FEMALE SPEAKER:  It's a Winston cigarette.
         FEMALE SPEAKER:  Winston cigarette?
         MALE SPEAKER:  Why, certainly.
         FEMALE SPEAKER:  I tell you, Pearl, Winston is
    good smoking.
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  So that's how it was back in the day
    when they were running three to one.  And now, since
    they're not allowed to have TV commercials, and it's
    all PSAs, this is what the young people of America are
    now being exposed to, thank God. ability.)
         (End of video.)
         MR. PAIGE:  Thank you all very much.
         THE COURT:  Thank you very much, Mr. Paige. 