MR. TROP: May it please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. TROP: Counsel, members of the jury, good morning again.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. TROP: I know you've heard this a number of times, but you haven't heard it from me 09:5 yet. I want to thank you very much for your hard work, for your patience, your diligence, paying attention. I know there have been times when we have had you run back and forth into the jury room while we have had to take care of things and they
have been important things, but on behalf of Melba, I really want to thank you for your attention and your hard work. It means a lot to her.
This is closing argument. This is, as the Judge just said, this is the time of the trial where we get to come up and explain what the evidence has been and how it applies to this case and what you are going to do. I'm going to split my time up with Mr. Paige over there, my partner, 09: and the first part of the closing argument for us is I'm going to explain a little bit about what you are going to be asked to do, the jury instructions and show you the verdict form and kind of explain what to do, and then I'm going to talk about the facts and the comparative fault aspects of the case.
Then Mr. Paige is going to up and he's going to talk about the damages in the case and he's going to talk about entitlement to punitive 09:53 damages and the punitive damages themselves.
Those damages are for punishment. Okay.
The first thing I want to do, though, I want to bring up something Mr. Alvarez brought up in his opening statement recently and show you a
board, and it is very important in this case.
This is the six simple truths. These are the six simple truths, our six simple truths. You'll recall that the Defendants put up a board that was similar, similar title, they had six simple truths. The difference is our six simple truths are actually true. You'll know they are true because they been decided. The first two have been decided by you.
John Sherman is a class member of Florida 09:5 addicted smokers. John Sherman's addiction to nicotine caused his death. You decided that.
That is true, that cannot be disputed. The party's over on that, the case is closed.
And the last four, the Judge told you about. Those are truths. They cannot be disputed. R.J. Reynolds was found to be negligent. They did not act the way a reasonable corporation would act. They are negligent. They can't be reargued. They are negligent in this 09:54 case.
R.J. Reynolds is strictly liable for placing cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. Their cigarettes, their Lucky Strikes, they own Lucky
Strike, they are responsible for them. Their Winstons were unreasonably dangerous and defective. That's it. Can't be reargued.
R.J. Reynolds concealed information knowing information was false or misleading concerning material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarette smoking. Not minor facts, basically concealing the fact that cigarette smoke caused lung cancer. They have been found to have done that. It's done, they can't reargue that. Despite the fact that they did for two weeks, they can't do it anymore.
R.J. Reynolds entered into an agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects. It's basically a conspiracy. Again, it's done, that's the law of the case. That's what happened in this case, and it's important because these things you are going to have to apply to what Judge Streitfeld is going to ask you to do at the end of the case.	09:55
At the end of the closing arguments this morning, his Honor Judge Streitfeld is going to give you instructions and I believe the Court is actually going to hand you the written instructions afterwards and he's going to also
09:5
give you a verdict form that you are going to fill out after you've deliberated and come to some decisions.
I want to give you a preview of what the verdict form says and go over it. This is going to be the verdict form. I hope you all can see it. The first question on the verdict form is were R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's cigarettes a cause of the addiction that was a legal cause of John Sherman's death. This one in large part you 09:5 already answered. You already determined that his addiction to nicotine was the cause of his death.
It's already been determined in large part and, again, the case is closed on that issue.
The only conceivable way you could answer no to that is if you think some other cigarette, like the rollup cigarettes when he was 12 years old, if you think they somehow caused his death.
I say that because I know, I have a feeling Ms.
Parker is going to argue that and I'm going to get 09:56 into that in a minute and explain why that can't possibly be true, but you've got to look at the question very closely. You should answer yes to this question, I submit to you, but look at the question. Were R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's
cigarettes a cause of the addiction that was a legal cause of John Sherman's death. Doesn't have to be the only cause.
MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. TROP: You just have to determine if it's a cause. There can be two causes. You can think, well, maybe there was another cause along with R.J. Reynolds cigarettes. You still answer yes to that question. I think that one is pretty 09:5 close; you've done about 95 percent of the work on that.
The second one, was the negligence of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company a legal cause of John Sherman's death. Was the negligence, it doesn't say was there negligence, there is negligence; that's been determined for you. You just have to determine whether it was a cause. They did not act as a reasonable corporation would do. That's been determined for you.	09:58
Was that a cause of his death. Well, of course it was. Again, was it a cause. There could be other causes. You could say, well, I think maybe his failure to quit was a cause, too. That's fine, but you still have to answer yes
because it was a cause. Okay.
Number three, this is probably the most straightforward, probably the easiest one to answer. Were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company a legal cause of John Sherman's death. Again, the cigarettes were defective and unreasonably dangerous. The Judge has told you that, okay, and I think the Judge is going to tell you that again, they were defective 09:5 and unreasonably dangerous. You already determined that they caused his death, the addiction to them. You've already -- it's not in dispute that those cigarettes caused his death.
So you have to determine if there was a cause and I submit to you the answer again -THE COURT: Excuse me, never mind.
I'm sorry, I apologize.
MR. TROP: No problem.
The answer should be yes.	09:59
So then you turn the page, there's another page. Did John Sherman reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company that omitted material information and, if so, was such a reliance a legal cause of
his death. Did he rely on any statement. I mean, there were hundreds of statements that he relied upon.
You heard the undisputed testimony of Melba Sherman that he believed them, and even after he started to question them, there was doubt in his mind. He didn't know whether or not to believe them because we know now they were withholding everything from him. So it would almost be impossible for that not to be true. So 09:59 I submit, again, to you that you should answer yes.
And it's not only the testimony about John Sherman that you can consider in determining whether or not that was a cause, a legal cause of his death; just think about history. Think about what the effect of what they did for 50 years was.
In the 40's, 50's and 60's, you've heard the evidence, seen the polls, over half of America smoked, right, half of America. Now today in 10:( 2009, about 17, 18 percent of America smokes.
Okay. Same products, same country. Why is there such a huge disparity in the amount of people that smoke cigarettes? Same country, same product.
It's because nowadays people know. People
at least make an informed decision and, yes, some people still choose to smoke, but back then, 50,
60 percent of people smoking? You think that's just a coincidence? Were people dumb back then?
No, they just didn't know. That's why there's such a huge difference and John Sherman was one of those people that didn't know. And remember the word a, a legal cause of his death. Doesn't have to be only one.
The next one, was any act taken in	10:01
furtherance of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes a legal cause of John Sherman's death.
All kinds of acts you've seen throughout, we don't have to prove anymore the conspiracy, the concealment, any of that; there's been a wealth of evidence. The answer to that should be yes also.
Then the next one goes to percentages.
This is the comparative fault phase of the issue. 10:0 That's a significant issue. State the percentage of responsibility for John Sherman's death that you charge to, then it lists four different entities. We submit to you, and I'm going to explain in greater detail, that R.J. Reynolds
should hold by far and away the lion's share for of the responsibility for his death, but at the same time, I'm not going to stand here in front of you and either of my partners and tell you that John Sherman didn't bear some responsibility for his own death. He did during a certain period of time. I going to spend a few minutes later on talking to you about that.
So you should split up between R.J.
Reynolds and John Sherman and divide up how much 10 responsibility you think belongs that should be attributed to each party, but you'll see that they have got Melba Sherman sitting there listed as a possibility. I submit to you that you should place a big fat zero next to Melba Sherman's name.
If you feel as strongly as I do, I do about that,
you should press real hard on the pen when you do
that. They came into this courtroom for solid
weeks. You heard nag, nag, nag, picky, picky,
picky over and over and over again about how Melba 10:0
would be nagging him, trying to get him to quit
from all the different witnesses. It's almost in
a mocking way, picky, picky, picky, nag, nag, nag.
Then they lose, they lose that whole battle for two solid weeks, and the next day, the
very next day, they come up here and they try to tell you, with her on the stand, they ask her if she feels she's responsible for killing her own husband. They make her sound like a crazy person for trying to get him to stop.
MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. TROP: Then they are going to come up here and say do you feel responsible for killing your own husband. That should be a zero up there, 10:0 and I submit to you if someone comes up here and argues that Melba Sherman is responsible for her husband's death, you should consider the source and you should hold them accountable for that.
And you are going to see there's another one, some other person or entity. That's called -- we are calling it the phantom box. What other person could be responsible? Well, you know what that's about again? That's about the hand-rolled cigarettes when they were 12 years old 10:0 or the possibility that he smoked Marlboro cigarettes that we hear that his dad smoked, even though there's no evidence that he smoked that.
That's all there is. That should be zero because there is absolutely zero evidence that those
cigarettes caused his death or had anything to do with his death.
Okay. There are also some damage questions on the case, and Mr. Paige is going to be the person talking about the damages, so I'm not going to get into that, but these are all the liability questions on this case. Okay.
Let's talk about the evidence in the case and what you've heard so far, and I have a big board. We were having a hard time finding a place 10:( to put it so everyone can see and, unfortunately,
Melba drew the short straw. She's kind of blocked out there, but I've shown it to her and I told her in the car exactly what I was going to say. I apologize for blocking her out; obviously, to me, she's the most important person here.
Let's talk about Mr. Sherman's smoking.
He was born in 1927, November of 1927. You've heard the testimony that he and his brother Robert first started smoking about two cigarettes a year 10:05 when they were 12 or 13. Those were the hand-rolled cigarettes, the father's hand-rolled cigarettes they would run down to the pond and smoke. Okay.
Robert and John become regular smokers in
about 1942, '43 when John was about 15 or 16 years old, okay. We know that Robert smoked Lucky Strikes then and he smoked Lucky Strikes for the next 20 years, okay. We know he joins the Navy for four years. We know during the Navy that R.J. Reynolds has this program where they are giving free cigarettes to all the soldiers and naval officers.
And then we know that John meets Melba in 1953; he's smoking three to four packs of Lucky 10:06 Strikes a day. So you have -- now, in her opening statement, Ms. Parker showed this graph repeatedly and I'd like -- I love the green part here, not RJR cigarettes from '44 to '53.
First of all, it doesn't really matter what he was smoking from '44 to '53 because the testimony is unrefuted that that's not what gave him lung cancer for those first ten years, but that is a little disingenuous to suggest he was not smoking RJR cigarettes from 1944 to 1953. His 10: brother was smoking, who he smoked with, started smoking with smoking Lucky Strikes the whole time.
He's in the Navy where everybody is smoking R.J. Reynolds cigarettes, and he meets Melba Sherman in 1953 and he's smoking three to four packs of Lucky
Strike cigarettes the day he meets her and the Defense seems like -- almost like they want to suggest that this guy, John Sherman, met Melba and he said to himself, you know what, starting today,
I think I'm going to start smoking three to four packs of Lucky Strikes today because I met Melba Sherman.
I mean, it's preposterous. You just don't do that. No one can do that. The man was smoking Lucky Strike cigarettes for a long period of time. 10: You have to draw reasonable inferences in this case and that's the only reasonable inference that you can draw, is that that's what he had been smoking not just the day he met her, but before he met her.
But let me tell you something, they may come up, Ms. Parker or whomever comes up to argue, may come up and say, well, we think he was smoking the hand-rolled cigarettes for ten years or those from '42 to '53. I don't know if they are going 10:0< to make that argument, or we may -- he may have been smoking these Marvel cigarettes -- we don't even know what Marvel was -- that his father smoked. There's no evidence whatsoever that John Sherman ever smoked a Marvel cigarette.
They can make those two arguments. They cannot and will not make an argument that he was smoking any other type of cigarette, not a Marvel from Philip Morris or from Lorillard or any of the other companies. They cannot make that argument, there's no evidence of it and they are not allowed to.
So if you think that he was smoking the hand-rolled cigarettes for ten years three to four packs a day or these Marvel cigarettes, then what 10:0 can I tell you. The fact of the matter is he was smoking Lucky Strikes.
The cruellest irony of this, though, is there's only one person in the world who could possibly tell you what John Sherman was smoking during those 10 or 11 years, of course that's John Sherman, but he's not around to tell you what he was smoking because he's dead and he died from smoking those cigarettes and now they are trying to take advantage of the fact that he's dead from 10:09 smoking their cigarettes and he can't come in and tell you that he was smoking those cigarettes. He was a Lucky Strikes smoker, John Sherman was.
Okay. We will put this back up a little bit. I want to take you back a little bit in
time. At the beginning of the case, I asked you to try to bring yourself back into the 40's and the 50's, even though certainly most of us weren't born anywhere near that time, but it's very important to understand what was going on and we told you about the way cigarette smoking was portrayed and accepted in society during that time period, and we've got a short clip of information, some commercials that were going on during that time period.	10:10
(Whereupon, the following videos were played:)
"Lucky Strike means prime tobacco. Lucky Strike presents Mark Warnow and the Lucky Strike Orchestra. So long, so firm, so fully packed, so free and easy on the draw. So make that next pack of cigarettes you buy Lucky Strike."
"Thousands of doctors in all parts of the country in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked what cigarette 10: do you smoke, Doctor? According to this survey, more doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette."
"Your steady smoke, smoke only Camels for 30 days and see why so many people say once a
Camel smoker, always a Camel smoker."
"It's the one with the pure white filter plus filter blend up front. Bright clear tobacco specially selected and specially processed for filter smoking. Filter blend is what makes people say Winstons tastes good like a cigarette should.
Try Winston and you'll know why more people smoke it than any other filtered cigarette."
"Here's John Wayne, America's number one dramatic movie star on location. After you've 10:1 been making a lot of strenuous scenes, you like to sit back and enjoy a cool, mild, good-tasting cigarette."
"What's white stuff in there? That's the Winston filter, but it's what's up that counts.
You mean the tobacco. A cigarette is only as good as the tobacco that's in it."
"The Flintstones have been brought to you by Winston, America's best selling, best tasting filtered cigarette. Winston tastes good like a 10:12 cigarette should."
MR. TROP: So that was basically what was going on as you've heard from the historians in this case. Incidentally, I hope you appreciate the fact when our historians came in to testify,
they tried to give both sides of the story. They admitted there were -- there was some information about smoking being bad for you in the public media, but they just showed the overwhelming amount of propaganda on behalf of the cigarette companies that was going on. I hope you appreciated; we tried to make that a clear point.
But it was in the early 50's when these studies came out, these medical studies, and that's when -- back to our board -- the Frank 10: Statement comes out in 1954, R.J. Reynolds and the other companies brought out the Frank Statement, and the TIRC was created and we've got a little clip, 1954, where they start going after all these doctors and they start talking about trying to dispute the medical evidence that was coming out about smoking and lung cancer. So we have here a clip from the TIRC.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)	10:13
"President of a major tobacco firm and chairman of the industry research committee.
I would like to quote from a statement released at the time the Tobacco Industry Research Committee was formed. At that time, we accept an
interest in people's health as a basic responsibility parallel to every other consideration in our business and that's where we stand."
MR. TROP: Okay. They accept responsibility and, of course, back in those days in the 50's, that's the way people talked and the way people acted. They did, in fact, accept responsibility, but back then, the difference was nobody knew that this guy was lying. Nobody 10:14 suspected people would lie about that kind of stuff, and nobody knew that they were going to go on a 50 year campaign of lying because corporations just didn't do that back then. They did not.
So the TIRC and R.J. Reynolds and Hill and Knowlton, all their agents and co-conspirators went on this plan of trying to rewrite science in the case, just tried to move forward and change what was going on and change public opinion. And 10: you know what? It actually worked.
Now, I don't have enough time to go through the whole list of things they have done, but there are a few examples, if we can show some of the newspaper clippings. "Americans are
smoking more cigarettes now that in its view the main impact of the cigarette health controversy apparently has passed." That's in the mid-fifties.
"Perhaps out of the belief that the public would know what to do once it had the facts, the administration has done little to implement the report's recommendation," the Surgeon General reports. "The trouble is that the facts have been blurred or buried by the constant avalanche of 10:1 cigarette advertisements."
"Tobacco scare fading in the smoke ring. Americans are beginning to forget the cancer scare generated by the government report on smoking."
Here's the tobacco company. "The cigarette industry today denounced as deceptive, distorted and unreliable a cancer researcher's finding that many filter cigarettes were at least as hazardous to health as non-filtered cigarette."
Those are filter cigarettes; that's what John 10:16 Sherman was smoking. That's in the late 60's.
"Even though those who are the most outspoken about the possible risk of cigarette smoking have been unable to demonstrate any particular ingredient found in cigarette smoke
actually causes any illness." That's the statement from the TIRC, okay, they are denying it. And that was all over the place and you've heard it.
As I said before, it worked because they took a poll and you've seen the polls, you've seen them. A Gallup Poll in 1964 right after the Surgeon General's report came out, 47 percent of smokers, almost half of smokers, think that smoking does not cause lung cancer. That's half 10:1 of smokers immediately after the Surgeon General's report comes out because of the avalanche of anti-Surgeon General propaganda by the tobacco industry.
You know, they brought in historians, we brought in historians to tell you what we think accurately happened, and I think you know what accurately happened, and they brought in historians, too, and they deny that people were doubting back then whether cigarette smoking 10:1 caused lung cancer. You know, they spent, the tobacco industry and, in particular, R.J.
Reynolds, spent the 40's and the 50's and the 60's and even the 70's and 80's trying to rewrite science. Now, in 2009, they bring people in here
to rewrite history and actually try to tell you that everybody knew back then that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. It's just not true. You've seen the polls. You've seen the polls.
Then there was a clip, this is 1971 Face the Nation. Everybody probably knows Face the Nation, it's still around, it's still on TV, from this Mr. Cullman.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)	10:18
"We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
So you believe that cigarettes are safe, have they been proved to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
I believe they have not been proved to be 10: unsafe."
MR. TROP: That's in 1971, all right.
That's not back in the 50's when they could claim they didn't know. We have seen those documents. He knew exactly -- that man knew exactly what he
was saying and it's just it's a lie. It's a lie.
And R.J. Reynolds has this Dr. Figlar come up and testify, he testified twice, and he was shown not that clip, but almost an identical clip where he said the exact same thing pretty much denying in the 70's -- and I think that clip was in the 80's -- that smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer or that it was dangerous. And he looked at it and he said, he was asked, Mr. Alvarez asked him, is that true, wasn't he lying? Well, no, he 10:19 had, you know, there's a difference between proof and scientific proof, or whatever his language was, something like that, and maybe, you know, you are thinking of a different type of proof, but he was thinking about scientific proof and, so, what he was saying was really accurate.
You know, they haven't changed at all.
They haven't changed at all. They are more sophisticated now, but they haven't changed. They are playing word games right here in the courtroom 10:2 as recently as yesterday. They are playing word games.
Now I can tell you right now this is no word game to Melba Sherman. This is no kind of game at all to Melba Sherman to have her -- have
to sit here and listen to them playing word games in this courtroom.
It kind of reminds me of a story of Abraham Lincoln. I like to quote Abraham Lincoln from time to time. Most people consider him, if not our best president, perhaps, you know, certainly one of our best presidents. There's a famous story about Abraham Lincoln where he's sitting in his living room with his young son and they are sitting there by the fireplace and the 10:^ family dog comes into the room. And Abe says to his son, son, how many legs does that dog have? And his son looks at Abraham and he says, well, he has four legs, Dad. And Abraham Lincoln says to his son, okay, son, if you were to call that dog's tail a leg, how many legs would he have then? His son said if you were to call his tail a leg, then the dog would have five legs. And honest Abe looked into his son's eyes, he said, son, I don't care what you call that dog's tail, that dog has 10: four legs.
I don't care what this doctor, Dr. Figlar, says about his scientific proof and proof. That man up there was lying. He was lying, but R.J. Reynolds lied for 50 years. It's not scientific
proof, it's a lie, and I think all of you know that, but they don't acknowledge it. Even today in 2009, they come in, they have just gotten more sophisticated at it, that's all. That's all.
Let me talk to you a little bit about comparative fault. It's a big issue here.
40 percent chance this thing is going over, but I'll try it again.
John Sherman was comparatively at fault.
He's comparatively responsible for his death. At 10:2 some point in time, he had to -- there had to be enough evidence where he knew or should have known hey, it's time to stop, it's time, and maybe he should have tried harder. Maybe he was stubborn as they say, thick-headed, maybe he's naive, but either way, he bears some responsibility.
We have admitted that from day one, we just weren't allowed to tell you we admitted it in day one because that was phase one, but there's no evidence that that man shares any responsibility 10:2 prior to 1964 and that's why you can see the colors are a little different. He didn't do anything wrong prior to 1964, not a thing. He really didn't. He had no reason to know. They knew, they knew and they concealed it, but he
didn't know.
Sometime between 1964 and say 1977 when he first started to quit, he bears some responsibility. '77 is an interesting date because that's when he started to try to quit and it's also the same -- it happens to be the same period of time when their doctor, Dr. Barsky, says well, you know what, even if he had quit then, he probably still would have gotten lung cancer. So anything he did after this time doesn't even 10: matter, it's not relevant because he would have gotten the lung cancer anyway, but he does bear some responsibility for this period of time.
And we have calculated it out, he died at 68 years old, that's 13 years there. That's
18	percent of his life. It's a hard decision for you, when you are going to attribute fault to him, how much fault he should be assessed with. I would suggest something around 18 percent. That's the period of time, the percentage of his life, 10: when he was at fault.
Now, you have to compare the fault. He's at fault for being addicted, maybe for being naive, maybe for being hard-headed. They are at fault for lying, repeatedly, about something
that's killing millions of people, including him.
So you've got to compare the fault. I mean, his is naivete or hard-headedness or maybe something else; their's is lying, their's is manipulating nicotine, their's is concealing information. When you talk about comparing fault, I mean, consider the types of fault you are comparing. They lied, they concealed, they manipulated. No one ever called John Sherman a liar in his lifetime, in his lifetime.	10:25
You have to almost to think that he was more responsible than them or that he somehow bore all the responsibility, you would just have to completely ignore the facts in this case. All the things they did, that they have been found to have done. I mean, it's just you'd have to believe that he knew from day one when he picked up the first cigarette that it was bad for you, that he said I don't care, I'm not going to quit no matter what, I want to die, I want to get lung cancer; 10:2 it's beyond reality.
Now, let me mention something else. A couple days ago when Ms. Parker mentioned that she felt it was disrespectful for my partner to mention that John Sherman had dropped out of high
school before graduating -THE CLERK: Five minutes, counselor.
MR. TROP: I never got a chance to meet John Sherman, but I've gotten a chance to meet Melba Sherman. I know her, she's my friend.
MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. TROP: John Sherman would not have taken offense to dropping out of high school,
leaving high school early, to join the United 10:26
States Navy in a time of war. I don't think he would have found that offensive. You know what he would have found offensive? Being lied to for 50 years about a product that was going to kill him.
I think that John Sherman would have found that offensive for sure.
You know what else he would have found offensive? Never got an apology. His wife, his widow in this courtroom, has still to this day, we have been here for two and a half weeks, not a 10:2 single apology for any of the lies that they have been found to have done and I -MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. TROP: I think the only conclusion you
can draw from the fact that they didn't even try, they have had the rep on twice, that they wouldn't apologize even for the biggest lies, is that they are not sorry. They really aren't sorry. Still to this day, they are defending it.
The last thing, and Mr. Paige may use some of this board to describe some things, John Sherman tries to quit numerous times. Not two or three times; two or three times that Melba could remember the dates the occasions. He tries to 10:2 quit many times.
There is some talk about, well, John didn't get to the doctor as early as he could have, and he didn't. You know, he was -- you know, there is one medical record that says 14 months, you know, that he was short of breath and getting a little weak and he didn't like to go to doctors. There are a lot of people like that, but there is no evidence in this case whatsoever that that made any difference in his outcome. 10:2 None whatsoever. I know they have raised that a few times.
We had the only doctor that treats cancer patients come into this courtroom. He's really a world renowned -- he may be one of the most world
renowned lung cancer experts in the world, come in here and said that makes no difference. When you start getting symptoms of lung cancer, unfortunately it's a death sentence. He said the only difference it would make is that he would have known he was dying earlier. It wouldn't have made a difference.
They could have brought in a doctor -they did bring in a doctor, a pathologist, but he's a doctor. Did you hear anything from him 10: that that made any difference? No, you didn't hear from that from nobody because nobody would say it.
So when you are talking about comparative fault, you can give some comparative fault for John Sherman for not trying to quit harder or more often. If he tried ten times, he could have tried 11, but I submit to you you cannot give him any comparative fault for not getting to the doctor early because there is no evidence in the case 10:2 that that would have made any difference whatsoever in this case.
I'm going to sit down now. I want to thank you. I wanted to mention one more thing.
You know, you heard a couple days ago that
I think Ms. Parker said that everybody feels sympathy for Ms. Sherman losing her husband. I know that's true. All of you do, I'm sure everybody in the courtroom does, but that's not relevant in this case, sympathy, okay? You want to know something? Melba Sherman isn't in this courtroom for your sympathy or for anybody else's sympathy. Melba Sherman is in this courtroom for justice. It's been a long time coming. She waited a long time, through nobody's fault, but 10: she's here now and she's asking you for justice.
I thank you very much for your time. I'm going to give Mr. Paige the rest of my time.



MR. PAIGE: May it please the Court, counsel.
Good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. PAIGE: I want to speak a little bit 10:30 about money for a little while, damages, compensation, and why that's really our system of justice, why that's the law, and it's just the way it is, but tomorrow you guys will go back to your jobs, go back to your lives, you're probably happy
to. I know that it's been a sacrifice to be here, but today, today, it's so important the power that you have. You have so much power to make something that is so wrong right, to not look the other way and say that we accept in our society this type of behavior. Today, the six of you collectively are the judicial branch of the government. You will decide what is right and what is wrong, what is fair and what is unfair, what is really, truly, if you are going to look at 10:31 these people, at R.J. Reynolds, and say we know that you caused, in one of the Surgeon General's report, refers to an epidemic, the amount of people that have been affected by their lies, it's truly evil is really the only word for it.
For any person of any type who has any conscience to go sit in a room and say we are going to put our corporate greed first over the health and lives of families of people, of real human beings, and we are going to do whatever we 10: can to make sure that we make the most money we can, that's truly, truly, I think the evidence is, there's no other word for it other than that it's horribly wrong and it is an evil act, and that's what it is.
So I know that your job is not an easy one and it's hard work and I know you all work hard and we are proud of the verdict that you reached to find that John Sherman is a member of the class, that these findings of fraud and false and misleading statements apply to him, that he's entitled to that.
And as Adam, my partner, has said, this has been a long journey for Melba Sherman. This is not easy for her to be up and down on the 10:32 witness stand. It's taken courage for her to really come here and stand up and do what she thinks is right. This is really about justice and any compromise for justice, we are really here, you have to think, we are here for -- we have been here a long time and we have been fighting this for a long time before we came here, and we are seeking 100 percent justice. If you compromise the verdict and give partial justice, that's partial injustice and that would not be right. 10:33
We are not here for sympathy, we are here for accountability. We have accepted accountability on behalf of John Sherman. We are here for them to be held accountable. They cannot be excused. You cannot pat them on the back and
say it's okay, it's a misunderstanding, you really didn't know, your scientists didn't know. We know this is not true. This was not a misunderstanding.
If you don't believe me, if you don't believe the evidence, you have to look at the law.
This is a deliberate intentional act that's been proven. They cannot stand up here and now say this was some mistake. It was not a mistake.
They could have stopped any time they wanted. 10: They could have stopped in the 60's, the 70's, the 80's. They didn't have to carry this on for 50 years and just affect lives the way they did.
That is not acceptable in any civilized society that I can think of.
So they did it on purpose, they are conspirators. You know, what you do today, part of the reason for punitive damages is to punish.
You don't just slap somebody on the wrist and say, hey, it's okay you did what you did, it's okay 10:34 that you didn't apologize, it's okay that you didn't say you are sorry, it's okay that you are still playing word games, we are just going to let you go and give you a free pass, but the other reason is to deter. They were in a conspiracy
with all the other tobacco companies. The other tobacco companies are watching, they are listening to what you do, too. You have to let them know that -MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: This conduct is not acceptable.
So that's part of your duty, part of your obligation as jurors, to award punitive damages, 10:3 not only to punish, but to deter other corporations, other tobacco companies, from knowing that what they did is not acceptable, it cannot be acceptable. You cannot -MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor, as to other companies.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: You cannot look the other way.
Mrs. Parker is a fine lawyer. I respect her, she knows I respect her, she's doing the best 10:3 she can with the facts of this case, but there is nothing that can be said that can hide the truth anymore. The truth is out there. We know the truth. You've seen the evidence and you've seen the law. I know she is objecting, she's doing her
job. Do not hold that against her.
You all know what's going on, you all have seen the truth. We came here and spoke during jury selection. You didn't know what you know now. You couldn't have, it would have been impossible unless you were an expert historian.
Now you know what we are talking about, we know what we are dealing with.
This is John Sherman. We are going to be asking for compensation. You know, the law is 10:3 that if there's a loss caused by somebody else's wrongful acts and you come to court, you are entitled to compensation, fair and reasonable compensation. You are not entitled to restoration. There is no restoration. There is no way -- so many people would be so happy if the six of you could go back into the jury room right now and say we are going to restore all the harm that was done, we are going to restore all the hurt, all the pain that you caused, and we are 10:36 going to make it all go away. We are going to provide complete restoration.
We can't do that. Our system ofjustice does not provide for that. It's impossible. It would be a miracle. If you could go back in that
room and wave some magic wand and say John Sherm is going to walk through the doors right now,
Melba would get up and walk out the door and be happy.
So all we want is fair compensation for what they did and we think that, you know, money is all that these people understand. That's all they understand. That's what they did. They did this for money, that's all they understand. To criticize anybody for bringing a lawsuit to ask 10:3 for money damages, because that's what our law provides, is asking you to disregard the law.
And I thought long and hard about what to ask for in terms of fair compensation because, of course, I don't want to ask for too much, I don't want to offend, and I don't want to ask for too little; I don't think that would be right, either.
So you all have to have in your minds what you think is fair.
This has been 13 years her husband would 10 have lived. You know, every day you have with somebody you love is important and you cherish every day. This is 13 years they took from them,
13 years they would have lived together. That's a lone time; that's 20 percent of his life.
So, for that significant loss, the amount of money amount of money that I would suggest to you as a guide for fair compensation for what they did, I would suggest the sum of -- this is clearly a significant case, it's a significant loss. I would suggest the sum of 5 to $10 million is fair compensation. You may think that's too little, you may think that's too much.
Again, like I told you in phase one, I will respect Melba Sherman will respect, my partners will respect whatever you do. Whatever you do, we will -- if you say, hey, you know what, Gary, you asked for too much money, we will respect that. If you say you asked for too little money, they will respect that. It's your decision. That's just a guide of what I think these type of cases warrant for fair compensation for the loss that they caused.
Now, I want to talk about punitive damages, punishment, because that's what punitive damages. It's different than compensation. You can't say, well, we gave her this to compensate her, so we are not going to give her punitive damages. It's separate; you have to consider them separately.
10:38
10:
Punitive damages is to punish and to deter and, you know, the evidence is that this is really -- if you could think of something worse than this; I cannot. This is the worst of the worst. They were motivated by greed. They did a risk cost analysis as to what was best for their company and all along they knew people were dying, they knew people were believing them. They have seen the polls, they have all their memos about doubt, doubt, doubt.	10:39
You know, Ms. Parker said, well, these were all the proposals, they were never implemented, you can't find the policy that was implemented that say doubt. We found the policy that was implemented, we have seen the polls, the newspaper articles. We have seen their public statements. We know that that's what they did.
They did it on purpose.
They made an analysis of their company, what was best for their company, and they said we 10:3 are going to go out there and we are going to lie, we know people are dying and we are going to give them crutches, these addicts, so they keep smoking and we are going to give them hope that we are going to remove the dangerous ingredients, and all
the time, in their back memos in the back rooms.
They knew that -- can I see Exhibit 5 -and this is from 1962. All along they knew that amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarettes is overwhelming. That is not hard to understand, what they thought. Mr. Figlar cannot come in here and say to you that they really didn't know and, oh, we really don't know what that means.
You know, they knew the amount of evidence 10:4 is overwhelming means it's overwhelming. They didn't go on TV to say that, that's not what they were saying, but this is something they knew all along, this is not something they didn't know about and all the time -- and we showed you so many different clips. I'm going to show you a couple. This is 283. They were laughing and smiling about it for the public saying the opposite.
(Whereupon, the following video was	10:40
played:)
"We want to be a detective just as much as the Surgeon General and we'll cooperate in every way.
Well, are you saying then, sir, that there
is something toxic about tobacco which are removable by filter?
Well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the, AMA through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. If they are found, they will be removed, but, at this point, we do not know."	10:4
MR. PAIGE: And he's speaking in that video on behalf of the entire tobacco industry.
That was role, his job, he was the head of the Tobacco Merchants Association that RJR was a member of. They didn't come forward and say Mr. Cullman, don't do that. You know, if you are in business with somebody and your partner says something like that, you know, usually you fire them or you say, hey, what are you doing, are you mad?	10:41
But they allowed that to go on. In fact, they knew, they knew back then that their statements they were making were false and they suspected one day they would get caught. This is Exhibit 122, which I think is -- it shows, this is
really why one of the main reasons we are here.
It says here that their position is subject to the charge and may one day be subject to the finding that we now have. So they knew what they were saying about making false.
MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: So they knew in 1968, after Mr. Cullman went on TV, after the Surgeon General report, all their statements they made, they knew 10: one day we would be here because they were making false and misleading statements and it was subject to that finding. So, for Mr. Figlar to get up here and say you are misunderstanding what they meant, they were really being honest, they were not misleading, they were not making false statements; they were and that's what the law is, so you have to follow the law. They knew exactly what they were doing.
Real quick, C17. These are the Tobacco 10:42 and Health Reports that were coming out where they were sending to three or 400,000 doctors trying to manipulate the science saying it wasn't proven, even though the reports say that it was.
These were the white papers they were
sending to all the politicians, community leaders, schoolteachers, telling them it's not proven, nobody know, not proven. You know, there's no mincing of words here, it's clear what was going on. I mean, for Mr. Figlar -- Dr. Figlar to say otherwise, look you in eyes and say otherwise, is no different than the Waxman hearings, no different than what Dr. Sreenivasan did, it's just their attempt to try to somehow walk out the door and escape responsibility for what they did. 10:43
The next one, which is 120, which is the white papers, it's showing you you cannot confuse, you can't be confused with what Dr. Figlar said yesterday. This is what they were saying about the Surgeon General report, that there's flaws in the methods, cast doubts on the accuracy, there's other factors, more research is needed, impediment to the advancement of knowledge. They were very clear that they were telling people smoking does not cause lung cancer. They were doing for a 10:4 reason, to make money, and all along they knew people like John Sherman were dying.
They ruined -- this was the love of her life and they deliberately went out and lied and ruined this man's life. There's nothing worse
than that. There's nothing that I can think of in my mind that can be worse than what they did.
One of the things for punitive damages, you have to prove reliance. Mr. Sherman -- I apologize. Mr. Sherman is not here to tell you what he relied upon, so you have to draw reasonable inferences from the evidence.
Here is the one board that you've seen many times. It's Exhibit 165. It's in evidence.
Where they knew, they knew that smokers were 10: switching to filters and they knew right there that filters were no safer and they knew people were relying upon their representation that they were. They said he had abandoned the regular, the non-filtered cigarettes on the ground it reduced the risk to health, however he was getting more -actually more tar and nicotine.
So they knew that all along and the polls showed them that even before that. So it's clear that Mr. Sherman relied upon their	10:45
misrepresentations and their lies, and we go from know from the polls, other polls in evidence. The majority, as I told you -- I can't believe this is the day before yesterday -- that at all times there is roughly 25 million Americans who were
believing that.
So the reasonable inference is that he was an ordinary person, he was like everybody else, their whole plan of doubt and confusion worked.
They got him, you know, they got him, and he was a valued customer as long as he was buying their cigarettes.
So, you know, again and I don't want to repeat myself. I have notes and I'm kind of going all over the place. This is not some	10:45
misunderstanding. We are bearing responsibility, as Adam told you, we have always said that. We have always said that any smoker who I represent, we understand that argument and, likewise, it would be nice if the cigarette companies, R.J.
Reynolds, would admit to what they did, the wrongful acts. Not just say we are sorry for your loss, say we are sorry because we caused your loss. We are sorry because we participated in death and pain that we have caused, but they won't 10: do that. They won't do that.
And, again, I told you it's important because others are watching, other cigarette companies are watching, I want to show you the Waxman hearings one more time because this is all
of them together of what they -- the lengths that they will go to and the conduct that is typical that cannot be excusable.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
"Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you, first I'd like to just go down the row, whether each you believe that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on 10: it and, yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
Mr. Johnston.
Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of the addiction. There is no -We will take that as a no. Again, time is short. If you could -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive and we just 10: would like to have this for the record.
I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
I believe nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive."
MR. PAIGE: So they were all in on it.
They need to be deterred; the other companies need to know that are watching.
MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: That this is not to be tolerated, that you will punish this company for 10:4 what they did to the Sherman family and that that's what we are going to do.
I want to show you again, I skipped over it, to make no mistake about it they weren't mincing words. I want to show you the Horrigan tape again from 1984 when Dr. Figlar was telling you he didn't really mean what he said, and I think it's clear that they knew exactly what they were saying.
(Whereupon, the following video was	10:48
played:)
"Early this week the R.J. Reynolds took out this ad in a number of major newspapers and magazines calling for an open debate about smoking. In brief, the ad contends that medical
studies which show that cigarette smoking causes disease are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary.
Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer, has not been causally established.
Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
Despite all of the research to date, there 10:48 has been no causal link established.
No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that, while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces."
MR. PAIGE: Now, that was 30 years after 10:4 the Frank Statement and it was 22 years after their own internal documents acknowledge that the evidence is overwhelming. Two decades, more than two decades later, that is the position that they are advocating to the public and to their
customers.
And you cannot look somebody like that in the eyes and say we condone this behavior, we accept this behavior, we feel that that behavior is okay with us, we don't have a problem with it.
It just wouldn't be just, wouldn't be right.
So, I just want to -- I have a couple more things to say, then I will sit down, I promise.
When you are awarding punitives damages in this case, I want you to remember they were forced 10:5 to turn over their documents. That was not a voluntary act of theirs. They were forced to admit that nicotine is addictive. They were forced to admit these findings in court here today; that was not a voluntary admission. They are not above the law. They are not above the law. They will not even admit that Mr. Sherman, a four pack a day smoker, who smoked on oxygen, who smoked in hospice, was addicted to nicotine.
They will take the positions to the 10:50 extreme to escape any accountability, any responsibility, despite the fact that even as far back as -- look, they don't need to say it, they need to be held accountable and that's the right to do, but back in 1953, they said we will
accept responsibility except when we have to come to court and justice needs to be served, then they don't want to be held accountable.
They wouldn't admit he was a class member.
They wouldn't say they were sorry. They never said they were sorry. And the bottom line is, as Adam said, you know, they are liars. They are liars. It was the worst type of lies, the worst type of deceit. This is not -- we need to teach people in our society, our children, anybody, that 10: this type of behavior is okay. It is not okay.
In fact, this is what we need to teach children and others that this is wrong, this is not acceptable, and to feel otherwise or to think otherwise, as R.J. Reynolds does, all that means is that they want to be excused for their conduct.
They do not want to be held responsible and they think they are above the law, and they are not above the law. They are not.
So, in awarding an amount for punitive 10:51 damages, I submit to you you consider the conduct, you consider the source, and you have to consider an amount that will punish them, okay. You can't give them a small, an insignificant punishment, because that does nothing. It doesn't punish
anybody. It's like your child does something wrong, you put them in time-out for ten seconds; they are just going to do it again. So this is the worst of the worst and they need to be punished significantly for it.
Now there are limits on what I can ask you for under the law. I cannot ask you for what I want in punitive damages; in compensatory damages,
I did ask for the amount that I thought was fair under those circumstances. The punitive damages, 10:5 to punish a company like this, I would like to be able to say, you know, this should be $100 million, $200 million, punish them, let them know this is wrong. You punish them and they will know by this punishment they will not do this again and others watching will know as well, but that would not comply with the law. I can't do that.
So the law on this is really basically the amount of punitive damages in Florida should not exceed three times compensatory damages, okay. So 10: the punitive damages, if the compensatory damages are 10 million, the punitive damages really cannot exceed $30 million. And if the compensatory damages are 5 million, the punitive damages cannot exceed 15 million. The punitive damages are to
punish, separate and apart from compensatory damages, cannot exceed three times under our law.
I still think if you award the maximum amount of punitive damages, the maximum punishment that you are allowed under the law, that they will at least begin to get the message, they will begin to know that this will not be tolerated and it will not -- it will deter them from doing anything like this again.
THE CLERK: Two minutes, counsel.	10:53
MR. PAIGE: So I'm done here.
When Mrs. Parker gets up here in a minute, and she's a fine lawyer, as I've said, and I mean that, she starts blaming Mr. Sherman and Mrs.
Sherman, you know, I do feel that -- I do agree with my partner, Adam Trop, that it is something that R.J. Reynolds should be ashamed of, trying to blame Mrs. Sherman, and that's -- that was wrong, but to blame Mr. Sherman, they can do that, that's fine, but they have no problem blaming the smoker, 10: they have no problem blaming Mr. Sherman, they have no problem blaming Mrs. Sherman, they have no problem blaming the two cigarettes by the pond, they have no problem blaming the Marvel cigarettes that his father smoked, but they will not under
any circumstances, I don't know why, but they will not accept responsibility. They just won't do it, they won't do it.
I just want you to remember talking about all the choices again that Mr. Sherman did, all the horrible things he did. They cannot bring it within themselves to admit, despite the findings, despite the evidence that you saw, they cannot admit the obvious.
Okay. That's all I have. I would say 10:55 that I do, and on behalf of my partners and Melba, we so much appreciate your time. I know RJR does as well.
You do really have so much power today. I know you don't take it lightly. This is so important what you are going to do and we ask, through your verdict, a fair compensation, fair punitive damages, that you let this corporation know, you let Ms. Parker and her client know, that this conduct, this behavior that has gone on for 10:5 five decades, is not acceptable in our society, it's not acceptable to you as six human beings in our society, and I thank you so much for your time.



MR. PAIGE: May it please the Court.
This is my opportunity for a brief response, so I'll try not to speak too fast for the court reporter, but I'll do my best.
In essence, listening to Ms. Parker, and I 12:23 can respond to almost everything she said. I mean, we have had this debate over and over again and one thing that Alex said the other day that was right, that you could have taken a tape recorder the other day and taped her closing statement, it was the same. It's just about blaming Mr. Sherman, blaming the smoker, and that's her position, but, really, what she's asking you to do, what she really -- what she's asking you to do, it's clear, if you know the law, 12:^ is she's asking you to disregard the law because the law is you've already found that his addiction caused his death. He smoked Lucky Strike cigarettes and Winston cigarettes. That's the truth, and the law is they are strictly liable.
That means they are responsible for placing cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. That's the law of the case. We don't have to debate that issue with them. We don't have to do that. That's the law. She's asking for you to nullify that law and disregard it and you cannot do that. You can't do that.
The verdict form says were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes that they placed on the market a legal cause of his death. The legal cause, you remember it from the first phase, it doesn't have to be the only cause, one of the causes. She's asking you right now to disregard the law. She keeps saying over and over again it's a legal product, it's a legal product.
Well, just because it's legal doesn't make it right. Just because it's legal doesn't mean they can lie, and just because it's legal doesn't mean that 48 states in the U.S. government shouldn't sue them for what they did.
They know that it's legal and how we got here with all their lies and manipulations, the thing with the nicotine is, it's funny, they show you the low nicotine levels and it's undisputed,
it's not even in dispute, the whole thing with the pH levels get up to 6.5, there's a document in evidence, number 28, and all they do is they add ammonia, they add ingredients to the nicotine and they get the nicotine, even though they are required to have low levels, they get the pH level up to 6.5. That's what gets the nicotine to the brain faster. That's what gets people wanting the nicotine. That's what gets Mr. Sherman wanting 600 to 800 hits of nicotine on his brain every 12:26 day.
And they know, this is from the 70's, they are talking about enhancing the roll of pH in selling cigarettes and going to be of interest to you, and they say they are talking about ways to exploit nicotine satisfaction. This shouldn't even be a dispute that they manipulate the nicotine, they add ammonia to the cigarettes, they get the pH levels higher, and that gets the nicotine to the brain quicker, people smoke more 12: cigarettes, and they make more money. And that's why one of the reasons why their product is defective and unreasonably dangerous and it's not in dispute.
They cannot stand up -- well, they can,
she did it, she stood up here and said disregard the law, don't pay attention to the law, nullify -MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: That's a bit argumentative,
sir.
MR. PAIGE: I'm sorry, your Honor.
But that's the law that has to be followed.
So he smoked their defective cigarettes. 12:27 He did it from at least 1953. That's the other thing she keeps saying, they can't prove he saw these advertisements, and they can't prove -- I wrote it down here -- they can't prove that he saw the Frank Statement and they can't prove what he smoked. You know, the only one that can prove it is the person they killed, John Sherman. We can't prove it because he's not here.
You have to make reasonable inferences.
You saw the evidence. He didn't live in a hole. 12:2 Everybody saw the Frank Statement. Everybody saw the advertisements. Everybody saw what was going on. He watched TV, he read the papers and, you know, they want you to believe that the only things he saw was the fact that it was bad for him
and that it wasn't good for him.
There was a controversy going on, that's the whole point. You have people who are addicted to nicotine. You have people who are addicted to nicotine and the best thing to do for those people is create doubt, confusion, and tell them it's not bad for you and they did this for years.
She keeps saying they didn't implement the policy; we must have been in different courtrooms.
They did this and this was successful. Now 12:28 there's 18 percent of people smoke, used to be 50,
60 percent of the doctors smoked, and the reason so little people smoke is people know now. The controversy is over, and I don't know who they are getting to smoke now, how they are doing it, but very little people are smoking.
And, back then, they were using different methods getting people to smoke. People were addicted, you know, of course he said he liked it.
We spoke about it. You know, Dr. Sreenivasan said 12: heroin addicts will say they like it, cocaine addicts will say they like it, that's part of being addicted.
We had this debate the other day; they lost. They want to have the debate again. They
have all these documents in evidence about nicotine. I'll show them to you. I apologize for wasting your time. They talk about the need for nicotine happily from the tobacco industry. We have to downplay the role of nicotine to convince people to smoke. Nicotine satisfaction is the desire. We are in the nicotine business. Most of our customers would like to stop if they could.
You know, for Mr. Sherman to say I like it, leave me alone, you know, nobody likes waking 12: up in the middle of the night -- I apologize for doing this again -- to have to get nicotine, nobody likes to smoking on oxygen, nobody likes smoking three to four packs a day, you know, most people would like to quit, anybody who quits, you know, that's the best thing they ever did in their life. Hopefully, they don't relapse. You know, there's high relapse rates of 75 percent. Your brain does not change and it's a tough addiction to quit.	12:29
The Surgeon General of the United States of America, who their Web site says you should follow their advice, says it's as addictive as cocaine and heroin and it's not a choice, it's not free will, it's in evidence. It's all these
books, they say it's not a free choice.
So what I was going to say is for the first 11 years when he smoked, Adam said this before, you have to make reasonable inferences on the evidence. Nobody will dispute what I'm saying right now. You have three choices of what he smoked between 1944 and 1953, it's either Lucky Strikes, Marvel is what his father smoked, or the hand-rolled cigarettes. That's it. Those are the only inferences that you can make, okay.	12:31
And we know reasonable inference is that it was not Marvels and it was not these hand-rolled cigarettes. I mean, he was smoking three packs of Lucky Strikes when he met his wife, his brother smoked Lucky Strikes, and if they want to put all their eggs in one basket right now, which she said, is that he had lung cancer by 1953 because Dr. Strauss said he had 36 pack years. So if that's true, he really had lung cancer, it was dormant for 40 years according to her, and he 12: really couldn't quit because I guess somebody said at one point he couldn't quit, so, therefore, the whole case is over between 1944 and 1953, if you believe what Ms. Parker said, then they bear 100 percent responsibility because he couldn't have
done anything wrong then, he was clearly smoking Lucky Strikes.
So I can take a crazy position like try to sell it to you and I would never do that. I wouldn't do it because it wouldn't be credible.
He started smoking most likely their product.
They marketed the product. You know, he saw it on TV. He didn't live in a hole. He got addicted to their product. There's no dispute that their product killed him. There's no dispute that their 12:31 product is defective and, you know, she talked about things being proud, they are proud of their conduct, she said, and it's a tragedy what we would ask for compensate. They are proud.
It's a tragedy that we have to be here asking you to please follow the law because they don't want you to follow the law. The only tragedy in this courtroom is the fact that they lied for decades, lied to make money, knowing millions of people were dying, and then to stand 12:3 up here and say it's a tragedy that Mrs. Sherman has the courage to come to court and ask you to award fair compensation and follow the law.
That's a real tragedy.
It's a tragedy to them when people want to
have their rights, just like the federal government and 48 states, they have a right to come to court and make sure that their rights -MS. PARKER: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
THE CLERK: Two minutes.
MR. PAIGE: Mrs. Sherman has a right to be here. That's not a tragedy. That's not a tragedy for her to be here asking you to follow the law.
The only thing I want to say is the 12:32 entitlement to punitive damages, it is an important issue. It's one of the important issues in this case. There's many important issues and that's one of them. And it's true, we have to prove that the conduct was reckless, that was indifferent to the rights of Mr. Sherman. There is no more of a reckless, evil, wrong conduct in what they did for 50 years.
The evidence is in, you can look through all the documents. You'll see what they knew. 12:: You'll see about all their proposals that Mrs.
Parker suggests to you that they never implemented, they never implemented these doubt proposals, it's a figment of your imagination.
According to Ms. Parker and Dr. Figlar, they never
implemented these.
All the times they were telling people that cigarettes didn't cause lung cancer, it was a big misunderstanding. If you believe that, then punitive damages are not warranted, but if you believe it wasn't a misunderstanding, and they did implement those policies, then that is a reckless behavior and that is a gross indifference for the rights and lives of millions of people and John Sherman, and for what they did to the Sherman 12:3 family, they need to be punished and that would deter them and the other cigarette companies from doing this again.
In terms of the amount that we asked for,
I will just submit to you that she did not -- I know that she doesn't want you to give any money to the Sherman family. I know that. You know that. And, obviously, the amount that we suggested, if she thought it was unfair asking for a range, if she thought that was unfair, she 12:34 certainly should have said something.
I submit to you, again, the amount that we have asked for, we have tried to present both sides of the case to you, we have tried to be fair and ask for a fair amount. And we just ask
respectfully that you do what we ask you to do and award fair compensation and punitives damages for this conduct.
Thank you.
