MS. PARKER: Counsel and good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MS. PARKER: Well, this is the last time I'm going to have an opportunity to talk to you and it is just a real privilege for me to be here today, having an occasion to get to talk about you.
I was thinking this morning how to start and what to say and, of course, the first thing is another thank you. I know you've heard that from 11: everybody, but we really all mean it. And the thank you is from everybody at our table as well,
John Walker and Gordon James and John Yarber and Alicia Morse sitting back there. Thank you very much for your time.
Usually when you are having discussions with people, it's a discussion; I'll be talking, you'll be talking, we can go back and forth, but that's not how this works. I'm going to be doing all the talking. I hope that I cover everything that I think you all need to hear and to consider when you go back for your deliberations.
Let me start by saying we all know what your verdict was in the first phase and we understand that and we accept that, but that was a 11:1 different issue than what you are going to have to decide in this part of the case. In this part of the case, while you are going to still rely on a lot of that evidence you heard before, so we didn't repeat all of that, you've got a whole different set of questions to decide.
The first time you only had one question and this time it's going to be a much longer verdict form. There are a lot of different things I'm going to try to cover, all right. Again, 11:11 thank you for your time and service as jurors here.
Now, some of the things that I'm going to talk about is what caused Mr. Sherman's addiction that you all found, what it means to be addicted.
Now what does that mean, does that mean that you can't quit, and did Mr. Sherman rely. The legal test that Judge Streitfeld is going to tell you is it has to be reasonable. Okay. Did Mr. Sherman reasonably rely on any of this stuff that you all have heard this morning from Mr. Paige and from Mr. Trop, but I've been saying this, you know, throughout the trial. I started in the opening, this case is only about Mr. Sherman. It's not a cause, it's not a crusade, it's not a chance for 11:12 you to vote on how you feel about smoking, and that's because our society has already done that.
Our society is fully aware of the health risk of smoking. It's already decided that cigarettes are a legal product and are available for adults who choose to smoke. And Congress has decided that adults can make decisions to use risky products, not just cigarettes, but as adults, you can drink alcohol, you can ride in a convertible, you can ride a motorcycle without a helmet. There are all 11: sorts of things that you can do that are risky, but they are still legal.
And, again, this morning, the Plaintiffs have spent almost all of their time talking about cigarettes in general and talking about all these
documents and things in general, but they haven't tied them to Mr. Sherman, okay, and that's going to be something that, in the instructions that you get from the Court, you are going to have to find that there's a tie to Mr. Sherman. I'm going to talk about that this morning.
And at the end of the day, end of my time, when I go over all this evidence, I'm going to ask you to return a verdict in favor of Reynolds on these issues that you are being asked to decide 11:13 under the law that Judge Streitfeld is going to give to you. That's all you are going to be asked to decide here, some specific questions under the law.
Now, some of the things I want to go over in a little bit more detail is what the evidence is. Now, what I say is not evidence, what Mrs. Sherman's lawyers say is not evidence, but what has the evidence been about who got Mr. Sherman addicted, okay, and what has the evidence been 11:1 about whether anything Reynolds did or didn't do could have affected Mr. Sherman's choice to smoke when nothing else affected his choice to smoke.
And you are going to see that there is absolutely no evidence that Mr. Sherman relied on
any of those ads, any of those statements; they are just not tied to Mr. Sherman. Mr. Sherman was aware of the health risk of smoking. That's a fact. He was aware of it at least in 1953 when he started smoking Reynolds products and the evidence is that he started smoking Reynolds products because that's when mother-in-law Ethel started telling him he ought to quit. Then, in 1955, when his father had a heart attack, and going forward to all those times that Mrs. Sherman told him he 11: ought to quit because of the health risk of smoking. That's a fact, Mr. Sherman knew there were health risks to smoking.
Here's another fact and that is that Mr. Sherman enjoyed smoking. He did. Everybody said that. Mrs. Sherman said that he enjoyed smoking. And we all know that cigarette companies have been under a lot of criticism, particularly the last few years, and you are not going to find anything positive in the press or in stop smoking 11: groups about cigarette companies, but I bet that there's a lot that you have never heard about all the positive things that Reynolds has done to try to reduce the health risk of smoking until this trial.
Now, Reynolds has reduced the nicotine levels by 60 percent in those cigarettes and that's a fact, that's not controverted, there's no evidence to the contrary. Reynolds has done some very positive things trying to make a safer cigarette, even though everybody knows there is no such thing as a safe cigarette, but Reynolds has tried to reduce the risk over the years. Has done all that work and that's not controverted. No one came to court and said oh, no, nobody did that, 11:1 it's really not true. It is true and we have all of those numbers to back that up that we showed you.
But, again, what you are going to be asked to decide in this case is not a referendum on the whole tobacco industry, it's not a referendum on Reynolds, it's about whether Reynolds' conduct did something to Mr. Sherman. It has to be something more than just selling cigarettes. You are going to have to find that Reynolds did something that 11:1 affected Mr. Sherman besides just selling cigarettes because that's legal.
Now, same as in the first phase that you all decided, the Plaintiff here has the burden of proof and Judge Streitfeld is going to give you
those instructions before you go back and deliberate. And you heard this morning Mr. Paige and Mr. Trop talk about these findings and they put that board up, but there's a lot more to it than that. Those findings don't decide all the questions that are on your verdict form; you still have to decide those. That's why they are there for you to decide, because they are still open, and the Plaintiff has to prove, for every one of those questions, that Reynolds' conduct is a legal 11:1 cause, that's the term, a legal cause of Mr.
Sherman's death.
They have to prove that Reynolds did something wrong to Mr. Sherman that caused him to develop lung cancer and to die and, again, it has to be something more than just selling cigarettes.
And if the Plaintiff cannot establish that initial threshold issue, that Reynolds' conduct, our conduct, did something to harm Mr. Sherman, then that's the end of the deliberations because every 11:1 one of those questions, every one of them requires legal cause. You'll see that when you go through them. Every claim requires a connection or a tie between Mr. Sherman and Reynolds' conduct, and that's going to be in the instructions that you
are going to get from his Honor.
Something else I need to talk to you about, one of the instructions that you are going to get from Judge Streitfeld is going to be that as jurors, it's part of your duty to decide the credibility of the witnesses. And nobody likes to ask someone else to determine credibility of whether you believe somebody's testimony, it's just against our nature, but that's something that you all are duty bound to do when you took your 11: oath and under the instructions that you are going to get. Everything in this case depends on Mrs. Sherman's testimony, and it's going to be up to you to decide what the truth is.
Let's pull up that jury charge. I won't read it now; you'll have it back there, Judge Streitfeld will read it to you, but after all the scientific evidence, all the documents, all the medical issues, all the technical issues, the case ultimately comes down to that because you are 11:2 going to have to decide why Mr. Sherman smokes, when he tried to stop, whether his efforts were sincere, whether they were serious, whether Mr. Sherman ever saw any statements from Reynolds, whether Mr. Sherman ever relied on anything from
Reynolds, whether anything Reynolds could have said would have made difference to him.
You are going to have to make -- that's your job, you'll have to make those decisions, and I submit to you that, after you hear all the arguments and you all are back there deliberating, that it would really be a tragedy here to award money damages to Mrs. Sherman when -- there, again, it's up for you all to decide, but when there has been a question about exaggeration of 11: what the facts were.
Again, that's going to be you all's job to decide and you'll have to decide if Mr. Sherman's death had anything to do with Reynolds' conduct.
And, again, I submit to you that it would be a tragedy for you to award money damages in those circumstances because Reynolds' conduct, all this you heard about, just doesn't have anything to do with Mr. Sherman. Doesn't have anything to do with Mr. Sherman.	11:21
Now, anything, anything that you find Mr. Sherman actually saw and actually relied upon and that that reliance was reasonable, that's part of the test, that's fair game. That's absolutely fair game. We want you to consider that, but
there's nothing like that. What is not fair game is trying to get you all riled up, get you all angry, get you mad at us about things that are not connected to Mr. Sherman. So I'm going to ask you, when you all are back deliberating, if you all are looking at documents where somebody says, wait a minute, I heard this, Mr. Paige said that or Mr. Trop said that, ask yourself is that something that was tied to Mr. Sherman and, if it was, it's fair game and you all can consider it 11:22 and see if it was reasonable for him to rely on, but if it's not, I'd submit to you that that's not fair game. That's just not what we are here about; we are only here about Mr. Sherman.
Who was responsible for Mr. Sherman's addiction. Obviously, you all found he was addicted, but let's go from there. And everything I'm going to talk about with respect to this is from the Plaintiffs witnesses, okay? So you all have decided you are accepting the Plaintiffs 11:23 version about addiction, so I'm telling you what the evidence is under what they have said. All right.
First of all, Mr. Sherman, this is undisputed, that means nobody has contested this,
Mr. Sherman was addicted before the evidence shows he started smoking Reynolds cigarettes. That is a fact. Here's the smoking history. Those first years, those first 11 years, there is no evidence that it was Reynolds smoking.
MR. PAIGE: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: When Mr. and Mrs. Sherman met in 1953, he was already smoking three to four packs per day. Here's what she said.	11:24
"When you met John in 1953, was he smoking?
Yes.
And approximately how much was he smoking per day?
Three, four packs."
And Mrs. Sherman has said she didn't know Mr. Sherman, she didn't know him until she met him in 1953, so she has no firsthand personal knowledge of what he was smoking before then. 11:
And you also heard the video testimony of Mr. Sherman's brother, Robert, and the brother Robert also testified that he, he the brother, does not know what John Sherman smoked. Remember, they both went to the Navy, were separated, went
at different times. He said -- you heard that, and it's in evidence, the brother does not know what John Sherman was smoking. So the only evidence that we have starts in 1953 when Mr. and Mrs. Sherman met.
Now, we have the testimony about -- from his brother about how they started smoking with the roll-your-own cigarettes and his father smoked the Marvel cigarettes. You all have heard that many, many times. What Mr. Sherman's brother 11: smoked is just not relevant. I mean, it doesn't matter what his brother smoked, what matters is what John Sherman smoked.
And they did not start smoking because of the advertising. Again, that's a fact.
Mr. Sherman did not start smoking because of the advertisements. He started smoking for the same reason that a lot of people start smoking; he and his brother wanted to be grown-ups and wanted to be like their father. If the father was smoking 11:26 roll-your-own cigarettes and that's how they got started, there's nothing about ads.
And let me pull up the testimony of the Plaintiff's witness, Dr. Glassman, and he testified that Mr. Sherman was already addicted
before they met in 1953. And this initial smoking is also important because and, again, under the Plaintiffs own witnesses, that initial smoking which caused his addiction is what set in motion his lung cancer. Remember Dr. Strauss, who is the Plaintiff's witness, who was the doctor that you heard about again this morning, he was the oncologist, and, again, I'm telling you this evidence under the Plaintiffs case. Here's what Dr. Strauss said.	11:27
He said his opinion was that his addiction to nicotine is what caused his significant smoking which led to his death. In other words,
Mr. Sherman was addicted before he met Mrs.
Sherman and, once he became addicted, according to the Plaintiff's theory, that's what caused his smoking and that's what caused his death. That's what set in motion the lung cancer. So how can Reynolds be responsible for Mr. Sherman's addiction when he was already addicted before 11: 1953?
Also -- and, again, going back to this issue about the legal cause, remember the Plaintiffs have told you every time they argue to you, they said four packs a day, four packs a day,
four packs a day, and they showed you all the medical records, and I guess we can -- four packs per day, all right? So there were 11 years from 1942 to 1953. So 11 years times four packs a day is 44 pack years, but this is what Dr. Strauss, again their own expert said in court; this is his testimony. That the average person who developed lung cancer had 35 pack years. So before Reynolds even came on the scene in 1953, Mr. Sherman already had more exposure to cause lung cancer 11:2 according to the Plaintiff's own expert.
And this smoking before 1953 is also important because of the Plaintiff's allegation about conspiracy, and the word conspiracy was used this morning, it was on one of the boards that they showed you, but, again, their expert, I'm doing all of this under what they have said, their expert Dr. Proctor, remember Dr. Proctor said this conspiracy started in December 1953. That was that meeting at The Plaza Hotel. He said all the 11:29 cigarette companies came together, but Mr. Sherman was already addicted by that time, according to the Plaintiffs own expert. So the conspiracy could not have caused his addiction that led to his death because Mr. Sherman was already addicted
before this meeting that started the conspiracy ever took place.
Now, I mentioned this yesterday morning when I talked to you during my opening statement for this part of it, but what the Plaintiff really is trying to do, they are trying to have it both ways here with respect to addiction. They have argued all throughout phase one that Mr. Sherman couldn't stop smoking. They said he was addicted and he couldn't stop. Mrs. Sherman said that 11:3 repeatedly. So if that is true, then there's nothing that Reynolds could have done that would have made any difference because he was already addicted when he met -- when Mr. and Mrs. Sherman met in 1953.
And something else that you are going to need to consider. I submit to you that you'll need to consider when you go back and deliberate is what it means to be addicted. Does it mean you can't quit or does it mean that just because you 11:3' are addicted you can still quit? And here's what the Plaintiffs expert said about that and, again, this is Dr. Glassman.
"Being addicted to a cigarette doesn't mean you can't quit?
No.
And, so, clearly addicted people can stop smoking? Yes.
And a person has to make a commitment to stopping smoking, smoking cessation, if they are to go stop, right?
If they don't try, it's not likely they will stop."
Then this morning you heard Mrs. Sherman's lawyer say that Mr. Sherman could have tried 11: harder. So now they are saying, even though he was addicted, he could quit. Again, they are trying to have it both ways. There's been absolutely no evidence here and, again, what's important is what you heard from the witness stand. The evidence not what the lawyers have said, but there's been no evidence that Reynolds ever did anything to Winston cigarettes, the cigarettes that Mr. Sherman smoked, to make them for addictive or more dangerous. There is no 11:3! evidence of that at all because that didn't happen.
Again, what the lawyers say is not evidence. There's no evidence in this case that Reynolds did anything to those Winston cigarettes
to make them more addictive or more dangerous. Nicotine is in a tobacco plant when it comes out of the ground, okay, and Reynolds didn't do anything to those cigarettes to make them anymore addictive.
And Dr. Proctor, even though he was asked, again this is the Plaintiff's witness, even he was asked all those questions about -- from Mr. Paige about, oh, nicotine manipulation and they added ammonia and pH, all of that, we still hear about 11: it, on and on and on. This is what their witness said. He said he could not support those claims for Winstons. This is what that testimony is.
"You have no evidence of the smoke pH of Mr. Sherman's cigarettes ever exceeded 6.5."
That's the Surgeon General's level.
He says, "I haven't looked at it for Winstons." Haven't even looked at it for Mr. Sherman's cigarettes.
And they never -- Dr. Figlar came and 11:33 testified twice, Jim Figlar from Reynolds, came and testified in the first phase, came and testified again yesterday. They never even raised with him, they never even asked him, well, is there anything that Reynolds should have done
differently to those Winston cigarettes. Didn't even ask him that.
Well, you know, you went over -- why didn't they say, well, you went over all these changes that reduced the nicotine that improved the cigarettes while trying to make them safer, why didn't you do this, or that, or why didn't you do something else. They didn't even ask those questions because there is no evidence of that.
There's no evidence at all that Reynolds did 11:34 anything to make the cigarettes that are legal more addictive or more harmful than cigarettes are.
Now one of the questions on the verdict form that we have been talking about is this issue of apportionment of fault and that is -- the only question there is who bears responsibility for the cause of Mr. Sherman's lung cancer, and we submit that Mr. Sherman bears responsibility for his choices and for his decision not to quit and for 11:34 his efforts not to seriously try. Mr. Sherman wanted to smoke and you all ought to have a good idea about the kind of person he is by now.
You've heard from all the family members, the friends that we brought, again that we brought
to trial, you heard the questions that -- the testimony, the questions asked of Mrs. Sherman.
He enjoyed smoking. That's a fact. He wanted to smoke because he enjoyed it. He chose to smoke.
He chose not to quit. He chose not to get any outside help. That's not contradicted. He was aware of the risk.
Again, with respect to Mr. Sherman, that's just not contradicted. He couldn't quit. If he had tried, if he had seriously tried, which he 11:35 didn't do and it's not for us here in this lawsuit to decide whether or not you agree with his choices now all these years after he passed away.
So I submit to you that the question that are going to need to decide is not, well, you know, what should he have done or maybe he should have lived his life differently or, you know, he made the wrong choices. That was his life and he was an adult and he has the right to decide how he wants to live his life, and he knew cigarettes had 11:3 health risks, but he enjoyed smoking. He didn't want anybody to tell him what to do and, again, he was an adult. Those are the choices that he made for himself and we shouldn't second-guess those here today under the circumstances of trying to --
the Plaintiffs efforts to try to get an award of money damages.
And this is really important. Reynolds did not do anything, there's nothing at all that Reynolds did that prevented Mr. Sherman from quitting. Let me play this clip for you.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
"Is there anything that a tobacco company may have said or did that you are aware of that 11:3 prevented your husband from trying to quit smoking?
Not that I recall."
MS. PARKER: That's the evidence here.
Now, the fact that cigarettes are dangerous is not -- was not news to Mr. Sherman.
We showed you the school textbooks from Illinois where he grew up. It's not controverted. It's not -- nobody disagrees that he was told that it was bad for him starting in 1953. And, again, 11:3 Reynolds cannot be held liable merely for selling a legal product.
MR. PAIGE: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: There's a long list of what
Mr. Sherman did not do to try to quit smoking.
I'm not going to go -- I'm just going to put it up there, I'm not going to go over it again. You all
have heard this over and over, but I do want to go
over these numbers again.
Out of this 50 years of smoking, he only tried to quit a few days. And, again, when I talked to you before about part of your job is going to be deciding the credibility of the witnesses. All during phase one, you heard from 11:' the Plaintiff's experts, you heard from Mrs.
Sherman, you heard from the videotape testimony you played, she said Mr. Sherman tried to quit two or three times. Yesterday, she said he tried to quit many times. What she has said before this lawsuit is that he only tried to quit three times for a few days each.
Here's how many days he smoked, Reynolds,
15,965 days. I submit to you that the most
credible evidence is he only tried to quit nine of 11:39
those days. That's the math. Those are the
facts.
And Mr. Sherman's failure to seriously try to quit means that he bears responsibility and Mrs. Sherman understood that. She understood she
could not impose her choices, what she wanted on him. She knew it was his decision to make and that's why she went out and bought his cigarettes for his whole life because she knew that that was his decision, that was his decision as an adult to do what he wanted to do.
Mr. Sherman did not want to quit and his response was that every time that somebody said to something to him about it, it was consistent.
That is the fact, that is the evidence, that he 11:40 did not want to quit. And Mr. Sherman -- this is really important -- Mr. Sherman never, ever expressed any regret for his smoking.
Let me show you what the transcript was, and this is what I asked Mrs. Sherman. This is the evidence.
"Mr. Sherman never expressed any regret about his decision to continue smoking?
Not that I remember."
That's what he felt about his choices and 11:4 his decisions about how he wanted to live his life. And if Mr. Sherman had lived his life a different way, the outcome here would have been different because if he had quit smoking, and it's on the Surgeon General warnings on the packages,
again, this is something that's not controverted.
If you quit smoking, your health risk goes back down. Your body can repair itself. That's why when you go to the doctor, the doctor says you should quit -- if you smoke, you should quit smoking. That's why the Surgeon General's warning says quitting smoking now greatly reduces health risk. That's a fact.
If he had quit smoking, it would have reduced his health risk and, as Dr. Barsky claims, 11: the amount of that reduction depends at which point he quit smoking, and that even for heavy smokers, if he had quit smoking in 1953 and 1954 when his mother-in-law Ethel told him, would he have died from lung cancer?
Ask yourself that if Mr. Sherman had quit smoking in 1955 when his father quit smoking cold turkey when his father had a heart attack, would Mr. Sherman have still died from lung cancer.
And all those times in the 50's and the 11:42 60's and the 70's that Mrs. Sherman was telling him that smoking was bad for him and he ought to quit, if he had quit then, would he have died from lung cancer?
If he had quit when the 1964 Surgeon
General's report came out that she says he knew about, would he have gotten lung cancer?
If he had quit smoking in 1966 when those first warning labels came out, would he have gotten lung cancer?
If he had quit smoking in 1969 when the additional warnings came out, would he have gotten lung cancer?
If he had quit smoking in 1977 when Mrs.
Sherman herself quit cold turkey when she had her 11: heart attack, would he have gotten lung cancer?
All those times that I've just gone over all the way from when they first met in 1953 up until 1977 when she had her heart attack, he never even tried to quit. This case is about Mr. Sherman. Mr. Sherman never even tried to quit. That's the facts. That's the testimony here.
And if Mr. Sherman had quit at any point in time when he wasn't even trying up to 1977, Dr. 11:4 Barsky's opinion was he would not have gotten lung cancer. That's the evidence that you all heard from Dr. Barsky. Mr. Sherman was in control of his actions. He was in control of his life. He had in future in his own hands, and his failure to
quit is what caused him to become addicted and to get lung cancer and that's what led to his death.
And Mr. Sherman also bears responsibility for his choice not to go to the doctor. That was something he decided for himself. He's an adult.
You know he has that right, but he bears responsibility for choosing not to go to the doctor. And these medical records are all in evidence and I won't go through all of them one by one, but over and over, he had been sick some 11: records say 14 months and some say two years.
This is a man who lost 50 pounds, 50 pounds, before he went to the doctor, and he bears some responsibility for that decision.
I want to talk now about this issue about reliance that I started with. The jury charge you are going to get from Judge Streitfeld, you are going to have to decide if you reasonably rely.
Two things, reasonably relied on something Reynolds said or failed to say, and that it would 11:4 have made a difference to Mr. Sherman.
So there are really two questions you'll have to decide with respect to this, whether he relied to his detriment on any statements made by Reynolds. There's no evidence of any reliance by
Mr. Sherman on anything Reynolds ever said or anything Reynolds ever failed to say. We are not talking about what somebody else said, we are only talking about Reynolds. He never cared what anybody said to him about his smoking and, you know, from what you know about Mr. Sherman, about his character, it wouldn't have been part of his character to have done so. All those other people who said something to him about smoking, it didn't matter to him, it didn't affect him, it didn't 11:46 make him change his behavior.
Then you'll have to decide the second part of this is whether this reliance is reasonable in light of the widespread knowledge in the public and Mr. Sherman's own knowledge about the health risk of smoking. Let me go over what the evidence is on this.
There has been, again, zero evidence that Mr. Sherman ever saw any statements by Reynolds, let alone that anything that Reynolds said would 11:4 have made a difference to him. This is what Mrs. Sherman said. Here's her testimony.
"You don't remember Mr. Sherman ever talking to you about any specific cigarette ad either he saw on TV or in the newspapers?
No.
You don't remember that?
No."
That's the evidence. That's what she said as the court reporter writes down.
And then remember, again, he did not start smoking due to the ads. He just didn't. That's just the facts of this case. He started smoking because his father smoked and he and his brother wanted to be grown-ups like his father, and 11:47 advertising didn't have anything at all to do with that. There's no evidence of that.
Also Mr. Sherman never even discussed Reynolds or any other cigarette company, okay.
Mr. Sherman never discussed Reynolds. Here's what that testimony is from Mrs. Sherman. This is what I asked.
"I want to make sure that your testimony is clear. When Mr. Sherman was alive, did the two of you ever have any conversations about R.J. 11: Reynolds or any other cigarette company?
No."
Those are the facts here. Mr. Sherman never referred to any cigarette ad, he never referred to Reynolds, he never referred to any
other cigarette company and, in fact, he really never referred to anybody. According to Mrs. Sherman, he didn't care what the government said.
He didn't care what he read in the papers about what scientists were saying. So those are the facts here.
When you are getting to the verdict form, remember those are the facts. It doesn't matter what the lawyers have said to you. Those are the facts.	11:48
And then the second part, again, you are going to have to decide whether any reliance was reasonable. That's the word, reasonable. Again, it's going to be told to you by Judge Streitfeld, anything that Mr. Sherman -- even if you somehow think there's something he relied on, it couldn't have been reasonable in light of the fact that he knew, just like the public knew, about the health risk of smoking. He knew that again from '53 forward, from his in-laws, father's heart attack, 11:48 Mrs. Sherman's heart attack, Surgeon General's report, warning labels on the packages.
Let's show the Chicago papers. Remember,
Mrs. Sherman said they got the papers. And here's what Mr. Sherman's brother said about the Surgeon
General's reports. He said it was hammering it in. Hammering it in.
Let's go back to the 1950's. In the 1950's, again, this is not controverted, nobody is coming in here and said what I'm about to tell you isn't true because it is true. The documents are there.
Here's what was said in the press publicly. The Surgeon General in 1957, the director of the National Cancer Institute in 1958, 11:< 1964 the American Medical Association, and 1968 the National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, they all said the health risk of smoking were already well known.
And remember this quote? This is from Daniel Horn. He was the director of the federal government's National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health and, in 1968, he said, "You could stand on the rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling 11: anyone anything they did not already know."
That's from the federal government.
Despite all of the warnings that Mr. Sherman received from his family, from people he loved the most, from the Surgeon General's
report, and the warnings on the packages, none of that caused Mr. Sherman to act any differently, and it's not reasonable to think that if Reynolds had done something, he would have acted any differently either.
When his family told him, when Mrs.
Sherman told him, when the Surgeon General said it in the report, when the cigarette packages have the Surgeon General's warning on it, none of that moved the needle a bit for Mr. Sherman. So why 11:5 would you think it's not reasonable to think that Reynolds somehow would have made a difference to him? He liked to smoke. He enjoyed smoking. He wanted to smoke.
And I'm not going to go over all this in detail again, but here's just a summary from Mrs.
Sherman from her testimony. Mr. Sherman was aware of all this. He saw those articles in the newspapers, he saw the Surgeon General's report, he saw the warnings on the packages. And, again, 11:5 his response was he laughed it off, he grinned, he said no, didn't want to quit.
Mrs. Sherman has said that these newspaper articles did not matter to her husband. Again, if they don't matter, if the newspaper articles
didn't matter to her husband, how is it that something Reynolds said that's not even tied to him, not even shown that he saw, how could that have mattered? If you could play that clip.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
"You remember that from articles and things you read in the newspaper and Mr. Sherman was aware of that as well.
Yes.	11:52
What reaction did he have, if any, to those reports?
He really didn't have any reaction because he loved smoking so much and he wasn't going to quit.
So, regardless of what they were saying, he was going to continue to smoke?
Yes."
MS. PARKER: After all of that, it's just not credible to believe that Mr. Sherman didn't 11:5 understand and appreciate the health risk of smoking and that the Plaintiffs want you to believe that he somehow relied on something by Reynolds when there's no evidence he even saw anything by Reynolds.
All the efforts of his loved ones did not change his behavior, all the efforts by the federal government did not change his behavior, but they want you to believe that Reynolds somehow did even though there's no tie from what to Mr. Sherman. That just doesn't make sense, and that's what you are going to be asked to decide in this part of the case. You are going to be asked to decide specific questions and that's what you are going to be asked to decide.	11:53
So there's no basis to find reliance at all, much less reasonable reliance, which is something you are going to be required to find in order to go forward with a case for money damages against Reynolds. In fact, the evidence will show that short of our just going out of business and not selling cigarettes, which is legal for us to do, there's nothing that we could have done that would have affected Mr. Sherman.
MR. PAIGE: Objection, your Honor.	11:5-
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: Because there's nothing that anybody else did that affected him, either.
Again, you are going to have to find that Reynolds' conduct, not just selling cigarettes but
Reynolds' conduct, caused Mr. Sherman to have lung cancer and die.
Now, there's been no testimony at all in this case that, at some point in time, Mr. Sherman said gee, you know, I just found out smoking is dangerous, so I want to quit. He never said anything like that. He never said, oh, I've just learned, found out that smoking was dangerous, I need to go quit. He never said anything like that. He smoked even though he knew it was risky. 11:
Now, I need to spend some time talking to you all about the filters and that's part of the case and the Plaintiff's talked about filters this morning. So what was the evidence about the filters? Not what the lawyers said, but what is the evidence about filters? Here's what Mrs.
Sherman said. This is what Mrs. Sherman testified here in court.
"Now, Mr. Sherman never said to you that he thought the filtered Winston cigarettes would 11:55 be better for his health than the Lucky Strike cigarettes he was smoking, correct?"
This is what she said.
"Yes, he showed me the filter and they were dark and he said," doesn't say Reynolds said
says, "He said this should take of whatever bad stuff was in there."
That's not something that Reynolds said to him. There is no evidence that Reynolds ever said anything that was communicated to Mr. Sherman that Mr. Sherman heard or relied on that said filters would take care of the bad stuff. There's no Winston ad that ever said that, ever. You all heard some of the ads this morning and there's one Winston print ad in evidence that Winston ads say 11:5 Winston tastes good like a cigarette should.
Tastes goods, tastes. That's not saying that the Winston filter cigarettes are safe and it's okay for you to smoke them.
And all this advertising, in any event, didn't shield Mr. Sherman somehow from this flood of information that he got from other sources.
Remember, all of this, all these other sources that smoking was risky and, of course, it's legal for Reynolds to advertise its products and has 11:57 been. There were celebrity endorsements back in the 50's for other products besides just cigarettes. Remember the testimony that Lucille Ball also advertised alcoholic beverages. That's just trying to make us look bad because we were
advertising legally our product in the 1950's, just like other companies did as well, but there is no ad that says from Winston, from Reynolds, that says Winston filters means your cigarette is safe. There's no evidence to that. What Mrs.
Sherman said is what Mr. Sherman told her, not what Reynolds said.
In order to get money damages here, they are asking you to accept that Mr. Sherman didn't know whether to believe Mrs. Sherman when she told 11: him that her doctor said he should quit smoking, that he didn't know whether to believe his in-laws, that he didn't know whether to believe the Surgeon General's report, that he didn't know whether to believe the warnings. They are asking you to believe that Mr. Sherman rejected all of that information from his wife, from the federal government, because of some ad that is not even in evidence because it doesn't exist. There's just zero evidence of that.	11:58
And Mrs. Sherman has admitted that Mr. Sherman never even discussed Reynolds or ads at all.
"You don't remember Mr. Sherman ever talking to you about any specific cigarette ad
either he saw on the TV or in the newspapers, is that correct?
No.
You don't remember that?
No."
Now, in their time with you, they spent -Mr. Paige, in particular, spent a lot of time talking to you about money damages, but Reynolds does not deserve a punitive damages award with respect to the facts of this case with respect to 11:59 Mr. Sherman, and Judge Streitfeld is going to give you what the instructions are about the limited circumstances under which you can consider punitive damages award. Reynolds can only be punished as a result of any of its actions that affected Mr. Sherman. There has to be a tie to Mr. Sherman.
And remember the findings that they put up on the board? The instructions you are going to get from Judge Streitfeld is you cannot consider 11:5 those findings in determining whether or not a punitive damage award is justified against Reynolds. Reynolds did not do anything -THE COURT: Stop.
Whose phone is that?
This is supposed to be done out in the hall. That's what I asked.
Go ahead.
MS. PARKER: Thank you, your Honor.
Reynolds did not do anything that impacted Mr. Sherman. Reynolds led the industry, it led the world in design innovations to make safer cigarettes. That's fact. And that included this reduction in nicotine here for the cigarettes that Mr. Sherman smoked.	12:00
Remember all these different techniques that Dr. Figlar went over with you? And, again, that's undisputed. And those innovations went into the very Winston cigarettes that Mr. Sherman smoked. We brought you the top person for Winston cigarettes at Reynolds. Remember he said he was in charge of that? He has 64 people working with him, and he went through all of the different things that Reynolds has tried long and hard over the years to implement to make safer cigarettes. 12: Not a safe cigarette because there's no such things, but to make safer cigarettes.
And there is no specific criticism of Winston cigarettes in this case. The criticism is just to all cigarettes. There's no specific
criticism of the Winston cigarettes and those are the only ones that matter here because those are the ones that Mr. Sherman smoked.
Reynolds has worked hard, diligently,
Reynolds has spent tremendous amounts of time and
effort to revolutionize cigarette design in order
to reduce those health risks and is still doing
that today. Dr. Figlar explained to you filtered
cigarettes are safer, but they are not safe and
all of these advances that he went over came from 12:(
Reynolds. Reynolds invented those.
Remember this chart Dr. Figlar explained to you? And this is using the standard federal government approved method to measure tar and nicotine. This is federal government approved method.
Filtered cigarettes are safer. They work just like your air conditioner filters work or water filters; they take out some of the bad stuff, but they don't take everything out, and we 12:03 have never said that filtered cigarettes are safe.
Remember, we even went over tobacco substitutes, all these different things that Reynolds has investigated over the years to try to substitute for the tobacco to make a safer
cigarette. We went over all those general reduction techniques and there were a lot of people, wasn't just Reynolds, there were a lot of people who said you should try to reduce tar and nicotine in the cigarettes. If you try to do that, you'd have a safer cigarette, people like Dr. Wynder, the scientist who did those mouse skin painting studies you all have heard about so much, he said that the goal should be to reduce tar and nicotine by 40 percent.	12:03
So this leading scientist, the one that did the mouse skin painting studies in 1953 that got all that publicity and started the research that led to the Surgeon General's report, he said the goal is 40 percent reduction and Reynolds has accomplished a 60 percent reduction.
How is it that we have -- it just doesn't make sense to say that we have manipulated nicotine or we have added nicotine when the facts are, by the federal government's method of	12:
measuring, nicotine levels and tar levels have fallen. And we even told you, Dr. Figlar told you, about things that Reynolds continued to do. Remember the Premier cigarettes and the Eclipse cigarettes that he showed you. Those aren't even
regular conventional cigarettes that heat tobacco, and the Eclipse is being sold here in Fort Lauderdale even now because Reynolds has been trying to develop a safer cigarette.
And that's the goal, but it's not easy because when you burn tobacco, there are bad things in it. That's why cigarettes are dangerous. That's why it's not safe to smoke, but Reynolds has been working very hard very diligently to try to reduce those risks.	12:05
And it was not just Reynolds, the federal government was involved as well. The federal government has been involved over the years in trying to come up with a safer cigarette and that's that National Cancer Institute Tobacco Working Group that you all heard about during the case that was formed in the 1960's to try to develop a safer cigarette and Reynolds was on that panel. That's not controverted, that's a fact.
That's the evidence.	12:05
And the State of Florida is involved with cigarettes also and you heard yesterday the State of Florida collects excise taxes and sales taxes on every package of Reynolds cigarettes that are sold here. Reynolds is not in this alone.
And besides funding research, Reynolds has conducted its own research both at Reynolds and also at medical schools. That's fact. That's not controverted, that is fact. Remember all the different -- this chart, all the different studies and tests that Reynolds does? Trying to determine what to do to make a safer cigarette, and all of this has been very public.
Reynolds has participated in scientific discussions about smoking and health in a very 12: public way. The '64 Surgeon General's report specifically referenced Reynolds' work. National Cancer Institute, Tobacco Working Group specifically recognized Reynolds work.
You heard Reynolds' scientists have published hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of articles in the public literature over the last years about the health risk of smoking and cigarette design. Reynolds' scientists have participated in these public conferences all 12:07 around the world. Reynolds has obtained hundreds of patents about its cigarette design and, besides the '64 report, the 1979 Surgeon General's report,
1981, 1989, and 2000 Surgeon General's reports, all acknowledge Reynolds' work.
Then we showed you the 700 page book that Dr. Figlar held up yesterday about Premier that had been peer reviewed by a group of outside scientists. Reynolds is proud of the work that we have done to try to make cigarettes safer.
Cigarettes, though, are a dangerous product. They are not safe. It says that on the package.
Mr. Sherman knew that.
Mr. Sherman knew that at least starting in
1953	when his own mother-in-law told him that. He 12: knew that when his father quit smoking immediately when he had a heart attack in 1955 because he thought that cigarettes had caused his heart attack. Mr. Sherman knew that in 1964 when the Surgeon General's report came out that Mrs.
Sherman has acknowledged he saw. When the labels went on in 1966 and went on in 1969, Mr. Sherman knew that there were warnings on those packages and Mrs. Sherman has acknowledged that.
Just as an example of the Plaintiff 12:08 talking about all this stuff that has nothing to do with Mr. Sherman, remember the Frank Statement?
We keep hearing about the Frank Statement. It was on the timeline they showed you this morning.
That Frank Statement which, by the way, we showed
you when I was cross examining Dr. Proctor, I pulled it up, it's in evidence, you can see for yourself, that Frank Statement was not just from the cigarette companies, it was from the tobacco farmers. It was the people who owned and ran the warehouses where the tobacco is stored. They came out with this called Frank Statement. It was published one day, one time, and that was January 4th of 1954, and there is zero evidence in this case that Mr. Sherman ever saw that. There 12:( is no evidence, there's just no evidence that he ever saw that. It just does not apply to Mr. Sherman.
But we do know in 1954 that Mr. Sherman, we do know from the facts of his own life, that in
1954	he already knew that cigarettes posed a health risk because 1954 is when he and Mrs.
Sherman got married and when Mrs. Sherman had said her mother-in-law was already on to him about the health risk of smoking.	12:09
And it was no secret that the TIRC that was talked about in the Frank Statement that was on the board this morning, there was no secret that that was funded by the cigarette companies.
Dr. Proctor admitted that. We told the federal
government that as soon as it happened. Here's what Dr. Proctor said.
I asked him a question, "Have you reviewed the correspondence between the Assistant Attorney General of the United States and TIRC where there was formal notification?"
He says, "I've seen that document, but I'm not familiar with it.
And it's addressed to the Assistant Attorney General Department of Justice?	12:1
Yes, and it talks about forming the committee."
That was not a secret, but in any event,
Mr. Sherman never saw it. There's no evidence; he never saw it. They are, again, trying to make us look bad about things that have nothing to do with Mr. Sherman.
You saw a lot of old documents in the case. I won't go over those in detail, but just briefly, the very first exhibit they put in is an 12:10 unsigned draft and there is no evidence Reynolds ever implemented it. It has nothing to do with Mr. Sherman. It has nothing to do with the Winston cigarettes that he smoked.
And then how many times have we seen doubt
is our product. Doubt is our product. Again, it's on the charts that they have today. That's a proposal. That is a fact. That is a fact. It is a proposal. It is a fact that there is no evidence that that was ever implemented. And then another document about creating doubt, again it says it's a proposal.
By the way, on the other documents, when I even asked Dr. Proctor about it, that's a document where Dr. Proctor himself said I looked through 12:1 all the archives to see if it had been implemented, to see what happened after the document came out, and he said it was a cold trail. Nothing happened after it. And, again, here's just another one that's an idea memo.
Again, nothing to do with Mr. Sherman.
So ask yourself why is it that the Plaintiffs are spending so much time on these documents that have nothing to do with Mr. Sherman. So, as you go back and you review 12: the evidence and you are looking at documents and if you are talking about different things that the lawyers from Mrs. Sherman have said, ask yourself, please, what is the evidence that it was ever implemented. What is the evidence it was ever
company policy. What does it have to do with Mr. Sherman, what does it have to do with Winston cigarettes.
The verdict form does not ask you to decide whether cigarettes should be legal or not because that's a decision our society made a long time ago. And our society did not make that decision because they thought cigarettes were safe; they made that decision because they said cigarettes are a product that should be available 12:12 for adults who choose to smoke after they have been warned and the public is being warned and has been warned.
There's nothing that you've heard in this trial, there's no evidence that you've heard in this trial about health risk of smoking that has not already been known by the Surgeon General, by Congress, and Reynolds is not the only one involved in these Winston cigarettes, the cigarettes that Mr. Sherman smoked. There are the 12: farmers who grew the tobacco, they are the people who made the paper that's wrapped around the tobacco, they are the people who supplied menthol and other flavors like that, they are the people who take the advertising for cigarettes, they are
the people in the grocery stores and filling stations that sell cigarettes, and it's all the people who work in all these different places and it's authorities like the State of Florida involved as well. And all of these people are not involved with selling cigarettes because they think they are safe; it's because they believe that the public is entitled -- has and is entitled to a choice.
MR. PAIGE: Objection, your Honor.	12:1
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: That the public has been warned.
THE CLERK: Ten minutes, counsel.
MS. PARKER: Thank you.
The evidence proves that Reynolds was making a legal product with health risks known to Congress, to the Surgeon General, and to Mr. Sherman himself, and Reynolds does not deserve to be punished with anything relating to	12:14
Mr. Sherman.
For the entire time that Reynolds -- that Mr. Sherman smoked Reynolds cigarettes, they were a legal product and they are -- other than -again, other than our just going out of business,
there's nothing that we could have done or should have done that would have made any difference to this man, John Sherman. Nothing else made any difference to him.
Why would something that Reynolds should have done made a difference when nothing else made a difference to him? He enjoyed smoking, he didn't want to quit, he kept on smoking, he told everybody to leave him alone.
Now, when Judge Streitfeld gives you the 12:1 instructions about punitive damages, you are going to hear it's a higher standard than what the standard you used and that you heard in phase one of the case and on the liability parts of the question here. It's a higher standard. The Plaintiff has to meet this higher standard before you can even consider it, and I just want to summarize a couple of the things that Judge Streitfeld is going to tell you about.
First of all, no one has an absolute right 12:15 to punitive damages. They are only there for punishment and deterrence, and the Plaintiff has to prove to you by this higher standard that, as to Mr. Sherman, that our conduct was gross, flagrant, recklessly disregarded to safety, that
someone at Reynolds was consciously indifferent, that Reynolds' conduct amounted to intentional violation of his rights. Punitive damages cannot be used to punish for something that did not harm Mr. Sherman.
Those will be in the instructions that you are given by the Court and also, this is important, the instructions you are going to be given by the Court are that punitive damages cannot be used to punish for harms outside the 12:16 State of Florida, and Mr. and Mrs. Sherman didn't even move to Florida until 1968. And, again, you have to disregard those findings when you are considering punitive damages and that will be in the instructions to you from the Court.
None of that, none of those requirements at this higher standard have been satisfied in this case because Mr. Sherman did not rely on something Reynolds said or failed to say and which would have made a difference to him. How can you 12 consider awarding punitive damages when the health risk of smoking have been common knowledge known to Mr. Sherman? There's never been a safer design for cigarettes, but we have tried.
So that brings us to the verdict form, and
the verdict form you are going to be given is going to have five questions in the beginning that you are going to need to answer, and then there's a discussion about damages. And I'd like to respectfully ask that, when you are reviewing the evidence and looking at the verdict form, your answers to those questions should be in favor of Reynolds and your answer should be no.
And I'm not going to argue -- not going to present argument about the amount of damages 12: because Mr. Sherman, because of his choices, because he never seriously tried to quit, because he never even talked about Reynolds, because he never relied on anything Reynolds did, the amount of damages here should be zero.
In closing, thank you again for your service, for your civic service here as jurors.
We appreciate everything you all have done. We have appreciated getting to know you in the way we have, sitting there at the table over the last few 12:18 weeks. We appreciate the time that you all took to review all the evidence in phase one, and we know that you all will do the same when you are reviewing the evidence for phase two.
When you go back to the jury room, there's
one thing I could say, is to please keep your focus on John Sherman. Keep your focus on John Sherman. None of all of this that you've heard has anything to do with him. And, so, in closing, instead of me telling you, I want you to hear what the evidence is. I just have a few clips I want to show. Here's what the evidence is in this case.
(Whereupon, the following video was
played:)	12:19
"What did he say?
I said, oh, John, you ought to quit.
What did he say?
He grinned at me, that's all.
He just grinned?
Uh-huh.
Did he say anything in response?
No.
Did she ever criticize him for smoking, for example?	12:19
Well, he knew she didn't like it, but he's an adult, he can do as he pleases.
He knew she didn't like it because it was bad for his health?
Yes.
Is that the way John Sherman smoked cigarettes?
He loved his cigarettes, yes.
Did he enjoy smoking?
I believe he did. If he didn't, he would have quit.
Do you think he could have quit smoking if he tried to do so?
I think he could.
What makes you say that?	12:20
Because he knew everybody was against him smoking."
"And she came out and told me that John was home and he was on oxygen and he was dying of cancer of the lung, there wasn't anything they could do, and I guess we had a conversation that started with he still smokes, he's on oxygen, and I probably said to her, you know, with oxygen, that's pretty dangerous lighting up a cigarette, and she said well, he doesn't seem to care, he 12:2( just won't stop, doesn't plan to stop.
Before you were made aware of Mr.
Sherman's condition, did you ever have any discussions with Melba Sherman about John smoking?
I don't believe so. If we did, you know,
she'd say, you know, he's smoking and I just can't do anything about it. I probably was in a conversation would have said, well, I don't know what you could do if that's what he wants to do.
It always appeared to me, in the short period of time that I was seeing him, that he was a rather -- he knew his own mind. He was an individual who was a hard-working man, probably had worked hard all his life, and you weren't going to tell him anything. That's the impression 12: I got from him."
"Did you ever tell your sons not to smoke cigarettes?
No. I left it up to them when they were adults what they wanted to do.
How about when they were kids?
No, it never came up, really.
Do you know if Mr. Sherman ever had discussions with them while they were children about smoking cigarettes?	12:22
No.
How about after they became adults?
I beg your pardon?
How about after they became adults?
No, we never -- we left them to do what
they thought best.
Is there anything that a tobacco company may have said or did that you are aware of that prevented your husband from trying to quit smoking?
Not that I recall.
Do you recall in the 1950's that
scientists were starting to investigate whether there's a link between smoking and cancer?
Yeah, I remember that time.	12:22
Do you remember that from articles and things you read in the newspaper?
Yes.
Mr. Sherman was aware of that as well?
Yes.
What reaction did he have, if any, to those reports?
He really didn't have any reactions because he loved smoking so much and he wasn't going to quit.	12:23
So, regardless of what they were saying, he was going to continue to smoke?
Yes."
THE CLERK: Two minutes.
MS. PARKER: Thank you very much for your
attention this morning.
Your Honor, that concludes my closing statement.
