CLOSING ARGUMENT
MS. PARKER: And counsel. Good afternoon, everybody. I want to start by adding my thanks to the thanks you've already received by Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Paige. We all know what a sacrifice it has been for ya'll. You have been away from your families and away from work, and you have been sitting here. It has been two weeks tomorrow when ya'll took your oath as jurors. We started jury selection two weeks from today when you filled out the questionnaires and two weeks tomorrow when you were actually sworn in as jurors, and I also want
to add the thanks from my client, from R.J.
Reynolds, for your service as jurors, and also from and whole team, from John Walker and Gordon Jame and John Yarber. We all say thank you also.
Remember when I gave my opening statement back a couple of weeks ago? I told you in my opening statement that what we were going to do is we will present evidence about one person, and that was going to be about John Sherman. That is what we tried to do in our part of the case because this case is only about him. It's about his smoking.
It is about his cigarettes. It is about his choices.
And as the court instructed you at the very beginning of the case, this case is going to be tried in phases, and we don't even reach damages until we reach the next phase, but ultimately this case is about whether Mrs. Sherman is entitled to receive money damages from Reynolds. That is what we are here about.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: Our society fully aware of the health risks of smoking has decided that cigarettes are a legal product and they should be available
for adults who choose to smoke. Cigarettes can cause lung cancer. I said that in my opening statement, and cigarettes can be addictive, and there are some people who are addicted. I said that in my opening statement. Congress knows that. Our society knows that. But here in America, people are allowed to make decisions and to take risky -- make risky decisions that may affect their health. Not just smoking, but drinking, not eating right. You have the right to do that. You have the right to make that choice, and here Mr. Sherman chose to smoke.
This whole case, everything you've heard, boils down to six simple truths. I am going to spend all of my time this afternoon talking to you about the six simple truths. Let me put up this board.
I am going to put it down here because I am going to use the screen also, and I want to leave the board up the whole time, and I think everyone can see it or I hope you can.
That is what this case is about. The six simple truths are this case is about John Sherman, nobody else. He didn't want to quit. He loved to smoke. He never made a serious effort to quit.
That is the truth.
He was aware of the dangers of smoking. That is the truth. Cigarettes are a legal product.
That is the truth. And it was Mr. Sherman's choice to smoke, and that's the truth, so I am going to spend my time this afternoon talking to you about each one of these, and I want to start with the first, and that is this case is about John Sherman and nobody else. There are some smokers who enjoy smoking, and they don't want to quit. They enjoy it. They have the right to do it. This case is not about somebody who wanted to quit, who tried over and over to quit, who went out and tried different aids to try to quit, but wasn't able to do it. That is not John Sherman. That is not what we are here about.
When you filled out the juror questionnaires, the written form before we started, some of you mentioned on the forms that you knew people who were like that. You knew people who tried over and over to quit, and you knew people who were addicted. That is fine. We don't disagree with it. That is not John Sherman. He never seriously tried to quit. He didn't want to. He wanted to smoke. It was his own decisions to continue
smoking without ever seriously trying to quit that led to his lung cancer. There is nothing wrong with what he chose to do. We are not criticizing him for smoking. He is an adult. He was entitled to make his own choices. That is just who he was, but it would be wrong for the Plaintiffs to come to court and to try to paint him as a different person than who he was so that they could get money damages.
And during this case, during most of this case, rather than dealing specifically with Mr. Sherman, Mrs. Sherman's lawyers put on evider to turn this into a general indictment about cigarettes. Does everybody see what they are doing here? They don't want you to focus on John Sherman because he did not want to quit smoking. He loved smoking. He never seriously tried to quit. That is the truth. They don't want you to focus on that, so they want to show you all this bad stuff, make all of these allegations, to get you so riled up and get you mad so that you will forget about Mr. Sherman. That is what is going on here.
Witness after witness they called to the stand, and when I asked them questions, they didn't know anything about John Sherman. Do ya'll
remember that? You heard over and over about how bad cigarettes are. Well, Congress knows that. It is on the warnings. It is on the packages. What is important here, again, is Mr. Sherman and the reasons why he smoked.
Now, you are going to be given a verdict form, and I will pull that up. This is the verdict form you are going to receive. It says, "Was John Sherman addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of Mr. Sherman's death?" It doesn't ask about anybody except John Sherman, but starting way back in the opening statements, Mr. Trop said that Mr. Sherman couldn't stop smoking, and, in fact, the way they would have you believe Mr. Sherman, he was somebod; who desperately wanted to quit. He tried to quit over and over, but he couldn't quit because he was an addict just like a heroin or cocaine addict, somebody who had lost all of their free will to quit smoking, but, ladies and gentlemen, that is not the true John Sherman.
There are people, there are smokers, who are like that. There are smokers who desperately want to quit. There are smokers who try all different sort of things to quit. There are smokers who are
serious and sincere in trying to quit, but Mr. Sherman was not one of them. He enjoyed smoking, and he did not want to quit.
And we know that because he never made a serious effort to quit all the way back. And there is not a shred of evidence, none, there is not a shred of evidence that he was in any way tormented by his smoking or that he struggled to try to quit. There is no evidence like that. Mr. Sherman was a willing smoker. He was somebody who decided he wanted to smoke, and he enjoyed smoking, and he didn't want anybody to tell him what to do, and he wanted to continue smoking, and he smoked despite knowing full well, full well, that smoking was bad for him, and it was dangerous to his health, but he chose to take that risk.
All of these other people told him repeatedly that he should quit smoking because it would be bad for his health, but he didn't listen to them. He never made any real effort to quit because he didn't want to, and that is okay. That is okay.
But that does not mean that he is somebody who is addicted and whose addiction is what caused their death. What caused his death is his own decisions.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: Now, let me stop here and go spend a minute and go over a legal instruction that we expect you will be given by Judge Streitfeld when he gives you the jury charges, and that is that the Plaintiff, that is Mrs. Sherman, has the burden of proof. In other words, the Plaintiff,
Mrs. Sherman, has to prove to you everything in this case. They have to prove to you that Mr. Sherman was addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine and that such addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Sherman's death. They have to prove two things to you; that Mr. Sherman was addicted and that this alleged addiction, not Mr. Sherman's free choice to smoke, is the reason that he developed his illness. The Plaintiff has to prove every single part of her claim.
Now, some of you may be saying to yourselves, well, he never tried to quit, he didn't want to quit, so I don't think he was addicted, so I am going to answer no, and then others of you may be thinking, well, wait a minute. I heard all of that from Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Paige, so maybe Mr. Sherman was addicted, so does that mean I should answer yes? That is not the end of it.
Okay. Even if you think Mr. Sherman was addicted you have to go on to the second part of the question which asks about what caused his lung cancer. That is why we have the word "and" in red there so you can see. If you believe the evidence fails to establish any part of that, then you should find for Reynolds. This is really important because we didn't have to put up any evidence at all. We don't have the burden of proof at all. We could just come and listen to the Plaintiffs and let it be that.
We did put on evidence. We are the ones that brought you all of the family and friends. We are the ones that brought you the testimony from Mr. Sherman's brother, from the cousin, from the niece. We're the ones who did that which shows that the Plaintiff cannot meet -- has not met her burden of proof on these two issues there, and that means that the case is over. The case is over.
What they are asking you to do is to ignore what Mr. Sherman said. They are asking you to ignore his actions. They are asking you to ignore what he said to these witnesses who told him that he ought to quit. They are asking you to ignore that he never seriously tried to quit. They are
asking you to ignore the facts. The Plaintiffs are trying to create this false Mr. Sherman, somebody that none of his family or friends recognize, and he, himself, wouldn't even recognize. They are trying to rewrite history here.
They are doing that because when you look at what the facts really are, it shows that Mr. Sherman was a willing smoker who liked to smoke. He loved to smoke. He enjoyed smoking. He wanted to smoke, and he never seriously tried to quit.
So ask yourself would Mr. Sherman have said that smoking was not his choice? Would Mr. Sherman have said that he didn't like to smoke? And where was Mr. Sherman in the Plaintiffs case? Not in New York reading The New York Times. Remember t brought one witness who had done nothing except look at The New York Times. They never lived in New York, and he never read The New York Times.
That same witness said that Mr. Sherman was irrelevant and that he had done nothing at all to find out about the facts of Mr. Sherman's life.
Mr. Sherman is not in any of these Plaintiffs documents and allegations about nicotine manipulation and ammonia and pH, because as their
own witness acknowledged, none of that has anything to do with the cigarettes he smoked, which are Winston. Mr. Sherman was not in any of these proposals. All these documents you saw again -let me move the board now. You saw them again today. Mr. Sherman was not in Dr. Proctor's testimony. Remember, he is the one that came that Friday and spent all day Friday. He said he was too busy to read the depositions in this case, and he didn't even know where Mr. Sherman grew up. I asked him, and he said New York. That is not right. He grew up in Illinois. That is not right.
Mr. Sherman is not in the Frank Statement we keep hearing about. There is no evidence that he ever saw the thing, zero. Mr. Sherman is not in those ads. Mrs. Sherman said they never talked about ads. He never mentioned any ads. He did not start smoking because of ads. He started smoking because he and his brother made roll-your-own cigarettes from their father's machine. Most of the ads you've seen aren't even for brands he smoked. Mr. Sherman is not in the documents from other companies. Some of those documents that have been admitted in evidence are not from Reynolds. What did they have to do with anything?
Mr. Sherman is not in a smoking cessation clinic which we keep hearing about. He didn't even go. He didn't even try to quit. He didn't go to a smoking cessation clinic. He didn't try anything.
As I think you are going to see, Mr. Sherman was just not in the Plaintiffs case, and instead what Mr. Paige and Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Trop have done is to inject all of these other issues into the case that have nothing to do with him to be red herrings and get you mad at us.
Mr. Sherman was not the person that he has been described to be this afternoon. He was not somebody who didn't want to smoke. He was not somebody who tried different things to quit. He was not an addict. He was not somebody like a cocaine or heroin addict. He is not somebody who desperately wanted to quit. That is just not the case for Mr. Sherman.
The true picture is quite the opposite. Look at the photos that are in evidence. They are in evidence, and you will have them in the jury room with you. Mr. Sherman was a happy guy who enjoye smoking. He is not somebody who was tormented by it. Some smokers like Mr. Sherman enjoy smoking, and they don't want to quit. Not everybody who
smokes is an addict according to one of the witnesses you heard. According to Laurine Belz today, he loved his cigarettes. If he didn't, he would have quit.
Now, for many people it is not easy to quit, but like anything else in your life, you can't be successful unless are you motivated. You have to be motivated for yourself. Somebody else or your wife telling you to quit is not enough. You, yourself, have to want to quit. Somebody else making a decision for you never works.
Some people become motivated to quit if they reach a birthday or a New Year's resolution or they meet somebody that doesn't want them to smoke or i they have a health care, which is what happened to Mrs. Sherman when she had a heart attack, but whatever the motivation is, you can't be successful unless you first try. You have to try. That is the very first step, and their addiction expert,
Dr. Glassman, agreed with that. You have to try.
Now, I want to mention one other thing right now, and that is in these instructions that the court will give you later on, one of the instructions says or it direct you not to be swayed from the performance of your duty by sympathy, and
I want to urge you to focus on the facts and apply your common sense here. And, of course, it is very sad that Mr. Sherman passed away. Our hearts go out to Mrs. Sherman, but your decision cannot be based on sympathy. It has to be based on the facts.
And what is important here is that if you decide when you are deliberating that Mrs. Sherman has not met this initial threshold burden, the case is over, so if you answer no, your job is done.
In a nutshell, what the Plaintiffs are saying -- Mr. Alvarez, Mr. Paige and Mr. Trop during the trial -- is, well, he was a really heavy smoker; he smoked a lot, therefore, he was an addict, and so they say, therefore, they should win phase I and go straight to damages and money. They are asking you to ignore everything about Mr. Sherman and his life, and you have to put everything in context. Every situation is different. Every case is different. Some smokers are addicted and can't quit. Some people don't want to quit. Some don't even want to try like Mr. Sherman. So there are some people that the answer would be yes for, but that's not Mr. Sherman.
That brings us to the second simple truth I want to talk to you about, and that is that Mr. Sherman did not want to quit. Here is the true John Sherman that you heard about during the trial.
He was independent minded. Remember he quit schoo at age 17. He started and he ran his own auto body repair shop. It was successful Mrs. Sherman said, another example of his independent nature. He was an intelligent man, and I've just got to say it is disrespectful for the Plaintiffs to say he was just a high school dropout. He was a self-made man who, as Mrs. Sherman said, was very successful in his business. He actively kept up with current events on TV and in the newspaper, and when he applied himself to things he cared about, like with his work, he was successful, and Mrs. Sherman told you that. That was consistent throughout his life. He was fun-loving and he was carefree. You heard the witnesses say that. He liked to go fishing. He liked to go to the moose club. He liked to play bingo. He liked to drink and smoke with his friends. He loved smoking. Mrs. Sherman says he loved it. That is the word she used. Everybody says he was a strong-willed man. Okay. These are not my words. I am telling you or reminding you
this is what you heard from the witness stand and on the video. That is what they said.
He was a strong-willed man. They said he was stubborn, and they said he was hardheaded and wouldn't listen and acted the way he wanted to, and they said he wore the pants in the family. Nobody could tell him what to do and nobody could tell him what not to do. Nobody could dictate to him in any area of his life, not just smoking.
Mrs. Sherman said or her testimony was Mr. Sherman was a man that was very headstrong an that you couldn't tell him not to do anything so I didn't try.
Then you heard from Dr. Shoba Sreenivasan.
We brought her as our expert here because she has 20 years of experience working with veterans just like Mr. Sherman. She works with patients just like him. She told you that for veterans she has seen this over and over with particularly older veterans like Mr. Sherman, and this is what she said. Particularly the older veterans will say I fought for my country. I fought for individual rights. I am an adult. This is a legal product.
This is my right to do what I want to do, so back off, and so they feel kind of by the process like
I'm telling them what to do. That describes Mr. Sherman to a tee, and Mrs. Sherman even said on the witness stand or she even went so far to say all Mr. Sherman did was joke about quitting, and he never really meant it, and no one ever heard Mr. Sherman say that he was addicted and his attitude in response was consistent throughout his life.
Remember back in the 1950s his in-laws, in particular his mother-in-law, Ethel, told him he should quit smoking, and he laughed them off.
Those are the words that those witnesses used. In the 1970s, their niece, Robin Atkins, testified by video deposition, and she said that when Mrs. Sherman would tell him to quit, he would say -- he would roll his eyes and say, oh, Melba, stop nagging. He would say, picky, picky, picky. That is what the facts are here. You heard about the cousin this morning Laurine Belz. When she told him to quit, he grinned. When they told him to quit because smoking is unhealthy, he shrugged his shoulders like whatever.
When their nextdoor neighbor, the nurse, and you saw her testify by video, Marie Sanderson, even at the very end of his life, she testified that
Mrs. Sherman told him that he was dying of lung cancer, but that he didn't plan to stop. That is what she said. He was in control. He was in control. He wanted to smoke, and we should not -I would like to say respectfully we should not come in here 12 years after he passed away and second guess the decisions that he made on how he wanted to live his own life.
I want to play a short summary of the evidence on this that you heard.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
>> "Did he ever say anything in response to her criticism?
>> Picky, picky, picky, you know, or, oh, Melba, stop nagging, you know, that kind of thing or all right, all right, all right. You know, I mean, he always had a little comment to make, you know.
>> Do you recall ever advising him that it was not good for his health?
>> I said it to him once when -- the last time I seen him, but that's his business, not mine.
>> What did you say?
>> I said, oh, John, you ought to quit.
>> What did he say?
>> And he just grinned at me. That's all.
>> He just grinned?
>> Um-hum.
>> Did he say anything in response?
>> No.
>> And I guess we had a conversation. What started it was he still smoked. He's on oxygen,
and I probably said to her, you know, with oxygen, that's pretty dangerous, lighting up a cigarette, and she said, well, he doesn't seem to care. He just won't stop. Doesn't plan to stop."
That is what the testimony has been about the true John Sherman. He didn't like to be told what to do, and everybody says he loved to smoke.
Now, he told people that it made him relaxed and it made him feel good. You heard a lot of statistics being thrown around by the Plaintiffs to try to convince you that smokers are rarely able to quit. How many times did we hear that? But the evidence really is the opposite. You are going to have that particularly in some of the documents that you will have back with you in the jury room. Many heavy smokers have quit. There are more former smokers in the United States today than current smokers. There are tens of millions of
former smokers. There are many former smokers tha 90 percent of them quit without any assistance at all. People can and do quit every day, but before you can quit, you have to try. It is not always easy to quit, but you have to be motivated. You have to try. And Dr. Glassman, the Plaintiffs expert, agreed. Here is what he testified. This is a transcript that the court reporters have been taking down. "Without motivation and a person not willing to quit and who does not want to quit, yes, they will not succeed. You have to make that decision to quit for yourself, and that's true whether you are talking about smoking or changing your diet or getting exercise or listening to your doctor's recommendations. You have to decide to do it for yourself. You have to be motivated yourself to do it; otherwise, you don't even get to first base."
Mr. Sherman was never motivated to stop. He never even tried to quit, not one single time, from when Mr. and Mrs. Sherman first met in 1953. Remember, they met in '53 and got married in '54.
He never even tried to quit one single solitary time for 24 years from 1953 up until 1977 when she had a heart attack. That is not disputed. And
Mrs. Sherman even said, and you heard her on the video this morning, she didn't even try to quit for herself during that period of time either, and after that in 1977 when she had her heart attack, he only made either two or three half-hearted attempts because she asked him and she wanted him to do it.
That is it. That is it. In other words,
Mr. Sherman only tried to quit for a few days total over his entire 50-year smoking history, and he never sought any aids. He never sought any help to quit smoking ever.
And Dr. Strauss that you heard about, the -the Plaintiffs talked about this afternoon, Dr.
Strauss even admitted that Mr. Sherman never made, in his words, major attempts to quit.
Now, does that sound like somebody who wanted to quit and couldn't? You have to ask yourself how credible is it to say that Mr. Sherman wanted to quit given those facts that he didn't try at all for 24 years, and he then only tried these half-hearted attempts in '77 when she was on him, and she wanted him to do it, and he didn't try to quit after then. How credible is it to say that that person wanted to quit and didn't want to
smoke?
This lawsuit should not go forward to the next phase under those facts. Addiction did not cause his disease. It was the fact that he had no interest in quitting and made no efforts to quit.
Now, you heard Mrs. Sherman say she did not know Mr. Sherman at all until 1953. That is when they met. She has no firsthand or personal knowledge of anything before then. When they met they were both already smokers, but we brought you the testimony of his younger brother who said they started smoking in the '40s when they were both teenagers when they made the roll-your-own cigarettes with their father's machine, and there is no evidence that he smoked Reynolds' cigarettes until 1953.
Now, let me show you the brand history. This is what the evidence is in terms of what Mr. Sherman smoked, and you'll recall Mr. Sherman's brother said that when they first started making those roll-your-own cigarettes, they only smoked one or two a year. That is how he started smoking. Reynolds did not put cigarettes in his hands.
Mr. Sherman went to the cigarettes. The cigarettes didn't go to him. He and his brother started
smoking roll-your-own cigarettes.
MR. ALVAREZ: Excuse me.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. PARKER: They started smoking roll-your-own cigarettes because their father smoked. It wasn't because of ads. It was because their father smoked. They didn't see advertisements and then run out and buy cigarettes because of advertisements. They smoked because their father smoked.
Now, let's go to the next simple truth on the chart, and that is he never made a serious effort to quit.
Somebody who really wants to quit would try hard to make it happen. Mr. Sherman didn't. And if he had wanted help, he would have gone out and asked for it, but there is no evidence, none, none, that he ever made a serious effort to quit. He never asked his wife or his father to help him, and he knew both of them had quit smoking cold turkey, so he knew they were successful, and he never asked them. He didn't ask anybody else how they did it or quit. He never went to see a doctor about smoking. Remember he said he didn't believe in doctors, and there is nowhere in any medical record
that says he was addicted.
In fact, the medical records from when he had lung cancer talk about him being a smoker. You saw them this afternoon. They said he was a four-pack-a-day smoker, but it doesn't say he was addicted. It doesn't say he wanted to quit. It doesn't say he told his doctors he wanted to quit because that didn't happen.
The medical records showed that Mr. Sherman had been ill 14 months. Those are the records in evidence. That is before he went to the doctor with what turned out to be cancer. They did not bring -- the Plaintiffs, Mrs. Sherman and her lawyers, didn't bring in Mr. Sherman's treating doctors as witnesses. You haven't heard from any of them.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: We have the medical records, an they are in evidence, and those medical records show you that Mr. Sherman never ever told his doctors that he wanted to quit. He never told his doctors he was addicted, and he was never diagnosed as being addicted, and those medical records were created by independent doctors, people who were
treating him and trying to help him 12 years before this lawsuit was ever filed.
Don't you think that if he was addicted, if he wanted to quit, when he was telling them that he was a four-pack-per-day smoker that he would have told his doctors if that were true? It is not in the records because it didn't happen.
He never asked for a prescription, and some prescriptions you will see in the records that are in evidence -- some prescriptions were available while Mr. Sherman was smoking. He never went to stop smoking clinic. He never went to a support group. He never tried hypnosis or got a video or audiotapes or never threw his ashtrays away. He never threw his ashtrays away. That is the most basic thing you can do if you really want to quit.
He never tried nicotine gum. You could buy it over-the-counter. He never tried the nicotine patch. He never stopped more than this two or three days in 1977 his entire smoking life. The only thing he ever did then that Mrs. Sherman said is he ate cookies or chewed on regular chewing gum because she told him that she wanted him to quit because she had just had a heart attack and she wanted him to quit for her own health, not because
-- he did that -- he made the limited efforts not because he wanted to quit, but because he wanted to satisfy her.
Those are not real quit attempts and those are not serious quit attempts. Nothing stopped Mr. Sherman from trying to quit if he had wanted to, but he never seriously tried. Mrs. Sherman understood that. She understood that she could not impose her wishes on him. That is why she is the one who bought his cigarettes for his whole life, including up to the end.
Now, is that somebody who should be allowed to go forward in this lawsuit to the another phase?
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: How much clearer can it be that he didn't want to quit, he enjoyed smoking, and he didn't want anybody to tell him what to do? He wanted to live his life is own way and chose to smoke. That evidence is overwhelming. Just because a person smokes a lot doesn't mean they can't quit. Heavy smokers can and do quit if they want to.
I want to mention something about the amount he smoked. The records are not clear. Some say
four packs a day. Some say three. Some say two. Then you heard that his employer said he didn't like to litter, and his employer went around picking up his cigarette butts, and he only smoked it halfway down and then he flipped it, so remember that.
Mr. Sherman did as he pleased. He didn't care that he was still smoking when his wife was trying to quit in 1977. She told him he would give them all lung cancer. Remember that. He kept on smoking.
Then you heard about this incident in church.
We keep hearing about that. This is one of those occasions when you can use your common sense here okay. The reason why Mr. Sherman lit up that cigarette in church was not because he was addicted and had to have a cigarette right that minute. He could have walked outside. He could have walked a short ways outside if that were the case. There was something else going on there, and it was not addiction. He could have walked outside if that were the case.
The fact is Mr. Sherman did as he pleased.
That is what the testimony has been. He did as he pleased. He didn't want anybody to tell him what
to do. Even at the end of his life when he was on oxygen, you heard Mr. Alvarez talk about that and Mr. Paige also, I believe. That is not the entire story about that. First of all, there's no record in any of the medical records, no nurse's note, no Hospice note or nothing that says anything about him smoking on oxygen. That is just the testimony of Mrs. Sherman in this case.
At the end of his life, he didn't tell his doctors he wanted to quit. Remember, his nurse, the nextdoor neighbor, the nurse said he didn't plan to stop. Those are her exact words. He didn't plan to stop. At that same time, he was also refusing some medical treatment showing again he wanted to live his life the way he wanted to.
He did as he pleased. We should not second guess him now 12 years later. I was reminded about this, and it reminds me of Mr. Sherman. Have you heard of the song that Frank Sinatra sings "I Did It My Way?" Well, that is Mr. Sherman. Mr. Sherman did things the way he wanted to. He did it his way.
Now, I want to talk about what you've heard at trial and from Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Paige about this cocaine and heroin addiction. Now, that is not Mr. Sherman. What do we know about
Mr. Sherman? Mr. Sherman's smoking does not -- is not in any way described the same way as cocaine or heroin addiction. Mr. Sherman controlled his smoking, not the other way around. He made the decision about where and when he smoked.
You heard her deposition testimony, Mrs. Sherman's deposition testimony, that we played earlier today that said he switched jobs because he had an opportunity for a manager position, a better position. It was his decision to smoke as a reflection of his control. He didn't struggle over it like a heroin or cocaine addict would. He didn't struggle over it, and he wasn't tormented over it, and that was consistent throughout his life.
Mr. Sherman unfortunately was already terminal in 1996 when he went to the doctor. He was already terminal, and so in that circumstance, as Dr. Sreenivasan explained, some people say, well, why would I quit smoking now? Why not do what I enjoy for the rest of the time that I have? Again, he certainly didn't ask his doctor for help.
Whatever it was that happened after he had his lung cancer is not what caused it because he already had it.
Let's go to the next point, number four. He was aware of the dangers of smoking. Ya'll have heard throughout this trial over and over people repeatedly told him that he should quit because of his health for decades. He knew it firsthand according to Mrs. Sherman. Here is what she said. She said -- this is her testimony here. He saw articles in the 1950s and 1960s in the newspapers.
He was aware of the 1964 Surgeon General's Report. He saw the warnings on the packages. Starting in 1953, her parents were after him to quit, particularly the mother-in-law. He laughed them off. His father had a heart attack in 1955 and quit smoking immediately, but that didn't move the needle for him. His aunt told him to quit. The nurse, the neighbor, and Mrs. Sherman told him to quit over and over again, and their niece testified on videotape that Mrs. Sherman complained enough for all of us. Do you remember that? How did he respond? He laughed it off and shrugged his shoulders and grinned at them and just said no.
He was aware of the health risks of smoking, and in 1977 when Mrs. Sherman had her heart attack she quit smoking immediately because she thought her smoking had caused her heart attack. How much
more forceful a warning could Mr. Sherman have gotten than his own wife who quit smoking cold turkey immediately because she thought her smoking caused it?
Mrs. Sherman said he wasn't going to quit regardless of what anybody said to him. They also -- Mrs. Sherman also testified that they had seen what are called public service announcements from the American Cancer Society, the American Heart Association, the American Lung Association, about the health risks of smoking. The 1964 Surgeon General's Report, Mr. Sherman was aware of it. It had no impact. Mr. Sherman was aware of the warning labels started in 1966. The warnings were on every single package of cigarettes Mr. Sherman smoked from January 1st of 1966 forward, and he saw those every day he smoked. He made his decisions to smoke with his eyes wide open, and he had gotten this avalanche of information from all these different sources about it being bad for his health, but who did the Plaintiffs -- who did Mrs. Sherman and her lawyers bring to court to tell you about this? Dr. Kyriakoudes. Now, remember he is the one that said he hadn't looked at any newspapers that the Shermans read. He didn't read
any newspapers in Illinois or Florida. He said Mr. Sherman was irrelevant to his opinions.
One of the instructions that you will get from Judge Streitfeld will be that you should apply the evidence only as it relates to the issue before you. Did you hear Dr. Kyriakoudes say anything at all that related to Mr. Sherman? Was his opinion credible to you in any way when he didn't look at the newspapers that Mr. Sherman read?
Again, they are trying to create this generic person who doesn't exist, and the person we are here about is John Sherman, somebody who did reai newspapers, and somebody that did know about the health risks of smoking.
There is zero evidence that Mr. Sherman ever saw any of those ads that they've shown you or any of those statements by cigarette companies. Here is what Mrs. Sherman said.
"Question: You don't remember Mr. Sherman ever talking to you about any specific cigarette ad either he saw on TV or in the newspapers; is that correct?
Answer: No.
Question: You don't remember that?
Answer: No."
Again, you have two issues to decide in this case regardless of whether you think Mr. Sherman was addicted. You have to decide whether addiction caused his disease. Mr. Sherman's death was not caused by an addiction to cigarettes because he wanted to smoke because he enjoyed it. He chose to smoke and chose not to quit and chose not to get any outside help and chose not to make a serious effort to quit. He was capable of quitting if he tried and for him the pleasure and enjoyment he got outweighed the risks. He was willing to take those risks.
Mr. Sherman's death was not caused by an addiction to cigarettes because he made a series of choices in his lifetime just like we all make choices.
Starting back at the opening statement,
Mr. Trop told you that when Mr. Sherman was gettin started smoking, nobody knew about the health risks of smoking, but we brought you the testimony of Dr. Lacy Ford to show there was widespread awareness and Mr. Sherman knew all of that himself, and starting in 1950 when the scientific evidence began to catch up with it, it was all widely reported. We showed you all of those newspapers
from Chicago. If you can put that up. This is 38.
It's from Chicago and TV. I want to mention to you one of their secret documents you keep hearing about. They call it the secret documents. They said, oh, Reynolds knew all of this and had all of the secret information that wasn't in the public.
The first one they started with is a document called "Survey of Cancer Research" by Dr. Teague. We showed you at the back there is a four-page bibliography. It was all publicly available information. That was not something that was secret that was known only to Reynolds, but this scientific and medical research led up to the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, and that was a lead story on television and the news for days, and it was one of the top news stories for the entire year of 1964. It was front-page news in Illinois. If you can put that up. That is where Mr. Sherman was living at the time.
After the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, Congress stepped in and Congress said cigarettes are a legal product and should be sold, but we will put warnings on there, and when the warnings went on is when Mr. Sherman became aware from the package itself that cigarette smoking was bad for
his health.
There was a flood of information to the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiffs allegation that Reynolds tried to manufacture doubt just doesn't hold up given that flood of information that was out there, particularly to Mr. Sherman who read the newspaper and watched TV every day, and Mr. Sherman's response was he was not interested in quitting ever.
The Plaintiffs brought you the testimony from Dr. Proctor and Dr. Kyriakoudes that had nothing to do with Mr. Sherman. What did Dr. Proctor talk about? All of this that has nothing to do with Mr. Sherman. No evidence that any of this had anything to do with Mr. Sherman. And the same thing with Dr. Kyriakoudes. Dr. Kyriakoudes went on and on, but he said nothing that I have done has been -- been to evaluate or even look at the circumstances of Mr. Sherman's life.
There are a lot of old documents that you have been shown, and you have been shown some ag this afternoon, but I want to go through and remind you all briefly about some of them. The first example that they put up is this. This is 51.
That is an unsigned draft. When I asked
Dr. Proctor about it or said did Reynolds ever implement that? He said no. That has nothing to do with Mr. Sherman. You know this quote that we keep hearing Mr. Paige say, "Doubt is our product." How many times have we heard that, "Doubt is our product." That appears in this document here, and it says on the very first page of that document that it is a proposal. You will see it. It is in evidence. It is a proposal. That is all it is.
I asked Dr. Proctor about it on cross-examination. I said, what happened after then? What happened after the proposal? He said, it's a cold trail after there. It wasn't implemented. It was a proposal that never went anywhere.
There is another document that you've seen and Mr. Paige shows talking about creating doubt. Again, it says it is a proposal that was not adopted by the company, and I can go on and on with these.
Ask yourself why have they spent so much time in this case talking about documents that were not implemented and have nothing to do with Mr. Sherman? It is because they want you to be mad at us and make us look back so that you will forget
about Mr. Sherman and forget about the fact that Mr. Sherman never seriously tried to quit because he didn't want to.
Let's go to the next simple truth. That is number five. Cigarettes are a legal product. As I said earlier, this case is not about whether cigarettes are safe. Cigarettes can cause lung cancer. Cigarettes can be addictive. Cigarettes are addictive for some people, but every health risk -- every health risk for cigarettes has been known by Congress, and it has been known by the Surgeon General, and it has been reported for decades, and the public policy of the United States -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. PARKER: -- the public policy of the United States is to let the public know and to let the public make the decision for themselves about whether they want to smoke. There are many parts of our society that are engaged in selling cigarettes. It is not because they think they are safe. It is because they think the public has the right to choose. It is not just the cigarette companies. It is the farmers you heard about. It
is the people that do the advertisements you heard about.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. PARKER: Judge Streitfeld when he gives you the instructions again at the end of the closing arguments will instruct you about legal cause, and to be a legal cause, Mrs. Sherman must prove that but for the alleged addiction, the jury would not have occurred.
The bottom line is the Plaintiff must prove that Mr. Sherman would not have been injured but for his addiction, and the Plaintiff can't prove that. That is a critical element of their claim.
During both Mr. Paige and Mr. Alvarez's comments to you, they just kept talking over and over about phase II; we want to get to phase II; we want to get to phase II, but this is a smoker who never seriously tried to quit and who wanted to smoke, and those are the facts before you.
We brought Dr. Jim Figlar to court. He is a top person at Reynolds for Winston cigarettes. He has 64 people reporting to him. He is the top person for all product development, including Winston cigarettes. He came to court, and he gave
you the facts about Winston cigarettes. The facts are nicotine is in the tobacco plant. It naturally occurs. It is not something that is added in cigarettes. It is the same as caffeine in coffee beans. It is there in the plant, and part of it -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Overruled. Continue.
MS. PARKER: One of the goals of Reynolds wa: to reduce the nicotine yield of cigarettes over time, and he explained to you -- Dr. Figlar explained to you that Reynolds invested tremendous amounts of time, efforts and money to accomplish that. Our government has been involved as well, including, for example, the National Cancer Institute Tobacco Working Group back in the '60s that Reynolds fully participated in, and you saw one of the boards today that Mr. Paige had, and witness after witness during the trial talked about the TIRC. I know you all remember that. They keep saying it was a fraud, but nothing could be further from the truth. It was no secret the cigarette companies funded that. Dr. Proctor even admitted we told the federal government, the Department of Justice, that in January of 1954. How can that be a secret? And those same grantees were funded by
people like the National Cancer Institute, the American Cancer Society, with leading research institutions, Harvard, Yale, and all of these in Florida. How can that be a secret? They published thousands of times in all of these medical journals, so how can that be a secret? It was cited in the Surgeon General's Reports over and over again.
Again, remember the Frank Statement that you heard about. There is no evidence Mr. Sherman saw that. And what the Frank Statement says is we are going to investigate the health risks of smoking, and that is exactly what they did. And the scientists who did it included five people who won Nobel Prizes.
Now, is it credible to say that this is all part of a fraud? How can Reynolds have engaged in secrets when Reynolds funded and supported all of this research and worked with the United States Government and -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled. That is enough. Too many objections.
MS. PARKER: Which leads us back to this point. They know they cannot win based on the
facts of Mr. Sherman, so they are just trying to make us look bad and hope you will forget about the facts of Mr. Sherman's life and the fact that he went 24 years without even trying to quit.
Then he made these few very half-hearted efforts in 1977 when his wife wanted to him to quit, and he didn't try to quit for the rest of his life. They want you to forget about that.
Simple truth number six, the last one. It was Mr. Sherman's choice to smoke. Let me turn back to the question of how do you best describe addiction and what did the evidence here show abou addiction?
We brought you the best expert in this case for Mr. Sherman, because as I mentioned before,
Dr. Sreenivasan works with people like him. She treats people, veterans. She has worked for the FBI. She teaches. She has published. Here is how she compares against Dr. Glassman. She has forensic experience. She treats patients. He didn't treat patients. She diagnoses addiction every week. She applied accepted diagnostic criteria and reviewed all of the fact depositions. Remember Dr. Glassman hadn't reviewed all of the depositions in this case. Here they don't even get
to first base.
Now, Mr. Paige or Mr. Alvarez, I can't remember which one said, well, we showed her these documents, and she agreed with them. Well, do you remember then when it was my turn to come back, foi example, the American Cancer Society website, they asked her about it, and I asked her about the rest of it, and she explained that website has five stages of quitting. Do you remember that? The first stage is you have to be motivated. She said Mr. Sherman didn't even meet stage one. She explained that nicotine is not intoxicating. It doesn't make you drunk. You don't lose control over your smoking. It has been known for hundreds of years that many people who smoke can find it hard to stop. There is nothing new about that.
Some people smoke because they enjoy it like Mr. Sherman did.
Now, in popular everyday terms, we say a lot of things are addictive or addicting, and we brought you the testimony of several family and friends, and some of them said that they had no training, but they thought Mr. Sherman was addicted. Again, those aren't experts, and both sides knew -- we had to bring experts, so you heard
experts in this case. There is a very substantial difference, very substantial difference, between what Mr. Sherman did, Mr. Sherman's smoking, and cocaine or heroin addiction. That comparison is not true. It just doesn't ring true for Mr. Sherman. It is not a fair or accurate comparison when you look at the facts of his life.
Here is the bottom line from Mrs. Sherman.
On those two or three occasions there in 1977, the only times he made any effort at all to quit, she said he was able to function normally. He was able to go about his daily routine. She said it didn't interfere with his work. She said that he only had some irritability, nothing that comes close to withdrawal from heroin or cocaine.
And I want to say something else, too, with respect to addiction. I saw one of the slides this afternoon, and it said genetics susceptibility. It said some people have genetics susceptibility to being addicted. Well, that is not Mr. Sherman. We know his father was able to quit smoking cold turkey immediately when he had a heart attack in 1955. There is no evidence there was any genetic susceptibility for Mr. Sherman. They keep telling you all of the general facts and just ignore
Mr. Sherman.
The true picture of Mr. Sherman is the opposite of what they are describing. The bottom line is no one forced Mr. Sherman to smoke. Some people don't want to smoke, and they don't. Some people do want to smoke. Some people choose to smoke, and they are smokers, and some people who choose to smoke later in their lives choose not to smoke, and they make an effort, and many of those are successful, but you have to make an effort first.
Our society gives us the right to make all of those choices. The testimony is that Mr. Sherman chose to smoke. He chose to continue smoking, and he chose to change brands. Remember he changed tc Winston. He chose not to go to the doctor, and he chose not to try anything to get outside help to quit, and he never seriously chose to quit.
Whether you agree with him or not, he was his own man, and he lived his life the way he wanted to live it, and Mrs. Sherman would not have kept on asking him to quit if she didn't think he would be able to. That is just common sense. The real Mr. Sherman was in control. He was a strong-willed man, stubborn. He was his own man. He was
headstrong, and he didn't want to quit, and those responses are consistent for his whole life. And he never ever expressed any regret for his smoking. And at various points along the way, if Mr. Shermai had made different choices, the outcome here might have been different also. Just like the Surgeon General's warning says, "Quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health."
What the Surgeon General has been saying since 1985 on the cigarette packages is that if you stop smoking, you can greatly reduce your health risks. That is why we brought you Dr. Barsky. Our bodies have the ability to repair itself and that healing begins soon after you stop smoking, so ask yourself if he had quit in the '50s, '60s, '70s, all of those times when Mrs. Sherman's family was telling him to, would he still have died from lung cancer? If he had quit in 1964 when the Surgeon General's Report came out, would he still have died from lung cancer? If he would have quit when the warning labels came out, would he have died from lung cancer? If he quit in 1977 when his wife had the heart attack, would he still have died from lung cancer?
All of those times I've just gone over from
1953 to 1977, Mr. Sherman never once tried to quit. Those are the choices of somebody who is a willing smoker.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Sherman made decisions and choices throughout his life. He had control over those choices, and he could have stopped just like his wife did and just like his father did and just like tens of other millions of Americans have done, but he never made a real bona fide serious effort to quit. The very little amount he did back there in 1977 was only because Mrs. Sherman asked him to, and he was trying to gei her off his back for a little while.
Here we have a man who smoked with warnings on the packages and who was told by his family since at least the early 1950s that smoking was bad for him. He is a man who saw the risks involved for himself because of his father's heart attack and his wife's heart attack. He decided to smoke nevertheless, but whose wife has now come to court and is asking you in this lawsuit for money damages. That is the case that you have before you.
Mr. Sherman never had personal motivation to stop smoking because he loved to smoke. Whatever
word that's used to describe smoking, whether it is habit or addiction or whether it is nicotine dependence or whatever the word is doesn't address the issue of his actions, and was Mr. Sherman's death caused by -- legally caused by an addiction to cigarettes? Did Mr. Sherman smoke because he couldn't stop or because he just didn't want to stop and didn't seriously try?
The evidence has shown you in this case, and I think you will decide this when you go back and deliberate, that Mr. Sherman's death was not caused by an addiction to cigarettes because he had control. He chose not to quit. He was aware of the risks. He was capable of quitting if he just tried. He chose not to get any outside help. He wanted to smoke.
Now, if the people who are the closest to Mr. Sherman, like Mrs. Sherman, if they couldn't convince him to try after years of Mrs. Sherman telling him that he should, what else could any other person or any other company have done?
Now, during the jury selection one of the first questions that I asked when I was asking you questions as a group, I asked you, and each one of you said that you believed that individuals should
be permitted to make that choice for themselves. Whether you agree with the choices Mr. Sherman mad or whether you agree with how he led his life is not the issue here. And, again, we shouldn't second guess what he decided for himself as to how he wanted to live his own life. That brings us back to the verdict form.
It contains, again, this one question that has two parts to it, and after you go back and consider all the evidence in this case, you will see that the answer to that question is no.
When are you evaluating the evidence in this case, please focus on these six simple truths.
This case is about John Sherman. Nobody else. He didn't want to quit. He loved to smoke. He never made a serious effort to quit. He was aware of the dangers of smoking. Cigarettes are a legal product, and it was his choice to smoke.
How can you possibly answer yes the way that Mr. Paige and Mr. Alvarez are asking you when Mr. Sherman only tried to quit two or three times ever, and those were only half-hearted, not serious, and only lasted a few days, when every single friend and family member who testified said that Mr. Sherman had been warned and was aware of
the risks of smoking, and when everybody -- every single friend and family member testified that he liked to smoke, he enjoyed smoking?
I want to express my appreciation again to all of you for your service as jurors here, and, again, the same as I asked you in my opening statement and when I started this afternoon: When you go back, keep your focus on Mr. Sherman. Please keep your focus on Mr. Sherman.
I want to conclude this afternoon with a couple of final thoughts. If you smoke for 50 years, and you never make a serious effort to quit, you didn't want to quit, if you only give up smoking two or three times for a couple of days over 50 years, you didn't want to quit, if you tell your wife to stop nagging you, you didn't want to quit, if your wife says that you would have quit if you wanted, you didn't want to quit, if you didn't even throw out your ashtrays, you didn't want to quit, if all you did was to chew gum and eat cookies a couple of times, you didn't want to quit, if you never tried any type of stop smoking aid, any kind of outside assistance, you didn't want to quit, and if you smoked because you enjoy it and you want to smoke, you didn't want to quit, despits
what they have told you this afternoon, it's not just a simple issue of whether Mr. Sherman was addicted. That is only part of it. The other part of it -- that is why we have the word "and" up there. The other part of the question is whether addiction was the legal cause of his death, and it was not.
Now, there's a symbol that is in a lot of places about Lady Justice, and she is blindfolded, and she holds up the scales of justice, and the reason why she is blindfolded is because when you are trying to reach a decision, when you are trying to decide what is the just and right thing here, you are blindfolded so you are not swayed by prejudice against one of the parties. You are not prejudiced by something you might have heard about one of the parties that is not the facts in this case.
Instead, justice is blind so you can make your decision based only on the facts of the case, and here it's the facts of Mr. Sherman, so you stand between us and the question of whether the spouse of a smoker who enjoyed smoking, who understood the risks of smoking all of his life, who never seriously tried to quit, will be able to
go forward with their case on money damages.
The Plaintiff's counsel told you this case is about choice. Let's see what Mrs. Sherman said about Mr. Sherman and choice:
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
"Question: Do you remember that from articles and things you read in the newspaper?
Answer: Yes.
Question: And Mr. Sherman was aware of that as well?
Answer: Yes.
Question: What reaction did he have, if any, to those reports?
Answer: He really didn't have any reactions because he loved smoking so much and he wasn't going to quit.
Question: So regardless of what they were saying, he was going to continue to smoke?
Answer: Yes."
We are in your hands. We ask you to follow the law and to use your common sense. Look at the facts of this case and return a verdict for Reynolds.
Thank you very much for your time this afternoon.
Thank you, Your Honor. That will conclude my closing.
