MR. SHIELDS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon, everyone.
JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. SHIELDS: I want to thank you again for your time, service, and for the verdict you
returned. Janice wants to thank you. I can't tell you how much Janice, John, Greg, Leslie and I, our whole team, appreciate how attentive you've been, how hard you've worked, and how you've kept up with all this evidence as we've gone through it and returned your verdict in a reasonable and expedited fashion.
This phase of the trial is about the amount of money to be awarded in punitive damages. You already decided in answering your Question 8 on the first verdict form that punitive damages are warranted under these circumstances, and so the question now is -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: -- so the question now in this phase is the amount to be awarded.
The purpose of punitive damages is to punish and deter from future conduct. It is the way our system ofjustice in a civil case, unlike a criminal case, is able to punish and deal with deterrence.
The Court will instruct you about those issues and what the law requires for the award of punitive damages and what should be considered. The amount
to be awarded is an amount necessary and appropriate and fair in meeting those goals of punishment and deterrence.
Let me start, then, by reviewing the evidence on this phase that is relevant to the amount of punitive damages. The Court is going to instruct you on what consideration should be given in determining the amount of punitive damages. And we'll bring up a slide -- if we may, Raegan.
The instruction will tell you that the considerations to be made for the amount of punitive damages include the nature, extent and degree of the misconduct and related circumstances, the financial resources, and any mitigating evidence.
Now, Phase I dealt primarily with the nature, extent and degree of the misconduct. I'm not going to obviously repeat the closing argument again -- I know you're relieved by that -- and cover all the evidence we talked about the other day about the nature, extent and degree of misconduct. I would simply remind you, however, that the evidence from Phase I can be considered in this Phase II as well in dealing with the nature, the extent and the degree of misconduct.
And so, as a quick summary of that evidence, it
demonstrated that R.J. Reynolds Company knowingly targeted kids in its advertising -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Improper argument.
If I could have the continuing objection on harm to others, we can go on.
THE COURT: You got it.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you.
MR. SHIELDS: -- that they designed cigarettes to create and sustain addiction, that the fundamental reason addicted smokers continued to smoke was because of addiction, and it was because of that sustained smoking as a result of addiction that the death and disease that results from smoking occurred.
You responded to the question on the agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects or the addictive nature of nicotine. I'm not going to repeat that evidence again, but you can consider that evidence as well in thinking about the nature, extent and degree of the misconduct.
What it comes down to is that there is a 50-year history of misconduct that stretches right up to Mr. Sikes' death. And that is appropriate for you to consider.
We offered, however, additional evidence for this Phase II that dealt with the second aspect of it, the financial resources of the company, because, after all, this phase is about what amount would be appropriate to deter and to punish. And in order to know what amount would be appropriate, you need to know something about their financial resources. So we brought Ian Ratner here to testify yesterday based upon his review of their financial records that are from public reports.
And what he told you was, first, that the value of this company is greater than 25 billion -- that's with a "b" -- billion dollars. Its market capitalization -- that is, their stock price times the number of shares -- is at approximately $25 billion. If anybody wanted to buy this, if another company wanted to buy this, they would have to pay that amount, at least, in order to acquire this company. That gives you great indication of its current value.
He also told you that they currently have operating revenue of about $8 billion a year.
Dr. Figlar admitted this morning they sold about 75 to 78 million cigarettes a year. That's its primary source of income. And from those sales it generates
about $8 billion in revenue.
After paying all of its expenses and all of the deductions that the accounting and tax laws will allow, it ends up with an operating profit, an operating income, of last year about $2.4 billion.
Most importantly, what Mr. Ratner told you was what amount of money they had laying around that could be used without any impact on them whatsoever in paying to punish and deter them. And he said they pay out annually about a billion dollars in dividends to their shareholders for stock that has been growing at about 17 percent compound in the recent years. So this investment in that stock not only gained that incredible growth during these times, but it's generated about a billion dollars in dividends.
In addition to that money being paid out, it sits on, year in and year out, about $2 billion in cash that sits around in the company.
So that when asked the question about what amount of money could they easily pay, Ian Ratner responded, "Well, if nothing else, the dividend matter of at least a billion dollars without even considering the cash reserves that the company has."
Now, what did R.J. Reynolds say in response to
that financial information? They tried to suggest that somehow they might be insolvent from fluctuations of market value, depending on what was going on in the market.
This is a company that has grown 17 percent compound in these hard times. This is a 150-year-old company that has a rate of growth and a capitalization that has been nothing but profits year in and year out. There is absolutely no basis to suggest that they may face some difficulty in the future.
I suggest to you it's a little manipulative to talk about, "Well, if we deducted good will from this figure, then we'd come out with a negative level."
Well, you know, you can play mathematical games if you want. If you include something that's not included in the figure and then deduct it from the figure, then mathematically you'll have a negative figure. It's irrelevant to anything. The good will is what's valuable. It's not included in their book value. And it's something that, if you wanted to talk about making any mathematical deduction, you ought to stop at the top -- start at the top, the 25 billion, not at some lower figure.
But the reality is, is there any question about the financial strength and solvency of this company? As Ian Ratner told you, it's extraordinary what they've been able to do and how much money they make.
The question you have to ask is, what amount of money would it take to deter and punish an entity with all those financial resources? What amount of money would be necessary to deter them from doing the kinds of things they have done for the last 50 years? That's the point of punitive damages, and that's the question you're going to have to answer.
Now, in response to these kinds of arguments, what we heard this morning from Dr. Figlar was that they have developed some safer products and that not all the people that were there historically are still there and that they have all of these high-sounding principles on their website.
Of course, I expect them to include those statements on their website, and I would expect that over 50 years that some of the people that were engaged in that misconduct are, merely because of age and attrition, no longer going to be with the company. But the question is, has the company changed? The question is, from the evidence you
saw, is there any indication it's any different today than it used to be?
And to answer that question, you ought to think specifically about the one example they wanted to talk about this morning, Eclipse. The Eclipse cigarette, the safer alternative, this less hazardous cigarette.
Once again they are totally at odds with the consensus of the scientific community as set out in the Surgeon General's report. Because what the Surgeon General says about Eclipse is not only is it not less hazardous; in fact, for some things like carbon monoxide and two or three other carcinogens, it actually increases the level of harmful exposure instead of reducing it.
But above and beyond that, the Surgeon General concluded that it does -- there is no evidence that, like low-tar cigarettes or like filters or like anything else it has done for the last 50 years, that it has reduced the risk of smoking one iota.
The data simply does not show that.
Yet they continue to market and advertise it just like they did the filters in the '50s and low-tar cigarettes in the '60s and '70s, by affirmatively asserting that it reduces the risk and
is less hazardous. That's the same old conduct that they've been engaged in during the entire 50 years of their conspiracy.
I submit to you that R.J. Reynolds Company simply doesn't get it. They simply don't understand that they need to do things differently. Youth marketing is in their DNA. Creating cigarettes that are designed to make people addicted and keep them addicted is part of their DNA. Blaming their customers and victims as the ones who are responsible is part of their DNA. They don't know how to do it any other way.
And the only way they're ever going to get the information and get the message is if jurors like you say, "The only way I can punish, the only way I can deter you, since it's not a criminal case, is by money." That's what the system is about. That's what this phase of the case is entirely about.
So what amount of money do we take? What amount of money are you going to think is necessary to deter them?
In punishing them and deterring them, you need to think about the harm to Janice Sikes. This case, as the Judge will instruct you, is not about the harm to all those other smokers, but it's about the
harm to Janice Sikes and to Jim Sikes.
And what the evidence was is that all of this conduct that we've been talking about directly related to him. He was a teenager when he started smoking. He was the target of their marketing. He switched to light cigarettes. He was the target of their marketing that that was less hazardous. He was addicted and continued to smoke because of that addiction. He was the target of everything they have done wrong during that 50 years, as well as other people. But this case is about him and about Janice Sikes.
What amount of money will punish for that? What amount of money will deter that?
Well, I would suggest to you that given the financial evidence you've seen, given the degree of the misconduct over that period of time, that it would be appropriate for you to consider awarding hundreds of millions of dollars. What would it really take to deter them, given that balance sheet, given the amount of money they have?
But we're not going to ask for that amount of money. We're going to suggest to you that under these circumstances in this case it would be appropriate to consider a punitive damage award of
no more than nine times the compensatory damage award. That would be a fair and reasonable figure, to take that multiple of nine times the approximately four-plus-million dollar verdict you rendered, and return a punitive damage award of that amount.
Will it deter them? I don't know. It's a start. Will it punish them? Well, it's certainly some punishment for Jim Sikes' death.
Now, this part of the case is not about compensating Jim Sikes. That's already been done. That's what your first verdict was. But the law provides in addition to that compensation, as you answered on the first question, punitive damages are warranted. And by warranted, then, it is your duty and your obligation to determine what amount would be appropriate to deter, what amount would be appropriate to punish under these circumstances.
And we can suggest an amount, but it's ultimately your decision to determine what that amount is.
I'm going to listen to what Mr. Boyce has to say. I'll be back to talk to you a little more after he has made his comments.
Thank you again for your attention.



MR. SHIELDS: Thank you.
I'm not going to take a lot of time in responding. I think the responses are relatively clear. But I do want to say a few things.
Mr. Boyce begins by saying that the message has been received, that he received it, Dr. Figlar received it, the R.J. Reynolds Company received it. And then he proceeds to try and justify everything that we have been arguing about for the last three weeks. And then he proceeds to argue the same positions he's argued throughout the entire trial.
He doesn't get it.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SHIELDS: If the message is received, why is the argument the same? Have you heard one person state from R.J. Reynolds, Dr. Figlar or their counsel, that in fact they now understand that it was inappropriate for them to knowingly target kids?
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Beyond the scope of my argument, and Dr. Figlar addressed all these issues.
THE COURT: All right. Sustained.
MR. SHIELDS: Dr. Figlar specifically tried to defend everything they were doing -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates his testimony, beyond the scope.
THE COURT: That's overruled. He's commenting on Dr. Figlar's testimony today.
MR. SHIELDS: Dr. Figlar specifically tried to defend their conduct and argued about whether the Surgeon General was right and argued about what their Eclipse figures were and argued about whether their low-tar products were safer and told you that they had done all of these wonderful things to reduce the risks over the years.
That doesn't sound much to me like he got it.
It doesn't sound much to me like the message was received. It's the same argument they've always made and they will continue to make.
So it is up to you as a jury to send them a message to the contrary. It is up to you as the jury to say to them, "We're going to punish you. We're going to punish you appropriately for the death of Jim Sikes. We're going to do that not only to punish you, but we're going to do that to deter you from continuing such conduct in the future," because there's no indication that they have changed or will change.
Now, we heard in closing argument that they have done all these things to change, but there's simply no evidence that they've changed. The fact that their people are not the same, the fact that people have died off over the years, certainly doesn't mean they've changed at all.
The best evidence that they haven't changed one bit are the most recent Surgeon General's reports, which continue, as I pointed out to Dr. Figlar, to state the same thing. They continue to assert that these products are safer when there's no evidence that they are; that they continue their advertising
of them in ways to suggest they're less hazardous when in fact they're not less hazardous at all; and that their advertising for products like Snus and these other products is specifically directed at trying to get people to continue to smoke instead of quit smoking.
Because the whole point of the advertising, in that quote I read to you from the Surgeon General, is -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Harm to others, continued objection. Second, misstates Dr. Figlar's testimony and the report.
THE COURT: It's overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: The whole point from that quote from the Surgeon General was that what they have used these products for and what they have said to advertise these products is, "Use this when you can't smoke so that you can keep addicted and smoke at other times."
That's what it's all about. You use the Snus product because today you can't smoke all the time. Instead of quitting, use the Snus product instead of quitting, so that when you go into class or you go into a restaurant or you go into -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SHIELDS: -- a theater -MR. BOYCE: Move to strike the reference to "class." In the quote he's -THE COURT: Okay. "Class" is struck.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you.
MR. SHIELDS: So that when you go into a theater, so that when you go into any of all the other activities where smoking is prohibited today, you still get your hit of nicotine so that you continue smoking.
That's what all those products are about, how to keep people smoking, how to keep people addicted to nicotine, because that's the only way they continue to make that incredible amount of money that they make.
Now, what amount of money does it take to deter them? I must say I found it a bit offensive to suggest that the appropriate amount of money was to pay back the cost of cigarettes.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Move to strike the phrase "offensive" and Mr. Shields' personal views.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: The suggestion was the appropriate punitive damage amount, after Mr. Sikes
was targeted as a teenager like other teenagers in this time period, became addicted to cigarettes, struggled to quit and ultimately died from them, that the appropriate thing to do after the death of Mr. Sikes from their product, which you have found was unreasonably dangerous, is to give him his money back.
How in the world does that punish them? How in the world does that deter them from anything? The point of punitive damages is to punish and deter in addition to the compensatory damages. That's what the law provides.
Now, what amount? I've told you I don't think you ought to award more than nine times the figure, or 36 million. But think about it this way. Recall when Dr. Krugman testified and he told you how much they spent on advertising?
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Beyond the scope. It's not proper rebuttal.
THE COURT: Overruled. It's part of Phase I.
MR. BOYCE: Might I request a brief surrebuttal on this point?
THE COURT: After he's finished you can talk about it -- we'll -- we'll talk about it, but I doubt it.
MR. SHIELDS: He told you how much money they spent on an annual basis. Pretty easy to divide that and figure out how much money they spent on a monthly basis, a weekly basis and a daily basis.
One day of advertising was $33 million.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. That's not a figure specific to Reynolds. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Mr. Boyce, it's argument of his recollection of the evidence.
MR. SHIELDS: Wouldn't we all be better off with one day less of their advertising? And that is in the range of the figures we're talking about as an appropriate amount to deter and to punish them.
Ultimately it's up to you. We're not talking about huge figures. These are a drop in the bucket in all the money that they have. It's up to you, then, to figure out an appropriate amount. You obviously would be justified to talk about dramatically more levels, but I suggest to you to come back at nine times compensatories of $36 million.
Thank you, again.
