MS. PARKER: Okay. Thank you.
Good afternoon, everybody.
This is my last time that I have to talk to you. And I want to start by thanking you again for your attention and your time yesterday. We know you-all spent a lot of time back there
deliberating and I'm sure going through documents and talking about everything. And that's you-all's job. And we appreciate the time that you spent yesterday to do that.
I can't say that we're not disappointed with your verdict yesterday, obviously. But I do want to say that we accept it, because -- and we respect the role that you have. That's your decision, and we accept it, and we respect your position to reach that verdict. And now we want to move forward and deal with the issues we have to deal with today.
I also want to just tell you again that we brought Mr. Adams down here, one of the top people at the company. And as he told you, he has told the other members of the leadership team about your verdict. So I want you to know that it's been taken seriously by the company. And that's why I brought him down here today, to talk to you some more about what the company is like today.
You know, the evidence you've been hearing and what Mr. Diaz just told you again, that was from the company a long time ago. And the company that is going to write the check here is the company today. That's really important for you to
remember.
You know, if you think back in our society, all the different parts of our society have changed over the years from the 1950s. You know,
I don't know that, as a woman, that I'd be a lawyer here making this argument, you know, if you were looking just back at — things change.
Things change. And what you need to do is to look at Reynolds today.
And I'd like to go over just a little bit of that with you. I'm not going to take a lot of time. But I want to talk about some issues that I hope you will keep in mind as you go back to the jury room and deliberate.
First of all, all those documents that you saw, Reynolds can only be punished for something Reynolds did. And so if you go back and look at any of these documents, please make sure that you look and see, is that a document from Reynolds? Because otherwise, as the Court has instructed you, that can't be used in this part of the case. It can't be used as a basis for punishment obviously.
And all those people that you-all saw, they're gone. They're not in the company anymore.
Some of them are passed away. I know you heard Mr. Heimann that Mr. Diaz quoted from again. He' passed away. You know, that's not the company today. And I think that's important for you-all to remember as you go back.
The same thing about the documents. As I asked Mr. Adams, and you know, and I know we got question from one of you about the 10-K. That's our point now. Our point now is that's available to everybody. When you-all finish being jurors here, you-all can go look at all of that. They have a computer right there. They can pull every bit of those documents. They can pull about ingredients. They can pull up the website. They can pull up the 10-K. They can pull up everything. Today the company is 1000 percent transparent, not like it was, not like business was conducted back in the 1950s.
And again, it's the company today that's going to have to write this check and that he's asking you to punish.
And, today, remember we showed you on the website there are links to other organizations, including to the Surgeon General. So everything that you heard Mr. Diaz talk about, like in the
1950s when he said, Oh, the 1960s, the Surgeon General came out with a report and that Reynolds — or the tobacco companies disagreed with it? That's not how it is today. Today we have our link, you know. You just have to go and click it, and you go straight to the Surgeon General. It's a different situation now.
And then the same thing with the tobacco industry organizations, all of those you-all heard about, the TIRC, TI, CTR, they're all gone.
They've been gone since 1998 and there is no such organization today. We're not a member of anything like that today.
You also heard about the change in the marketing and advertising limits today. What you saw from the ads from the 1950s, we can't do that today. There are all those different restrictions that are in place that Reynolds follows, so, again, think about that when you're thinking of punishing Reynolds today.
And then the FDA, that's a really important part of the change in the company. There is a federal law now — there is federal legislation that gives the FDA oversight on all tobacco products, including cigarettes. So today the FDA
regulates manufacturing, packaging, marketing, any kind of changes in the product, the tar and nicotine, disclosure of ingredients, and disclosure about health and other research, and then they have the ability to make rules going forward too. So right now, our federal — our society, our federal government enacted a law that said, hey, we need — we want additional oversight, and they have it now. And they've had it for several years. So please keep that in mind also.
I want to talk now about the issue of punishment and the request that Mr. Diaz made for the dollar amount. I know you-all have heard this so many times during the trial. And this is the last time I'm going to say it, but it applies in this part of your deliberations also. And that is cigarettes are legal. You know, Mr. Diaz keeps talking about preventible deaths. Honestly, you know, when you think about this, you consider honestly, that applies right today, to our federal government, you know. Our federal government could ban cigarettes. They could stop all of this. And they've decided not to do that. Our society has decided not to do that.
And so when Mr. Diaz keeps talking about these charts, which again, they're federal government information about the number of deaths, of course it's horrible any time anybody passes away. It's bad when anybody has had cancer.
I'm certainly not saying anything to the contrary. But our society has said that you can go buy cigarettes still. And so you need to keep that in mind as you listen to Mr. Diaz's arguments.
I want to also — there were some questions about the net worth. And I want to address that just really briefly, the point that Mr. Adams made is you can't just look at that number, because net worth includes all these other things, 85 percent of that number is intangibles, the things that you can't go out and sell on the marketplace. And the other parts of it are things like the machinery or obligations we have to farmers or obligations we have to pension or obligations we have to shareholders. It's not this huge big number the way that Mr. Diaz and Dr. Raffa made it seem.
I also want to talk to you about what the evidence was from Mr. Adams about other obligations that the company has because of other
punitive damage awards. The total amount — total amount that Reynolds has already incurred and has to pay is $64,000,000 already, total. And then there is an additional $200,000,000 that's not final but they are judgements already against Reynolds for that amount. Again, that's a total amount. So keep that in mind. Reynolds has been punished. Reynolds has been punished from those awards already.
So I want to talk now about the amount that Mr. Diaz asked for. You have the authority, you you have the power to put whatever number that you want in there that you feel is appropriate with your own conscience. You can put a zero there, and that's, of course, what we ask for. You can put a zero. But if you're going to put a number down, don't just pull something out of thin air. Don't just think, oh, well, cigarettes caused deaths to people. Again, our government allowed that, and does allow it today. All of us. This government is us. Government is not somebody else. We are the government. We are society. We are the ones who made that decision and are still making that decision.
So I would ask you instead to think about a
number that you-all have already settled on as something you thought was appropriate. Yesterday you came back and you said that you thought $10,000,000 was the amount to compensate Mrs. Smith, so you've done that. That's the compensation part. But that's a number that you-all arrived at is $10,000,000. But then you reduced that, for it will be reduced by the Court, reduced by $3,000,000 because of that 30 percent, you know, on the verdict form. And so again, what I'm asking first is that you-all consider putting zero down because our society, all of us, are the ones who made this decision about cigarettes being sold.
But if you do want to put a number down, I would ask you to consider that three million dollars. That's your number. You know, that's a number you've already decided in terms of what would make her whole and that's the difference in terms of what you reduced it by yesterday. So I would ask you to consider that.
You know, your job here, I know, has been — has been a difficult one for you. You-all have been sitting here, we're into our third week, and I know you-all want to go ahead and get this over
with so you can get back there and consider it.
But it's really a sacred duty that you have. And as you're considering it, remember where we are too. Okay. How many times have you heard Mr. Diaz say that we're from out of town? How many times have we heard we're from Winston-Salem? And we are, you know. The company is from Winston-Salem. That's where the headquarters are. But that's not a reason to punish us. That's not appropriate as a basis to punish us, because we're not from Jackson County.
Instead, think about the things that Mr. Diaz has said and put those -- I respectfully ask to put those in context. Only look at documents that are from Reynolds. And consider that whatever documents you're looking at, those people aren't there anymore. They haven't been there for years. And there is now a regulatory framework in place that will guarantee that nothing like what Mr. Diaz has talked about could ever possibly happen, because our society, our federal government has that framework in place to oversee it.
And again, this decision about cigarettes is one that we all made as part of society, as part
of our government.
So that's all I'm going to leave you with this afternoon. Other than to say, again, thank you very much for your service, and we respect your positions, and I want to thank you on behalf of Reynolds and Mr. Adams and Dr. Gentry also.
So, thank you again for your attention this afternoon.
Thank you, Your Honor. That's all I have.