                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MS. BAKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
     please the Court, counsel, and Mrs. Smith, good
     morning, ladies and gentlemen.
          Now, when Mr. Wichmann stood up, he
     started his presentation by quoting my words
     from opening statement, that this was a case
     about one smoker and one smoker only, Julius
     Smith.
          And for a minute, I actually thought he
     was going to talk about Mr. Smith.  But what
     did he do next?  He pulled up a document from a
     conference that was held in England in the
     1980s.
          And you had to ask yourself:  Did that 3248
     have anything to do with Mr. Smith's choices?
          That document didn't make a difference to
     Mr. Smith, like lots of the documents that you
     saw flash up on the screen during the trial.
          And Mr. Wichmann didn't try to argue that
     it did.  Reynolds didn't stand up; I didn't
     stand up; and Mr. Gordon didn't stand up and
     defend against documents like that.  We agree
     that it was wrong-headed.
          And so we spent our time throughout trial
     trying to be efficient and trying to use time
     wisely, and I will try to do the same here this
     morning with my closing.  And we tried to talk
     about what mattered in this case, and that was
     Mr. Smith and the choices that he made.
          Now, I told you that Plaintiff's
     counsel -- I told you in opening that
     Plaintiff's counsel would make it seem like
     Mr. Smith lived in a bubble where he was
     unaware of the health risks and addictive
     nature of smoking.  And they did.
          But you heard the evidence.  Mr. Smith was
     told not to smoke before he ever picked up that
     first cigarette.
          And he saw, read, and understood the 3249
     warnings on every pack of cigarettes he smoked
     from 1966 forward.  That is undisputed.  He
     chose to keep smoking in the face of those
     warnings, so you know -- you know that isn't
     the case, that he grew up and lived in a
     bubble.  He knew the health risks.  He knew
     smoking was addictive.
          Mr. Wichmann said that he was misled.  He
     knew the risks.  He wasn't misled.  He wasn't
     confused.
          And I told you that they would try to
     convince you that something a tobacco company
     said or didn't say made a difference to
     Mr. Smith, and they did.  They spent a lot of
     time on that in this trial.
          They spent days showing you documents and
     videos that no one -- no one could tell you
     that Mr. Smith saw or relied on.  And you saw
     that no warning about the health risks -- not
     from Mr. Smith's parents, not from his wife,
     not from his children, and not from every pack
     of cigarettes that he smoked after 1966.  None
     of those warnings made any difference to him.
          Mr. Smith was smart.  He was hard-working.
     He was his own man, and he made his own 3250
     decisions.  If the warnings that were literally
     all around him, in his house, in the palm of
     his hand every time he picked up a pack, if
     those warnings made no difference, you know
     that nothing a tobacco company said or did
     would have.
          Now, on behalf of myself and Mr. Gordon
     and Mr. Hansen, I want to thank you, like
     others have this morning, for your jury
     service.  Our legal system depends on citizens
     like you responding to the call of civic duty.
          I know you had to give up your time over
     the last two weeks.  I know that this has been
     an inconvenience, but we very much appreciate
     your time and your attention and your patience,
     especially this morning.
          Now, let's talk about what this case is
     really about.
          Mr. Praglin told you just a few moments
     ago to keep your eye on the ball.  And I agree.
     I think that sports analogy is particularly
     important in this case.  Because no matter what
     sport you like, one of the first things that we
     teach kids when they start playing sports is to
     stay focused and keep your eye on the ball. 3251
     And that is especially true here.
          I told you in opening statement -- and it
     remains true today -- that that class action
     that Judge Craig told you about, told you about
     at the beginning of the trial and he mentioned
     it again today, that class action is over.
          And despite what Dr. Cummings tried to
     tell you, this is not a case about smokers in
     general.  It's not a case about tobacco company
     conduct in general, even though Mr. Wichmann
     would have you believe that.
          And he spent most of his time this morning
     talking that, and I expect when he stands up
     after I sit down, he will do that again.  He
     wants your focus on tobacco company conduct and
     not on Mr. Smith.  And we know that conduct
     didn't make a difference to Mr. Smith.
          Now, I told you in opening -- and it bears
     repeating -- that if you look back over the
     millions of pages of documents authored by
     employees of Reynolds and other tobacco
     companies over the last 50 or 60 years, you
     will find statements -- and we saw some of them
     in this courtroom -- you will see statements
     made and ideas expressed that today no one 3252
     would say or think.
          I told you that for too long Reynolds held
     on to the notion that it hadn't been proven
     that smoking could cause disease; that it
     hadn't been proven that smoking was addictive,
     long after -- long after Mr. Smith already knew
     those things.
          And I told you, just like I told you when
     I got started this morning, that many of those
     ideas that you would see expressed, that you
     saw when Mr. Wichmann got up, many were just
     plain wrong-headed.
          But y'all know that we're not here to
     debate those issues.  And we're not here to
     defend those documents, because I think we can
     all agree that those things could not and would
     not be said today.
          That is why I asked you in opening, and
     that is why I ask you now:  Every time you see
     a document or an ad flash up on the screen, ask
     yourself:  What does this have to do -- what
     does this have to do with Mr. Smith's choices.
     Keep your eye on that ball.
          Now, this case is about Mr. Smith.  This
     is his case.  His wife brought this lawsuit. 3253
     And so his choices and his decisions have to be
     examined:  what he knew, when he knew it, and
     what he did with the information that he had.
          That is why we have tried to focus on that
     in presenting the evidence in this case, and
     that is what I hope to focus on in my time with
     you this morning.
          Now, Mr. Praglin, he got up and said there
     was unrebutted testimony from their witnesses.
     It was not unrebutted.  It was not unrebutted.
     We had the opportunity to get up and ask
     questions on cross-examination.  And that is
     the evidence from Reynolds that you can
     consider in this case.
          Now, you will soon get a verdict form from
     Judge Craig.  And you will see that the
     questions on that verdict form -- and you've
     already seen it a little bit this morning.  The
     questions on that verdict form ask you about
     Mr. Smith, not other smokers.
          And so before we get to the four key
     facts -- we talked about those key facts, those
     key issues at the outset.  Before we get back
     to that now and the evidence that you saw as to
     each of those, let me just quickly address 3254
     something that both Mr. Wichmann and
     Mr. Praglin mentioned.
          They talked about the fact that we didn't
     bring any witnesses.  And we didn't.  We all
     know that.  But this case is not about who
     brought more witnesses.  It's about the
     evidence you find to be most convincing, most
     persuasive and most compelling.
          And just like I told you during opening
     statements when I told you that most of our
     evidence would likely come in through the
     cross-examination of Plaintiff's witnesses, you
     heard everything you needed to know from
     Mr. Gordon and Mr. Hansen and me through the
     questions we asked when Plaintiff's witnesses
     took the stand.
          We didn't think you needed to spend more
     time -- any more time here before you decided
     the issues in this case.  We didn't need to
     call a paid expert to certify that Mr. Smith's
     death wasn't caused by COPD or related to
     smoking.
          We didn't need to call a witness to tell
     you that Mr. Smith knew about the health
     hazards of smoking, and he knew about them for 3255
     decades.  You heard that from his sister, Sue
     Pigue, the one who grew up with him and lived
     in the same house as him and was around him
     when he started smoking.
          And yesterday you heard that again when
     Mrs. Smith took the stand.
          Now, Mrs. Smith's lawyers brought two
     experts, Dr. Hurt, their first witness, and
     Dr. Cummings, each of whom has been testifying
     against Reynolds you now know for decades.
          Dr. Hurt actually started this year,
     started 2016 testifying in a case right here in
     this courtroom.  He brought those same slides
     that he used in that trial to talk to you about
     the exact same things in this case.  He didn't
     even change the name on those slides.  And he
     has made hundreds of thousands of dollars over
     the last two years alone.
          Dr. Cummings, that's the one -- that's the
     witness who came and told you right at the
     beginning of his testimony that he was not here
     to talk about Mr. Smith.  He didn't know the
     first thing about Mr. Smith.  He said the
     facts -- that facts are facts.
          Well, the facts are this.  He has made 3256
     over a million dollars testifying against
     tobacco companies.  And he, too, came in here
     and showed you the same documents and videos
     that he has shown in nearly 100 other trials
     that he has testified in.
          You saw some of those again this morning
     when Mr. Wichmann threw many of them back up on
     the screen.  But not a single person, not one,
     who knew Mr. Smith -- we know Dr. Cummings
     didn't know Mr. Smith -- but not one witness
     who knew Mr. Smith walked into this courtroom
     and testified that he didn't know smoking was
     dangerous.  Not one.  Not a single person told
     you that he was somehow confused about the
     health risks of smoking.  He was not.  We know
     that now.  And that, ladies and gentlemen, is a
     fact.
          So ask yourself why Mr. Wichmann spent his
     time this morning trying to persuade you that
     Mr. Smith was misled, that he was tricked into
     smoking and continuing to smoke.  That is not
     the evidence you heard in this case.
          Now, you're going to hear -- you've
     already heard this morning again about those
     findings from an earlier class action.  Judge 3257
     Craig read you those instructions.  And there's
     no dispute about that, ladies and gentlemen.
     Those findings that you will see or that you
     heard this morning in the instruction, they
     don't tell you how to answer any of the
     questions on the verdict form.
          That's because, by your answers to
     specific questions on the verdict form, you
     will get to decide whether those findings even
     apply in this case and ultimately to the
     choices Mr. Smith made.
          Now, you just heard Mr. Praglin.  He has
     now asked you to award millions of dollars and
     damages for Mr.~Smith's choice to smoke
     cigarettes, something you all know that he did
     in the face of warnings for years.
          So in many respects, this case presents a
     very simple question:  Are you going to hold
     Reynolds legally responsible for Mr. Smith's
     choice to smoke cigarettes and award Ms. Smith
     millions of dollars in damages, when the
     evidence clearly demonstrates that he knew the
     risks, but simply made no motivated effort to
     quit smoking until his final and successful
     quit in 2002? 3258
          Now, in a moment we're going to go through
     those four key facts, those four key issues,
     and I am going to walk you through the evidence
     on those points.  Before I do, I want to spend
     just a moment on the sources of evidence in
     this case, where the evidence came from.
          Now, in opening, I asked you to pay close
     attention to these sources and I told you that
     everything that you would see would either come
     from a source that predates this lawsuit,
     meaning before this lawsuit was filed and
     before anyone had an interest in remembering
     things in a way that might be favorable to the
     outcome.
          Things like that claim form that Mr. Smith
     signed under penalty of prosecution for the 16
     years of exposure to mold and chemicals that he
     said -- that he said -- not me, not
     Mr. Gordon -- that he said caused his
     respiratory symptoms, prostate cancer and other
     problems.
          The rest of the evidence came from
     testimony from Mrs. Smith and her children and
     what they told us about Mr. Smith, and that all
     came -- all of that testimony came after this 3259
     lawsuit was filed.
          And now you know why I asked you to pay
     close attention to the sources of evidence.
     Many of the things that Mrs. Smith and her
     children told us here in this courtroom were
     constricted by the prior -- contradicted by the
     prior testimony under oath and they don't fit
     the facts of Mr.~Smith's life.  You are the
     sole judges of the facts and you get to decide
     what testimony you believe.
          Judge Craig will give you this
     instruction.  You have already seen it.  I
     think Mr. Praglin showed it to you.  He will
     give you this instruction on the believability
     of witnesses.  You can see that.  One of the
     things, one of the factors is any interest the
     witness may have in the outcome of the case.
     That is a factor you can consider in
     determining the credibility of a witness.
          And by "interest," we mean a financial
     interest in the outcome of a case.
          I encourage you, I ask you to use your
     common sense when you evaluate the evidence in
     the case.  You can accept or reject any
     testimony in part or in whole, and that is your 3260
     job and your job alone.
          Let me give you an example of when
     Ms. Smith told us one thing here in the
     courtroom that was controverted by other
     evidence.  You heard her tell us on direct
     evidence yesterday, you heard her tell us that
     she didn't know that smoking had health risks
     until her husband was diagnosed with COPD in
     the 1990s.  You recall that testimony.
          But what was the other evidence you heard
     on cross-examination?  You heard that she and
     Mr. Smith talked about nicotine being addictive
     in 1964.  In 1964, they had that conversation.
     He wasn't confused about whether nicotine was
     addictive.  He was not confused about whether
     smoking could be difficult to quit.  He knew
     that in 1964, and he told Ms. Smith that.
          In 1965, she notices that he has a
     smoker's cough.  He is coughing already because
     of his smoking, and she talks to him about it
     and she tells him he has a terrible cough.
          In 1966, that's the first time the
     warnings go on the pack of cigarettes, and
     the Smiths take notice.  They both take notice.
     Mr. Smith sees it, he understands it. 3261
          In 1970, the warning label changes.  And
     you heard about this.  In 1970, the Smiths
     actually have a conversation about the change
     in the language.  Mr. Smith starts that
     conversation.  He shows Mrs. Smith the warning
     label and he reads it to her.  He reads it to
     her.  He wasn't confused.  It wasn't a
     controversy in his mind.
          In the 1980s, Mrs. Smith is reading
     articles about the health risks of smoking in
     the Palatka Daily News and she's talking to
     Mr. Smith about it.  She telling him what he
     already knows.  She's reminding him that
     smoking can be dangerous and it has health
     risks.
          And in 1985, the warning labels change
     again to four rotating warning labels.  And
     once again, the Smiths take notice.  Mr. Smith
     sees it.  He understands it.  He knows there's
     no controversy.  He's not being misled.
     There's no confusion in his mind.
          Now, remember too that when I asked
     Mrs. Smith, she told us on direct examination
     that she never read about the health risks of
     smoking in the newspapers.  Didn't see it,
www.phippsreporting.com
888-811-3408

     didn't read it.  But on cross-examination, I
     pointed out to her her prior testimony where
     she told us under oath that she did, in fact,
     see those articles, she read about them in the
     Palatka Daily News, and that she was a regular
     evening news watcher.
          Now, Judge Craig will tell you that you
     don't have to check your common sense at the
     door.  You don't have to check that down at the
     metal detector.  When deciding whether or not
     to believe the testimony you heard in this
     courtroom, you can use your common sense and
     good judgment.  That, again, is your job and
     your job alone.
          Now, we're going to take you to the four
     key facts in order and I want to talk about the
     evidence, and we'll go through the verdict form
     questions in order.  But as we do that, I ask
     you to ask yourself the following series of
     questions.
          Who was in control of Mr. Smith's choices
     and his decision to smoke cigarettes?  Who was
     in control of that?  Who was in control of his
     efforts to quit smoking?
          Who controlled his motivation to quit? 3263
     Was he addicted?  And if so, was he someone
     whose addiction was so strong, so
     substantial -- and that's from the Court's
     instruction -- so strong, so substantial, that
     he was unable to make the choice to quit?
          And, finally, did Mr. Smith rely on
     anything that Reynolds said or failed to say
     about the health risks of smoking?
          Now, after hearing the evidence in this
     case, you know that Mr. Smith wasn't paying
     attention to what tobacco companies were
     saying.  He wasn't waiting for Reynolds to tell
     him something he didn't already know.  He knew
     the dangers, and he was the only person making
     smoking decisions in his life.
          The truth is, and the evidence has shown,
     that Mr. Smith smoked because he wanted to.  He
     didn't want to throw away his cigarettes.
          Smoking gave him a social outlet.  It
     helped him relax.  He enjoyed smoking with a
     cup of coffee.  Nothing wrong with that.  I
     told you in opening, and it's worth repeating
     here again this morning, we all have the right
     in this country to make decisions for
     ourselves. 3264
          Mr. Smith understood that.  His family
     told you he respected the flag and what it
     stood for.  And what it stands for is free will
     and choice and personal responsibility.
          Mr. Smith made the choice to smoke and
     keep smoking, and he had that right.  We're not
     here to criticize that right.  We aren't here
     to second-guess his choices or decisions, but
     they were his choices and his decisions.
          With the right to make choices for
     yourself, the right to forge your own path in
     life comes personal responsibility.  You can't
     have one without the other.  You can make those
     choices, but at the end of the day, you must
     accept the consequences for those choices.
          Nicotine did not rob Mr. Smith of the
     ability to make choices.  You have heard no
     evidence of the sort.  No evidence.  He was
     smart and hard working and able to accomplish
     things he set his mind to.
          He made his own decisions.  All we need to
     know -- all we need to do to know that is look
     at his life and what he was able to accomplish.
     So with that in mind, let's get to the four
     facts.  These are the facts we discussed in 3265
     opening.
          Plaintiff failed to prove that Mr.~Smith
     was addicted rather than someone who chose to
     smoke and was not motivated to stop until he
     quit smoking for good.
          Plaintiff failed to prove that
     addiction -- addiction, not smoking, but
     addiction was a legal cause of his injuries and
     not his choices and decisions.
          Number 3, Plaintiff failed to meet her
     burden of proving that COPD -- COPD caused
     Mr. Smith's death as opposed to his numerous
     other health issues including aspiration and
     sepsis, which is a word for infection.
          And finally, Plaintiff brought you no
     credible evidence -- none -- that Mr. Smith
     reasonably relied on statements by Reynolds.
          Let's look at the first key issue.
          Addiction.  This is that first issue, the
     first hurdle.
          And this is a question -- this first issue
     is part of a question, the first question on
     your verdict form:  Was Julius Smith addicted
     to cigarettes containing nicotine?  Part one.
     We are going to talk about that now. 3266
          And part two:  If so, was such addiction a
     legal cause of his emphysema or COPD?
          If you answer no to this question, that is
     a verdict for Reynolds.  If you answer yes,
     that is a verdict for Plaintiff, and you have
     decided that Reynolds is liable to Mr.~Smith
     for her husband's choices to smoke.
          So let's look at whether Mr. Smith was
     addicted.
          Now, remember on this -- and you heard
     this instruction from the judge.  You can't
     consider the findings for purposes of answering
     this question.  The findings don't apply yet.
     And let me remind you, too, and you didn't hear
     it this morning, the Court has not and will not
     give you a definition of what it means to be
     addicted.  The Court won't give you a set of
     medical criteria to use to determine whether
     Mr. Smith was addicted.  So let's look at the
     evidence that you heard.
          Now, at the outset, you saw a lot of
     medical records in this case.  They contained
     many medical diagnoses.  But not one, not one
     record that you saw contained a diagnosis from
     one of Mr. Smith's doctors that he was addicted 3267
     to nicotine.  No one who ever treated Mr. Smith
     made a diagnosis of addiction.
          You heard from Dr. Hurt last week, he was
     the lead-off witness, the guy that goes around
     making presentations about not giving yes-or-no
     answers on cross-examination.  He told you that
     it was this simple:  Just count up the number
     of cigarettes that Mr. Smith smoked each day
     and see if he smoked early in the morning.  And
     if he did, he is addicted.
          Those are the two questions under the
     Heaviness of Smoking Index.  And it should come
     as no surprise Plaintiff wants you to use that
     test in this case.  It's a test with only one
     outcome.  I asked Dr. Hurt about this on
     cross-examination, and you saw that.
          You're considered addicted under this test
     even if you score 0.  Even if you score 0.  And
     you remember Dr. Hurt quibbling with me on that
     point when I asked him:  So even someone who
     only smokes one cigarette a day, under this
     test, that person would be considered addicted?
     And he did everything I think he could to avoid
     answering that question, but I think we know
     the answer.  There's only one outcome under 3268
     this test, and that is everyone who smokes
     daily is addicted.
          Dr. Hurt also told us that addiction meant
     a loss of control.  He said that was Addiction
     101, loss of control.
          You have now heard the evidence.  You know
     Mr. Smith was in control of his smoking.  He
     stopped smoking in the house by the late '70s
     or early 1980s.  Never smoked in the house
     again.  He didn't smoke inside the jail when he
     worked at the Volusia County Branch Jail.  He
     was not allowed to smoke inside the jail.
          When he went places where there were
     nonsmoking restrictions like church or work,
     Mr. Smith could abide by those without
     difficulty.  Under Dr. Hurt's Addiction 101
     test, Mr. Smith was not addicted.  Smoking did
     not control him, and he did not lose control
     over his smoking.  And we know that Mr. Smith
     could quit because he did quit.
          There was nothing in the record that told
     us, absolutely nothing, that he couldn't have
     quit earlier.  Smoking never controlled
     Mr. Smith, and when he made a motivated,
     determined effort to quit, he did so. 3269
          This is not the picture of a hopeless
     addict or tortured smoker.  Mr. Smith was a
     willing smoker for almost the entire time that
     he was smoking.
          Based on the evidence you heard, we
     believe you should find that Mr. Smith was not
     addicted, and your answer to this first
     question on the verdict form should be "no" for
     that reason.
          Well, let's get to the second key fact.
     Even if you ultimately decide that Mr. Smith
     was addicted, your work is really just
     beginning because you have to get to the second
     part of that first question.
          And this is that second key fact.
     Plaintiff failed to prove that addiction was a
     legal cause of Mr. Smith's injuries.
          This is the second hurdle.
          Plaintiff has to get over both of these
     hurdles, has to meet her burden on both of
     these to get a yes on the first question on the
     verdict form.
          Now, Mrs. Smith has the burden to prove by
     the greater weight of the evidence that
     Mr. Smith's claimed addiction was a legal cause 3270
     of his COPD.  And, again, this is asking about
     addiction, not smoking.
          The Court gave you an instruction on legal
     cause.  And honestly, the language in the
     instruction is hard to follow, even if you're a
     lawyer.
          But in a case like this, the question of
     legal cause really boils down to quitting.
          Ask yourself this:  Based on all of the
     evidence you heard, was Mr. Smith's claimed
     addiction so strong, so substantial, that it
     stood in the way of a motivated and committed
     effort to quit?
          And let me step back here for just a
     moment because there was some suggestion this
     morning that we have somehow criticized
     Mr. Smith's attempts to quit smoking.  We're
     not here to do that.  We aren't here to do
     that.
          But for all of the evidence you heard
     about a patch or gum or spray or hypnosis,
     whatever you heard, the bottom line is this:
     Mr. Smith never, not once, threw out his
     cigarettes until the last and final time that
     he quit in 2002. 3271
          And whatever he was allegedly using to try
     to quit, whatever it was, he never, not once,
     tried to stop smoking until he actually stopped
     in 2002.  He never put those cigarettes down.
          I said it at the outset, and the evidence
     and your common sense tells you you can't quit
     smoking if you don't stop smoking.
          Now, Mrs. Smith really told us all we need
     to know on this issue yesterday.  She told us
     that when Mr. Smith quit for good in 2002, this
     was different.  It was different than all of
     the other times.  She said he told her, this is
     it.  This is it.  I'm quitting.  That's what he
     told her in 2002.  And he had never done that
     before.
          And she told us that, for the first time,
     for the very first time, he actually put down
     his cigarettes and didn't pick them up again.
          Folks, actions speak louder than words.
     You can say you're going to quit, but if don't
     actually try to quit, you're not going to stop
     smoking.  This time in 2002 when Mr. Smith quit
     for good, he wasn't going through the motions.
     He wasn't just putting on a patch or chewing
     gum but not throwing out his cigarettes and not 3272
     stopping.
          Dr. Cummings tried to tell you that people
     can't quit without a patch or a cessation aid,
     but for Mr. Smith, we know that isn't true.
     Maybe there are smokers out there who honestly
     and truly cannot quit, but we know that
     Mr. Smith wasn't one of them.  When he finally
     decided to quit for good, he did it and he
     never picked up a cigarette again.
          And despite whatever he felt after he
     quit, you heard this testimony from a variety
     of witnesses, he continued to experience
     cravings, he was desperate, he wanted to smoke.
     Despite those feelings, once he decided this is
     it, I'm quitting, he never picked up a
     cigarette again.  Those cravings, those
     feelings didn't make him go out and buy a
     carton or a pack of cigarettes and start
     smoking again.
          For the next 13 years after Mr. Smith
     quit, he stayed off cigarettes.  And what was
     it -- what was it that kept him from giving in
     and going and buying a carton or buying a pack?
     His choice was to stay quit.  It was his
     choice.  It was his decision. 3273
          Addiction didn't cause him to smoke for
     those 13 years after he quit for good.  When
     you decide to quit and you say, this is it, I'm
     quitting, and make a motivated, committed
     effort -- and Mrs. Smith told us this effort
     was different.  Those aren't my words.  Those
     are not the words of Defense counsel or lawyers
     representing Reynolds.  This is Mrs. Smith's
     words.
          When you make a motivated effort and for
     the first time put down your cigarettes and
     stay quit, an alleged addiction is not driving
     your actions.  Mr. Smith's choices stood in
     between any alleged addiction and his COPD.
     They always did, and they certainly did in
     2002.
          Now, if you decide that Mr. Smith could
     have quit smoking when he was truly motivated
     to do so, and we know here that he did in 2002,
     then addiction cannot be a legal cause of his
     COPD.
          Instead, it was Mr. Smith's choice to
     smoke and not to make a concerted, sincere
     effort to quit in the years that he was faced
     with so many warnings. 3274
          Those choices, those decisions are the one
     and only legal cause in this case.  This is
     part of the legal cause instruction.  In order
     to be a legal cause, it has to be direct.  It
     has to be natural.  It has to be continuous.
     We know it was none of those things.  Because
     we know Mr. Smith's choices stood in between
     any alleged addiction and his disease.
          Now, remember what Dr. Hurt told us about
     motivation.  Dr. Hurt talked about motivation.
     Despite everything he told you about nicotine,
     he acknowledged that motivation is the key to
     quitting.  That's true about a lot of things in
     life.  And where does motivation come from?
          Ask yourself.  Apply your common sense.
     It comes from within each and every one of us.
     He can't come from outside.  It can't come
     because others want you to quit.  It can't come
     from patch or gum.  It comes from inside.
          For Mr. Smith, that motivation came from
     his prostate cancer diagnosis.  And Dr. Hurt
     told us, ultimately, that all smokers can quit.
     All smokers can quit, even heavily addicted
     smokers.  He admitted that.  That was one thing
     that he actually agreed to without trying to 3275
     get his point in.
          Now, we heard from both him and
     Dr. Cummings that 60 million -- this is
     Dr. Hurt's manual.  We looked at this with
     Dr. Hurt as well.  This was his manual, "The
     Path to a Smoke-Free Future."  And what does he
     say in the manual that he prepared at the Mayo
     Clinic?  He says:  "Only you can decide when to
     quit smoking.  Not others.  Only you."
          And for Mr. Smith, we know that was true.
          Now, Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings both told
     us 60 million Americans have quit in this
     country.  They have made the choice to quit,
     and they have quit.  Most of those folks would
     be considered addicted.  All had nicotinic
     receptors.  All had brain changes that
     Mr. Wichmann talked to you about.  All had
     dopamine.  They all had all of that.  But they
     all quit, many cold turkey like Mr. Smith.
          The nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent
     these people from understanding that smoking is
     dangerous and making a choice to quit like
     Mr. Smith did.
          Let's take a look at Smart Move.  You saw
     this with Dr. Cummings on cross-examination. 3276
     This is another pamphlet.  This is the one that
     Dr. Cummings prepared for the American Cancer
     Society.  And he talks about the things you
     need to have, what it takes to stop smoking.
     And when Mr. Smith quit, he had all of those
     things, things he had not had previously when
     me had made efforts to stop smoking.
          So what did Mr.~Smith do when he was
     finally able to quit for good in 2002?  This
     was Mr. Smith's Smart Move.
          He said for the first time, "This is it.
     I'm quitting."  He had never done that before.
     For the first time, he actually stopped
     smoking.  He had never done that before.  And
     he put down his cigarettes.  He put down the
     pack.  Never done that before.
          You have heard all of the evidence, and
     you have heard that Mr. Smith always made his
     own choices.  Not the nicotine in cigarettes,
     not Reynolds.
          Whether you find that Plaintiff did not
     meet her burden of proving that Mr. Smith was
     addicted or that his claimed addiction was the
     cause of his COPD -- and you all don't have to
     agree on those points.  But if all of you 3277
     together find that he either, one, was not
     addicted or that addiction was not the legal
     cause of his COPD, you should check "no" -- you
     should check "no" to this first question on the
     verdict form.  And we would ask you to check
     "no" to this first question on the verdict
     form.
          Now, let's get to the third key
     fact:  cause of death.  I don't think you
     should get this far on the verdict form, but
     it's my job to talk to you about each and every
     one of these questions on the verdict form.  So
     let's get to this issue.
          This is whether Mr. Smith's death was
     caused by COPD.  I'm not going to spend a lot
     of time on this point.  You heard the
     testimony.  You saw the death certificate.  But
     there are two things that I want to talk to you
     about, and the first is the death certificate.
          Y'all have seen this.  It doesn't say
     COPD, and it doesn't say that tobacco use
     contributed to the death.
          Like any other official record,
     Dr. Martinez -- you heard from Dr. Martinez on
     this point.  He told you that doctors are 3278
     obligated to complete death certificates to the
     best of their professional ability.  And the
     doctor who signs the death certificate must
     certify that the record is accurate.  That's
     what Dr. Martinez told us.
          In other words, a death certificate is
     something, as you would expect, as your
     common sense would tell you, that doctors take
     very seriously.
          Looking at Mr. Smith's death certificate,
     we see it was signed by Dr. Kayyal.  We heard a
     lot about Dr. Kayyal in this trial, and I think
     Mr. Praglin told you they were not here to
     criticize what the doctors at the hospital who
     treated Mr. Smith -- they are not here to
     criticize that treatment.  And that would
     include Dr. Kayyal.
          Now, Dr. Kayyal wasn't just any doctor who
     sat at a disk and reviewed records and filled
     out death certificates.  You saw that
     Dr. Kayyal admitted Mr. Smith during that final
     hospital stay.  He was in charge of Mr.~Smith's
     care and treatment during that entire week
     before he passed.  He was there when he died.
          He had personal, firsthand knowledge of 3279
     Mr. Smith's condition.  And most importantly,
     everything that Dr. Kayyal observed and wrote
     in Mr.~Smith's medical records, including his
     death certificate, occurred entirely
     independent of this lawsuit.
          That is, Dr. Kayyal wasn't getting paid to
     reach a certain conclusion.  He had nothing to
     gain from completing this death certificate.
     Based on his treatment and experience with
     Mr. Smith, Dr. Kayyal identified Mr. Smith's
     causes of death as septic shock and aspiration.
          Dr. Kayyal made no mention on the death
     certificate of COPD or emphysema, and you saw
     that he did not -- he did not check "yes" as to
     whether tobacco use contributed to this death.
          Now, Mr. Praglin suggested when he stood
     up to talk to you that Dr. Kayyal somehow
     didn't have all of the information; that he
     didn't know about Mr. Smith smoking.  We know
     that wasn't true.
          Dr. Kayyal knew that Mr. Smith was a
     former smoker, and he knew that he had COPD.
     He knew about his smoking history.
          Now, as you heard from Dr. Martinez, he,
     of course, was a paid expert.  He was not 3280
     someone who ever treated Mr. Smith.  He never
     met Mr.~Smith.  He never made any attempt to
     reach out and talk to any of Mr.~Smith's
     doctors, including Dr. Kayyal.
          Ands despite all of that, Ms. Smith's
     lawyers hired him to come in and testify that
     somehow he knew more than the doctors who
     treated Mr. Smith in his final days.
          But like every other issue in this case,
     remember that Plaintiff bears the burden of
     proof as to Mr. Smith's cause of death.  As you
     evaluate the medical records during that entire
     hospital stay and the death certificate, as you
     evaluate both of those things, we ask you to
     consider who had firsthand experience with
     Mr. Smith.  Who actually treated him?
          Ultimately, it's clear that Plaintiff did
     not meet her burden.  She didn't prove that the
     death certificate was incorrect.  She didn't
     prove that it was incomplete.  And she didn't
     prove that anything other than aspiration,
     which caused that sepsis, which caused that
     infection, caused Mr. Smith's death.
          Now, I want to quickly talk here about
     Mr. Smith's other health conditions. 3281
     Mr. Praglin talked a lot about the fact that
     Mr. Smith was hospitalized a week before he
     passed away due to a COPD exacerbation.
          Dr. Martinez and Plaintiff's counsels
     would have you believe that the exacerbation
     was the beginning and the end of the story
     here.  That, you know, is not the case.
     Indeed, you saw records from a few days after
     Mr. Smith was hospitalized which indicate that
     he was improving.
          So what happened after that?  What
     happened?
          Well, Mr. Smith had a number of other
     serious medical conditions.  You heard lots of
     evidence about that.  Upon being admitted to
     the hospital, Dr. Kayyal reports that Mr. Smith
     was experiencing diabetes, diabetic neuropathy,
     chronic kidney disease.  He had prostate
     cancer.  He was hypertensive, meaning he had
     high blood pressure.  He had heart disease.  He
     had AFib.  And he had significant urinary and
     bladder issues.
          And you saw evidence that while he was in
     the hospital, Mr. Smith had a gastric or
     stomach bleed.  And I think Mr. Praglin showed 3282
     you a container, 5 Coke cans.  1700 milliliters
     of dried blood had accumulated in his stomach.
          Now, as noted on the death certificate,
     Mr. Smith aspirated; and he developed that
     sepsis, that infection that killed him.
     Plaintiff did not meet her burden of showing
     that either of these, much less that both, were
     caused by smoking.  No evidence that his
     gastric bleeding was caused by cigarette
     smoking.
          He had been experiencing gastrointestinal
     problems since the 1990s.  We saw that in his
     medical records from the 1990s.  And
     Dr. Martinez agreed on cross-examination that
     there are many different causes for this kind
     of bleeding.
          MS. BAKER:  And they haven't met their
     burden.  Plaintiff hasn't met her burden of
     showing that Mr. Smith's aspiration was caused
     by his COPD.
          Dr. Martinez testified that people can
     aspirate for any number of reasons and that
     aspirations can occur both within and outside
     the hospital.  We know that.
          Finally, Mr. Smith's sepsis was not caused 3283
     by smoking.  He had that dried blood in his
     stomach which was suctioned out during the time
     period he was very, very ill.
          Now, one other point about Mr. Smith's
     medical background and history.  During opening
     statement, Mr. Wichmann repeatedly told you
     that we were going to say -- what we were going
     to say and what we were going to do.
          He accused tobacco companies of making
     claims about alternative causes for a smoker's
     disease and challenging the official findings
     on the death certificate.
          We're not doing that here.  Plaintiff is
     doing that here.
          Here it was Smith himself, not Reynolds,
     who made the claim that his respiratory
     symptoms and other diseases, like his prostate
     cancer, were caused by workplace exposures, not
     smoking.
          And it was Mr. Praglin and Dr. Martinez,
     not Reynolds, who said that the death
     certificate in this case was wrong.
          Now, when you get to this question -- this
     is question 2 on your verdict form:  "Was
     Mr. Smith's emphysema or COPD a legal cause of 3284
     his death?" you should check "no."
          Let me get -- before we get to the next
     key fact, let me talk about question 3 on the
     verdict form.  "Was smoking cigarettes
     manufactured by Reynolds a legal cause of
     Mr. Smith's COPD or emphysema?"
          Now, this question asks whether it was
     smoking cigarettes or something else that
     caused Mr.~Smith's COPD.  On this question, I
     ask that you look to 2003.  That was when
     Mr. Smith made the claim -- you will have this
     exhibit in the jury room.  This is Defense
     Exhibit 8.
          This is where Mr. Smith made the claim,
     under penalty of prosecution, for respiratory
     symptoms due to his workplace exposures at the
     Volusia County Branch Jail.  This was a claim
     for long-term exposure, not just one date that
     Mr. Praglin was showing you.  When you look at
     the document, you will see that.  It talks
     about long-standing exposure to mold, to
     chemicals, to bleach.
          So on this question, ask yourself:  Did
     Plaintiff meet her burden of proof in light of
     Mr. Smith's previous claim that his workplace
www.phippsreporting.com
888-811-3408

     caused his respiratory symptoms, not smoking?
     Y'all will have to decide that.
          And let me add one final point on this.
     Mrs. Smith claimed that she was completely
     unaware of this document, completely unaware of
     this claim that her husband had filed a serious
     claim that made serious allegations about his
     health and what had caused his respiratory and
     sinus symptoms.
          But whether Mrs. Smith really knew about
     it or not -- and you will have to be the judges
     on the credibility of that testimony -- this
     claim and its allegations cannot be ignored,
     cannot be swept under the rug.
          Plaintiff brought you no one to refute
     that.  Now, either this was a serious claim --
     Mr. Smith signed it under penalty of
     prosecution -- or if, I guess as Mr. Praglin
     would have you believe, it was frivolous.
          You can't have it both ways.  You can't
     have it both ways.
          Mr. Smith's claim in 2003 tells you that
     he believes -- he believes his symptoms were
     caused by workplace exposures.  His claim in
     2003 tells you to check "no" to this question 3286
     on the verdict form, question 3.
          Now, let's get to the fourth and final key
     fact, and then we will have a few additional
     verdict form questions to talk about.
          Our final key fact, Plaintiff did not
     prove that Mr. Smith relied on a statement by
     Reynolds.
          Now, this one is actually pretty
     straightforward.  I'm going to spend some time
     on it because Mr. Wichmann spent some time on
     it this morning.  And I expect when he stands
     up, he is going to spend some more time on this
     issue.
          But it was pretty straightforward.  I have
     already this morning talked a little bit about
     some inconsistencies between the records and
     the testimony that you heard in this case.
          For instance, when we compare Mr. Smith's
     medical records to his family's testimony, we
     see different stories about Mr. Smith's health.
     And when we look at the family's testimony
     about Mr. Smith's quit attempts, we hear
     varying stories about those attempts.
          But on this issue, but on this issue,
     everyone agreed.  On the issue of whether 3287
     Mr.~Smith relied on something that Reynolds
     said or did, the testimony is actually
     100 percent consistent:  He did not rely.
          Now, did any family member come in here
     and testify that Mr. Smith smoked his first
     cigarette because of an ad or something a
     tobacco company did?  All of the family
     members, everyone told you "no."
          Did any family member testify that
     Mr. Smith became a regular smoker because of
     cigarette ads or because of something a tobacco
     company said?  The answer is "no."
          Did any family member testify that
     Mr. Smith smoked Winston because of an ad?
     Again, they all agreed:  "No."
          Did any family member testify that
     Mr. Smith ever relied on a cigarette ad or a
     tobacco company statement?  They all told you
     "no."
          Did any family member testify that
     Mr. Smith believed that filters were safer
     because of an ad or a tobacco company
     statement?  And on that point, yes, they all
     agreed.  He did not rely.  They could not point
     to any tobacco company statement that he relied 3288
     on for that point.
          Did any family member testify that
     Mr.~Smith ever heard, discussed, or relied on
     any statement from those groups you heard of?
     From the TIRC, from the TI, from the CTR -- you
     heard lots of testimony about those groups.  No
     one came in here to tell you that he had ever
     seen any of those statements, let alone relied
     on them.  They all agreed.  No reliance.
          Did any family member testify that
     Mr. Smith made any smoking-related decision
     whether to keep smoking, whether to try to quit
     because of something a tobacco company said or
     did?
          And, again, you know the answer is "no."
     He did not rely on tobacco companies in making
     smoking decisions.
          No one in Mr. Smith's family testified
     that Mr. Smith was ever misled.  Mr. Wichmann
     can get up and say as many times as he wants.
     No one came in here and told you he was misled.
     No one came in and told you he was deceived.
          The reality is that Mr. Smith never made
     any smoking-related decision because of
     something a tobacco company said or didn't say. 3289
     Because Plaintiff couldn't show you any direct
     evidence of this, they couldn't bring you a
     witness who could tell you this, they called
     Dr. Cummings to the stand for an entire day.
          And we already know the first thing he
     testified, the first thing he said on
     cross-examination is that he couldn't tell you
     a single thing about Mr.~Smith because he
     didn't read a single word about Mr.~Smith.
          He gave the same generic testimony that he
     has given in almost 100 other trials since
     1996.
          So what was the point of bringing
     Dr. Cummings to court?  What was the point of
     that?
          I submit to you that it was to show you
     some tobacco company documents in the hopes of
     upsetting you, in the hopes of making you
     angry.
          But remember what I told you in opening
     statement and again today.  We wouldn't be here
     today if the only issue to decide was whether
     Reynolds said some wrong-headed things in some
     documents many, many years ago.  This case is
     about more than that.  It's about whether 3290
     Mr. Smith relied on any of the things that
     Reynolds or any other tobacco company said.
          Now, with that in mind, I want to quickly
     run through some of the things that
     Dr. Cummings showed you so that you can see it
     had nothing to do with Mr. Smith's choices.
          Places people smoked.  When talking about
     this -- and you saw this in opening statement.
     You saw it again, I think, with both Dr. Hurt
     and Dr. Cummings.  Dr. Cummings specifically,
     though, talked about people smoking in
     government buildings.  It's a red herring in
     this case.
          Mr. Smith never worked in a government
     building where smoking was permitted.  In fact,
     we know at the jail through the entire 16 years
     he worked there, there was no smoking inside
     the jail.
          Despite having a stressful job, this
     restriction didn't affect Mr. Smith -- it
     didn't affect his job performance.  He was able
     to do his job and do it with no problems.
          Health care professionals.
          Let's pull up the slide that you saw with
     Dr. Cummings. 3291
          Actually, let's go ahead and just go to --
     we will go to celebrities and movie stars and
     then go back to health care professionals.
          Look, this is the slide that Dr. Cummings
     showed you.  The advertisements circled are for
     the brands that Mr. Smith -- we know he never
     smoked.  There's no evidence that he smoked
     because of celebrities or movie stars.
          In fact, his daughter testified that he
     said he never smoked -- he never thought
     smoking was glamorous.
          And Dr. Cummings admitted on
     cross-examination that celebrities and movie
     stars are used in all sorts of advertisements.
     Nothing unique about cigarette ads.
          Health care professionals, you heard a lot
     about that, doctors smoking, more doctors smoke
     Camels.  Those ads ran from 1949 to 1951.
     Mr. Smith didn't have a TV until 1955.  There's
     no evidence he ever saw any of those ads or it
     made any difference to him.
          Cigarettes for the holidays.  Holiday
     themed ads.  Again the ads circled are for
     brands Mr. Smith never even smoked.  You heard
     Dr. Cummings testify that using holiday themes 3292
     was -- again, just like celebrities and movie
     stars, it was a popular and common advertising
     technique for many products, not just
     cigarettes.
          And more importantly, there's no evidence
     that Mr. Smith smoked because of these types of
     ads.
          Now, filter ads, I want to spend just a
     minute on these.  You saw these again this
     morning with Mr. Wichmann.
          Mr. Smith never said that he smoked
     filtered cigarettes because of any
     advertisement.  And he actually smoked filtered
     Marlboros.  You heard the testimony from Sue
     Pigue.  He smoked filtered Marlboro before he
     ever smoked a filtered Winston.
          Marlboros aren't manufactured by Reynolds.
     They're manufactured by Philip Morris.  They're
     not a Defendant in this case.
          Now, these -- the advertisement for
     Winston cigarettes focus on taste -- not
     health, not safety.  None of these
     advertisements, no Winston advertisement claims
     that filtered cigarettes are safer or
     healthier. 3293
          Filters were another point, and
     Mr. Praglin touched on it this morning.  It was
     one of the first things he said to you.
     Filters were another point where Mrs. Smith
     said something at trial that was different,
     that was contrary to what she told us under
     oath prior to trial.
          He said it was a mistake.  He said it
     was -- she made a mistake and something
     occurred to her later.  Well, you heard the
     testimony.  You and only you can be the judges
     of the credibility on that issue.
          Famous athletes, you heard a lot about
     famous athletes.  The advertisements circled
     are for brands that Mr. Smith never smoked.  We
     saw lots of ads for brands that he never smoked
     on that slide.
          There is no evidence that Mr. Smith ever
     smoked because of a famous athlete or because
     he saw an athlete smoking on television.
          "Beverly Hillbillies."  Look, now, here
     again, witness credibility matters.  And you
     know why.  Before trial under oath, Mrs. Smith
     told us flat out that she didn't remember any
     cigarette ads.  She didn't equivocate.  She 3294
     told us that flat out.  She didn't remember
     cigarette ads.  Not one.
          But here in this courtroom, she suddenly
     remembered that Winston sponsored "The Beverly
     Hillbillies," and she claimed that she
     remembered watching that with Mr. Smith.
          I ask you to use your common sense here,
     ladies and gentlemen.  Even though she claimed
     they watched it together, when I asked her
     whether Mr. Smith ever said anything about an
     ad, Beverly Hillbillies or not, an ad affecting
     a smoking decision, she had to concede he never
     said that.
          At the end of the day, Mr. Wichmann can
     throw up as many ads as he wants, but none made
     a bit of difference to Mr.~Smith.
          Again, as Dr. Cummings said, facts are
     facts.  And the fact is, Mr. Smith never
     smoked, he never picked a brand, he didn't keep
     smoking because of an ad.  Ads did not affect
     Mr. Smith.  There's no testimony, no testimony
     in this courtroom that ads made a difference to
     him.
          Let's take a quick look at tobacco company
     statements in "The New York Times."  I want to 3295
     spend just a minute talking about that.  You
     saw a lot of that when Dr. Cummings was on the
     stand.  He showed you articles that contain
     tobacco company statements.  Articles from "The
     New York Times."  Mr. Smith never lived outside
     of Florida and certainly nowhere near New York.
     He never received "The New York Times" and
     never told anyone that he thought there was a
     controversy about smoking.
          Instead, here is what we know.  Mr. and
     Mrs. Smith in a conversation, starting in 1964,
     the same year as the Surgeon General's Report,
     the first Surgeon General's Report on smoking
     and health.  Y'all saw that during
     Dr. Cummings' testimony.  That was the first
     report.  It received widespread news coverage.
     Front-page news over the country.  It was the
     first story, the lead story on every network,
     ABC, CBS, and NBC, and they all did special
     reports on that report.
          Starting around that time, that's when
     Mr. and Mrs. Smith start talking about nicotine
     and the health risks of smoking.
          Now, Dr. Hurt came in and showed you a
     presentation as well, and that was a 3296
     presentation of slides much like Dr. Cummings'
     that contain the name actually, as we talked
     about a few moments ago, the name of a
     different smoker from a different trial.
          The reason he doesn't have to worry about
     changing the names on his slides is because he
     reaches the same opinion in every case.  In
     fact, in this case, Dr. Hurt told you that he
     reached his opinions, he came to his decision
     about this case before he had ever read a
     single page of deposition testimony given by
     any of the family members in this case.
          So not surprisingly, Dr. Hurt gave the
     same old presentation to you that he has given
     over a dozen times and in at least seven cases
     with Mr. Wichmann.  And he talk about company
     documents and public statements that, again,
     Mr.~Smith never saw, heard or relied on.
          He talked about the Frank Statement.  He
     showed you that congressional hearing
     testimony.  You remember when I stood up and
     asked him, did Mr.~Smith see this, is there any
     evidence that he saw that.  He had none.  He
     talked about the TI, The Tobacco Institute, CTR
     and TRC.  No evidence that it reached 3297
     Mr. Smith.  He talked about white papers and,
     again, he talked about company statements and
     "New York Times" articles.
          I told you from the beginning, we said it
     again today, this case about Mr. Smith.  And
     from the beginning, Plaintiff hasn't shown one
     thing that Mr. Smith relied on.  Not one.  None
     of Mr. Smith's family members could identify
     anything that he relied on, and both -- both
     Plaintiff's experts, both Dr. Hurt and
     Dr. Cummings, said the same things they say
     every time they testify, showing you ads of
     brands that Mr. Smith never smoked or company
     documents that he never saw.
          That is not reliance.  That is not
     reliance, ladies and gentlemen.  Plaintiff has
     clearly, clearly failed to met her burden of
     showing that Mr. Smith reasonably relied on
     anything that Reynolds or any other tobacco
     company said or did.
          We know Mr.~Smith made his own decisions
     for whatever reasons were good and sufficient
     to him.  Now we have covered the four key facts
     in this case.
          Let me go to the verdict form before we 3298
     move on.  These are questions 4 and 5.  Please
     state whether Julius B. Smith reasonably relied
     to his detriment on any statement made by
     Reynolds which concealed or omitted material
     information not already known -- not already
     known or available to him.
          There's no evidence of that.  Your answer
     on this verdict form question should be no.  No
     on question 4.
          Let's go to question 5.  It asks a similar
     question.  Please state whether Julius B. Smith
     reasonably relied to his detriment on any
     statement made in furtherance of Reynolds'
     agreement with other tobacco companies or
     organizations to conceal or omit material
     information.
          Again, you know there's no evidence of
     reliance.  Your answer on this question must
     also be "no."  No to question 5.
          So now we've covered those four key
     issues, the four key facts that we talked about
     in opening statement and we've covered those
     again this morning.  But I want to go on and
     talk to you about the rest of the questions on
     the verdict form. 3299
          I don't think you should get down this far
     on the verdict form.  But if you do, I want to
     talk to you about the evidence that you saw as
     it relates to these questions.
          Comparative fault is the next question.
     Verdict form question 6.
          Please state the percentage of any fault
     that was a legal cause of Mr. Smith's
     emphysema/COPD that you charge to Reynolds and
     that you charge to Mr. Smith.
          Now, this question, despite what
     Mr. Wichmann told you this morning, this
     question does not call for some sort of global
     comparison of conduct.  It is not a question of
     what Julius Smith did over the course of his
     life versus the global conduct of tobacco
     companies.
          It's a comparison of actions that
     Mr. Smith and Reynolds took that were a legal
     cause of Mr.~Smith's death.  This is actually a
     very narrow inquiry.
          Now, you may have seen things in this case
     that tobacco companies said or did that you
     didn't like.  A majority of Dr. Cummings' and
     Dr. Hurt's testimony focused on those very 3300
     things.  You saw that.  But despite the hours
     of testimony that you heard from them, the
     issue here, the issue addressed by this
     question on the verdict form is whether those
     things affected Mr. Smith and caused his death.
          We know that -- we know that there was no
     evidence of that.
          On the question of comparative fault,
     remember that Reynolds cannot be assigned fault
     for things that were not a legal cause of
     Mr. Smith's death.  And remember that
     Plaintiff -- Plaintiff has the burden of proof,
     and Reynolds can only be responsible for
     conduct that, in your determination, had some
     connection to Mr.~Smith.
          Now, I want to reemphasize something I
     mentioned in opening statement.  We are not
     blaming Mr.~Smith.  We are not asking you to
     assign blame to Mr. Smith for his choices of.
     This is not about blame.  This is about
     responsibility.  We are not criticizing
     Mr. Smith's choices.  We're not asking you to
     criticize his choices with your verdict.
          We're simply asking that you respect his
     choices and that you hold him accountable, 3301
     personally responsible for his choices.
          We have been up front with you from the
     beginning.  Our position is that Mr. Smith and
     only Mr. Smith was responsible for his smoking
     decisions.  Reynolds couldn't make those
     decisions for him.
          Only Mr. Smith could have chosen to start
     smoking.  Only he could choose to keep smoking.
     Only he could choose to quit.  And the evidence
     in this case is that it was Mr. Smith, and
     Mr. Smith only, that made those choices.
          Now, I think you heard a little bit this
     morning, and it's been no secret, I think, that
     the theme of Plaintiff's presentation is that
     all of Mr. Smith's choices, all of his choices
     were about somebody else or something else.  It
     was somebody else's fault he started.  Somebody
     else's fault he kept smoking.  And somebody
     else's fault that he could not quit until 2002.
          Now, we spent a whole day listening to
     Dr. Cummings, who knew nothing about Mr. Smith.
     Did any of his testimony help you in
     determining the extent to which Mr. Smith was
     responsible?  And the answer, of course, is no.
     Dr. Cummings tried to shift all the blame to 3302
     Reynolds, despite the fact that he didn't know
     anything about Mr. Smith or his choices.  You
     saw all of the information that was available
     to Mr. Smith when he made his choices.  The
     newspapers, the magazines, the warning labels.
     Those are really important.  We know Mr. Smith
     saw those warning labels.  We know he believed
     and understood and told his family members
     about those warning labels.
          You saw Public Service Announcements and
     you heard about the messages that he received
     from loved ones.  And it was in the face of all
     of this that Mr. Smith decided to smoke and
     keep smoking until 2002.
          Now, Mrs. Smith testified, and you heard
     it from Sue Pigue as well, that while Mr. Smith
     was growing up, his parents were strict and
     they forbade smoking and they would have tanned
     his hide if he was caught.  Mr. Smith defied
     his parents' rules, snuck around, hid his
     smoking.
          You heard that Mr. and Mrs. Smith had
     repeated conversations when they met in 1964
     about the fact that cigarettes were addictive.
     We talked about that. 3303
          Six years later in 1970, Mr. Smith shows
     Mrs. Smith the warning label on his pack of
     cigarettes.  And he says, the Surgeon General
     has now determined that smoking is hazardous
     for your health.  He kept smoking for 30 years
     after that.  He smoked for 30 more years.
          Now, we heard some mixed testimony about
     the types and extent of his quit attempts in
     the '80s and '90s.  But consistent among all
     of the witnesses is that he never actually
     stopped smoking.  We talked about that.
          Now, Plaintiff tells you, Mrs. Smith tells
     us that Mr. Smith was diagnosed with a serious
     respiratory disease in the mid 1990s, that he
     was diagnosed with COPD at that time.  Yet
     Mrs. Smith doesn't recall Mr.~Smith quitting
     for a full day until eight years after that
     diagnosis.
          She would have you believe that he was
     diagnosed with a serious respiratory illness in
     the 1990s and no doctor -- no doctor talked to
     him about quitting.
          Mr. Smith chose not to quit in an era when
     60 million Americans, many of whom were
     addicted, many of whom were addicted, quit. 3304
     Was he somehow different than those 60 million
     Americans?  Was that somebody else's fault?  I
     submit that the answer is no.
          Ultimately, your answer here comes down to
     the question of what it means to accept
     responsibility for decisions that you make in
     life.  This isn't about blame.  This is not
     about blame.  Don't let Plaintiff's counsel
     tell you otherwise.  This is about personal
     responsibility.
          Now, I want you to also look -- and I'm
     going to show you an instruction that the judge
     read to you this morning.  It's a little bit
     confusing.  But it says in this case, Plaintiff
     has pled that Mr. Smith's acts or omissions
     relating to the frequency and duration of his
     efforts to quit smoking, that they may have
     been a partial legal cause -- a partial cause
     of his injuries and death.
          Here what Plaintiff is saying is they
     accept some responsibility, but not all.  You
     heard that again this morning from Plaintiff's
     counsel.  They take some, but not all.
          Now, Mrs. Smith may not have wanted to
     tell you about this when she was on the stand 3305
     yesterday, but this will be the instruction,
     this is the instruction from the Court.
          As you go back to deliberate, ask
     yourselves whether Mr. and Mrs. Smith ever
     spent one minute outside of a courtroom or a
     legal proceeding talking to each other about
     Mr. Smith's smoking, using words and phrases
     like that.
          Do you think the Smiths ever talked to
     each other about the frequency and duration of
     his efforts to quit?  Do you think they ever
     discussed that it was his acts or omissions
     that were the partial legal cause of his
     injuries?
          MR. WICHMANN:  Your Honor, I object.  May
     we approach?
          THE COURT:  Come on up.
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          MR. WICHMANN:  She is now doing what Your
     Honor indicated you would not allow her to do,
     which is read the Complaint language to the
     jury and suggest or imply that Mrs. and
     Mr. Smith had some hand in writing it, when it
     was written by the lawyers, it's from the
     Complaint.
www.phippsreporting.com
888-811-3408

          It wasn't signed or verified by
     Mrs. Smith, so I think she can argue this is an
     instruction that the judge gave her, but when
     she started saying, I remind you that Mr. or
     Mrs. talked about this or imagine this -- I
     think that is improper, Judge.
          THE COURT:  All right.  That's facts not
     in evidence.  Don't have them imagining if they
     talked or inferred that Mrs. Smith had anything
     to do with the Complaint.
          MS. BAKER:  That's an instruction to the
     jury.
          THE COURT:  I understand.  But saying they
     don't talk like this and that -- facts that are
     not in evidence, don't get into it.  So you can
     make the argument, but just stay away from
     that.
          MS. BAKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MS. BAKER:  Now, accepting responsibility,
     that means just that:  Accepting full
     responsibility for the consequences of your
     actions.  It's not a complicated sentence full
     of legal jargon.
          The evidence that you heard is clear that 3307
     Mr. Smith knew smoking was dangerous and
     addictive for decades.  We talked about that at
     length.  You saw that evidence.  It was very
     clear.  Going all the way back to the 1950s,
     before he ever picked up that first cigarette.
     Despite this knowledge, and in the face of
     repeated warnings and requests to quit from his
     family, Mr. Smith never -- before the final
     time that he quit, never said, this is it, I'm
     quitting.  He never stopped.  He never put down
     his cigarettes, not until 2002.
          That's what we're talking about when we
     talk about motivated, sincere, persistent
     efforts to quit.  We're not criticizing
     Mr. Smith.  We're talking about doing the
     things that Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings told you
     that you have to do to be successful in
     quitting smoking.
          And it was in 2002 that Mr.~Smith did it
     for the first time.  He says, this is it, I'm
     quitting.  He made a decision, and he quit.  He
     put down his cigarettes and he never smoked
     again.
          Now, ladies and gentlemen, you know that
     Mr. Smith made his own choices.  We all make 3308
     our own choices.  We don't make 75 percent of
     our choices, as Mr. Wichmann would have you
     believe.  We're not 75 percent responsible for
     our choices, we're not 10 percent, we're not
     50 percent, and that's what we're talking about
     here with this question.  Mr. Smith made
     100 percent of his choices.  Nobody else was
     responsible for those choices.
          If you get to this question, and again, I
     don't believe that you should, but if you get
     here, I would ask that you find Mr. Smith is
     100 percent responsible.  Not that you blame
     Mr. Smith, but that you hold him personally
     responsible for his choices to smoke in the
     face of all of that knowledge that he had.
          Now I want to briefly turn to the issue of
     damages.  Mr. Praglin talked to you about that
     a bit ago.  These are the questions 7 and 8 on
     your verdict form.  And he talked to you about
     the fact there are two kinds of damages claimed
     in this case.  You will only answer one of
     these questions.
          One asks about damages to Mrs. Smith and
     one asks about damages suffered by Mr. Smith.
     Now, it may seem obvious enough, and we talked 3309
     about this in opening statement, but not every
     loss, not every loss, whether physical or
     emotional or otherwise, means that someone is
     entitled to money damages in a court of law.
     Just because we have a loss, that doesn't
     always mean we're entitled to money for that
     loss.
          Before Plaintiff is entitled to any
     damages, she must meet her burden of proof.
     Not speculation.  Not guesswork.  But the hard
     building blocks of evidence.  Plaintiff has the
     burden to show and prove every dollar of
     damages.
          And equally as important, equally as
     important, however sympathetic we may feel
     about the passing of Mr. Smith, sympathy has no
     place in determining your verdict in this case.
     We talked about that during jury selection.  We
     talked about that during opening statements.
          You all promised and committed to set
     aside any sympathy that you might feel and
     decide your case just on the evidence and the
     instructions that the Court provided you.
          And, actually, this morning Judge Craig
     instructed you on this issue.  And that 3310
     instruction is, in reaching your verdict, do
     not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public
     opinion or any other sentiment for or against
     any party influence your decision.
          Your verdict must be based on the evidence
     that you heard here in this courtroom.
          Now, in this case, Mrs. Smith can only
     recover damages that are directly linked or
     legally caused by Reynolds.  In other words,
     any damages that she may have because of
     Mr.~Smith's chronic health conditions, injuries
     or pain that he felt or suffered from a car
     accident, prostate cancer or workplace
     exposures, those can't be considered for
     purposes of damages in this case.
          Now, again, based on everything that we
     have already talked about, I don't believe you
     should reach this question.  But if you do,
     Judge Craig's instructions told you that any
     damages you award must be fair and they must be
     just.
          And that here, too, Plaintiff has the
     burden to demonstrate with evidence -- not
     guesswork, not speculation -- that any damages
     she or Mr. Smith incurred had anything to do 3311
     with Reynolds.  That connection to Reynolds is
     an important limitation on damages, any damages
     here.
          You heard that Mr. Smith had many serious
     injuries and health conditions and that
     Mr. Smith and Plaintiff's relationship with him
     have absolutely nothing -- you heard about
     those problems and those issues, those had
     nothing to do with cigarette smoking or COPD or
     Reynolds.  Those injuries took a toll on
     Mr. and Mrs. Smith, and it is not fair and
     just -- in fact, it is against the Court's
     instructions to ask Reynolds to pay for
     injuries that it had nothing to do with.
          Now, we already talked about Mr.~Smith's
     workers' compensation claim in 2003.  And in
     this claim, he makes a claim for long-standing
     exposure to mold, a sick building and toxic
     substances and chemicals during his work as a
     corrections officer at the Volusia County
     Branch Jail.  He was there for 16 years.
          And he sums up his claim at the end of his
     claim petition, and I encourage you to go look
     at it, he talks about long-standing exposures.
     And, again, he signed this claim under penalty 3312
     of prosecution.  The injuries that he claims
     here, whatever injuries that he claims here
     were obviously substantial and long lasting.
     And by his own admission, in Mr. Smith's own
     words, they were not caused by Reynolds.  They
     were caused instead by his workplace exposure.
          Again, these are not my words.  These are
     not the words of Reynolds.  This is what
     Mr. Smith put in his claim form.  So you cannot
     award any money to Mrs. Smith in this lawsuit
     against Reynolds for any injuries that
     Mr. Smith claimed in that 2003 claim form.
     Those were damages against the County here in
     Volusia.
          Now, whether you believe the claim form or
     not -- and it sounded like this morning
     Mr. Praglin was asking you not to believe it --
     Plaintiff and Smith cannot have it both ways.
     Either Mr. Smith was telling the truth in the
     2003 claim, in which case Plaintiff cannot meet
     her burden of proof on damages, or Mr. Smith
     submitted an inaccurate claim; this claim was
     inaccurate when he signed it under penalty of
     prosecution.
          Now, when it comes to the multiple other 3313
     diseases and conditions that Mr. Smith had for
     years prior to his death, on top of this 2003
     claim, on top of this workplace claim, those
     other diseases, those other conditions prevent
     Plaintiff from proving her or Mr. Smith's
     damages and from proving they were related
     solely to his emphysema or COPD.  We have seen
     this list before.  We have gone through this
     list.
          You also heard -- when Mrs. Smith took the
     stand, you heard about a car accident, a
     serious car accident that is reflected in
     Mr. Smith's medical records.  You heard that he
     was in a car -- a very serious car accident,
     and he suffered chronic cervical pain and
     chronic headaches.  He was treated by numerous
     doctors for that pain.
          And you heard from Plaintiff, you heard
     from her that accident changed their lives
     drastically.  It left Mr. Smith in excruciating
     pain, that their relationship suffered for a
     time.  It impacted the way they communicated
     and that it was tough on Plaintiff, that she
     became bitter and resentful in how that
     accident impacted their lives. 3314
          These things have nothing to do with
     Reynolds.  The 2003 workplace claim for
     exposures to mold and toxic substances, all of
     Mr. Smith's other diseases, there's no --
     allegation, no claim that any of those things
     were caused by COPD or smoking -- and his car
     accident.
          None of these things have anything to do
     with Reynolds.  And, as a result, damages, any
     pain and suffering through those -- for those
     things cannot be attributed to Reynolds.
          In light of all of the evidence you heard
     about these other things, we would submit that
     Plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of
     proof on damages specific to Reynolds.
          And, look, this is difficult.  This is a
     difficult part for me to discuss, because we
     all wish Mrs. Smith well.  We all wish her
     well.
          But her lawyer stood up this morning and
     asked for an extraordinary amount of money, an
     extraordinary amount of money, $10 million.
     Any verdict in this case should not exceed good
     reason -- should not exceed reason and good
     judgment and common sense. 3315
          Plaintiff did not prove millions of
     dollars' worth of damages against Reynolds when
     you remove all of the other things, all of the
     other injuries, all of the other diseases, all
     of the other things that Mr.~Smith suffered
     from.
          We believe that you should award
     Mrs. Smith no damages in this case.  We believe
     you should award her no damages.  We believe
     that's what the evidence shows.
          But if you feel compelled to award
     damages, we would submit that something in the
     thousands, something in the thousands, not
     millions, is appropriate.
          Now, I want to move to the final question,
     the final question on the verdict form,
     question 9.  And we're almost there.  We're
     getting closer to lunch.
          This is the issue about entitlement to
     punitive damages.  You heard a lot about
     punitive damages during voir dire; right?  And
     you know -- you know that if you check "yes" to
     this question that punitive damages should be
     awarded in this case, that there will be
     another phase of this trial.  There will be 3316
     additional evidence and witnesses presented,
     and you will have a second round of
     deliberations to decide the amount of those
     damages.
          Any punitive damages that you award to
     Mrs. Smith would only go to her.  They go to
     her, no one else.  No -- nothing else.  They go
     to Mrs. Smith.
          The purpose of punitive damages is to
     punish and deter -- not to compensate.  If you
     decide that Mrs. Smith is entitled to recover
     money for the choices that Mr. Smith made to
     smoke, you will have fully compensated her with
     an award of compensatory damages.  Punitive
     damages are over and above the amount you award
     to compensate someone.
          And they can only be for things -- only
     for the legal cause, things that were legally
     caused by Reynolds.  They can't -- any
     determination of punitive damages in this case
     has to have a tie to Reynolds.  And you
     can't -- in considering this question and
     making a determination on this question, you
     cannot consider the findings.
          Now, the Court instructed you before we 3317
     got started today that this question has had a
     higher burden of proof.  It's a higher burden,
     clear and convincing evidence.  And that is
     evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
     confusion and of such weight that it produces a
     firm belief or conviction without hesitation --
     without hesitation.  This is higher.  This is a
     higher burden of proof.
          To get you to give more money to
     Mrs. Smith, again, Mr. Wichmann and Mr. Praglin
     want to talk about a lot of stuff that has
     nothing to do with Mr. Smith.  And they showed
     you that stuff.
          They showed you that stuff through
     Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings, and you saw it again
     this morning.  And I expect you are going to
     see it again when I sit down.  But what they
     showed you is just half the story, so let's
     talk about a few examples.
          Dr. Cummings talked to you about the fact
     that filters were in effective; however, on
     cross-examination when Mr. Gordon stood up to
     ask him questions, you learned that the
     government, the U.S. Government, including the
     Surgeon General, believed that filters reduced 3318
     the risks of smoking and that they
     encouraged -- they actually encouraged the
     development of filters and encouraged smokers
     who could not quit to use filters.
          You heard from Dr. Cummings that CTR was
     an organization that sponsored research having
     nothing to do with smoking and health.  You
     heard about that.
          However, again, on cross-examination, you
     learned that CTR funded good research at many
     prominent institutions, including institutions
     right here in Florida, Florida, Florida State,
     University of South Florida, and University of
     Miami.
          You also heard about concealment, and
     Mr. Wichmann talked to you about that this
     morning.  But on cross-examination, you learned
     that the companies made information about the
     carcinogens in tobacco smoke available to the
     Surgeon General before that first report in
     1964 and that the Surgeon General's committee
     thanked the companies for their contribution.
          You learned that Reynolds' scientists
     identified over half of the different compounds
     that are known to be in cigarette smoke and 3319
     that they published on the methods to analyze
     cigarette smoke.
          And, importantly, importantly, you learned
     that Reynolds is now tightly regulated by the
     FDA.  That started in 2009.  They are tightly
     regulated by the FDA.  That includes reporting
     all of the -- all of their additives and
     ingredients for every brand of cigarette.  It
     includes getting permission and approval from
     the FDA before they can change their products.
     And it allows the FDA, it allows the FDA to
     regulate the amount of nicotine in cigarettes.
          Nothing can be done without FDA oversight
     anymore.  And you learned that today, all of
     those documents that you saw up on the screen
     with Dr. Hurt or Dr. Cummings, you learned that
     those are all publicly available.  They are
     secrets no more.
          And Reynolds even has -- as you saw when
     Mr. Gordon cross-examined Dr. Cummings,
     Reynolds even has a document, a repository on
     its Web site.
          Finally, you heard about the Reynolds of
     today from Dr. Cummings.  You saw the Web site.
     This is what Reynolds says today.  This is what 3320
     Reynolds' guiding principles and beliefs are
     today.
          Number one, no tobacco product has been
     shown to be safe or risk free.  Unequivocal.
          Two, quitting smoking significantly
     decreases the risk for lung cancer, heart
     disease, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and
     other serious diseases and conditions.  This is
     on the Reynolds Web site today.
          And, three, the best course of action for
     tobacco consumers concerned about their health
     is to quit.  Dr. Cummings told you that is on
     the Web site today.  Any -- anyone can go look
     at that.  Any consumer can go look at that.
          And you heard Dr. Cummings say that it was
     a good idea for Reynolds to sell nicotine
     replacement products, like nicotine gum and the
     nicotine patch, through its sister company
     Niconovum.
          Dr. Cummings commended Reynolds for its
     research, for medical conditions, including its
     work to develop an Ebola treatment called ZMapp
     through its sister company Kentucky
     BioProcessing.
          Dr. Cummings said facts were facts, and 3321
     these are the facts that you heard when
     Mr. Gordon stood up to cross-examine
     Dr. Cummings earlier this week.
          The Reynolds of today is devoted -- is
     tightly regulated and devoted to researching
     and developing products that are less harmful
     and developing medicines and other products
     that are improving the quality of life for
     folks everywhere.
          This is not the type of conduct that
     requires punishment or deterrence.  This is not
     a record that requires an award of more money
     to Mrs. Smith.
          If you should get to this part of the
     verdict form -- and I don't believe that you
     should -- but if you do, we would urge you to
     check "no."  "No."  No need to punish or deter
     the Reynolds of today.  No need to deter.  They
     are now tightly regulated by the FDA and no
     need to punish the Reynolds of today for the
     acts that occurred many years ago.
          Punitive damages are not appropriate in
     this case, in Mr. Smith's case.  We would ask
     that you check "no" to the ninth question on
     the verdict form, should you get there. 3322
          Now, let me make one last point and
     hopefully we'll all be eating lunch soon.  As
     I've said before, this case is about Mr. Smith.
     It's not a class action.  It's not about other
     smokers.
          As Judge Craig instructed you this
     morning, other folks have had an opportunity to
     bring their own lawsuits and ask for damages.
     So this is about whether the conduct that you
     heard in this trial harmed Mr. Smith.
          And we know Plaintiff brought you no
     evidence of that here in this case, Mr. Smith's
     case.  Based on the evidence that you heard in
     this case, there is no basis to award punitive
     damages.  You know that Reynolds had nothing to
     do with the smoking decisions that Mr.~Smith
     made.  He made his own decisions.
          There could be no question that punitive
     damages are inappropriate in Mr.~Smith's case.
     So, again, if you get this far on the verdict
     form, your answer to question number 9 should
     be "no."
          Now, I'm about to sit down, and I want to
     again thank you for your patience and your
     attention.  I know it's a lot to have to sit 3323
     there and listen to both sides argue all
     morning long.
          I know that y'all have had to listen to a
     lot of evidence.  In the past week, there's
     been a lot of things thrown your way.  Now,
     when I sit down, I don't know what Mr. Wichmann
     or Mr. Praglin -- what they will say, how they
     will respond to some of the things that I told
     you.  But I suspect that they will say some
     pretty critical things.  I'm pretty certain of
     that.
          But as you listen to the things that they
     say, ask yourself this.  Ask yourself, every
     time they say something, every time they show
     you a document, every time they show you an ad,
     ask yourself:  What does this have to do --
     what does this have to do with Mr. Smith's
     choices?  What does this have to do with
     Mr. Smith's case?
          Mr. Smith is smart and hard working and
     had common sense.  You heard that from all of
     the witnesses.  And we know he was warned about
     the health risks and that he was aware that
     smoking could be dangerous and addictive,
     period.  That is undisputed.  That is a fact. 3324
          But it wasn't until he was motivated to
     quit in 2002, that motivation that came with
     the prostate cancer diagnosis.  It wasn't until
     he was motivated to quit in 2002 that he
     finally did so, that he finally said:  This is
     it, put the cigarettes down, and stopped
     smoking.
          Now, the truth is we enjoy a tremendous
     amount of freedom in this country.  We talked
     at the beginning of the case, and you heard it
     in the testimony throughout the trial,
     cigarettes are a legal product.  We talked
     about this during jury selection too.
     Cigarettes are legal in this country.
          Congress has decided that cigarettes will
     remain legal, legal to manufacture, legal to
     sell, and, yes, legal to advertise.  We have
     the right in this country to make decisions for
     ourselves and to make choices about our
     lifestyle that maybe aren't always in our best
     interests.
          But with that freedom, with those choices,
     with that right, with that tremendous amount of
     freedom comes the obligation to accept personal
     responsibility for those choices.  Not for a 3325
     little bit.  Not for 25 percent.  Not for part
     of the choices.  But for 100 percent of our
     choices.
          And in the end, that's what this case is
     all about.  That's what this case is all about.
     Based on the evidence that you've heard in
     Mr. Smith's case, I would submit that there is
     one and only one true verdict.  And that is a
     verdict in Reynolds' favor.
          And I would ask you, as you go back to
     deliberate and you have the verdict form in
     front of you, that you enter a verdict for
     Reynolds.
          Now, this is my last opportunity to speak
     with you, and I want -- I just want to leave
     you with this.  I want to again thank you.  It
     has been a pleasure and an honor.
          And on behalf of Mr. Gordon and
     Mr. Hansen, we have truly appreciated your
     service.  It has been a true honor to present
     this case to you, and I thank you so much for
     your attention this morning.  Thank you.
