MR. DIAZ: Yes, if Your Honor please.
Counsel, Mr. Trammell, Mr. Harris, Vernell, Reverend Smith.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon.
It is time. It is time. For 50 years R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company together with other tobacco manufacturers engaged in one of the most massive conspiracies ever seen before in American history, for 50 years. For 40 of those years --or within those 50 of those years, for 40 of those years Reverend Smith smoked their products. He believed in them. He trusted them. He read their ads, and he smoked their cigarettes.
We know that from Dr. Proctor. He told you about the history of the tobacco industry. And we
damages you award must represent the punishment you deem appropriate for causing plaintiff's 1992 cancer.
That is the law that you must follow in deciding this case. The attorneys for the parties will now present their final arguments. When they are through, I will have a few final instructions about your deliberation.
Mr. Diaz?
MR. DIAZ: Yes, if Your Honor please.
Counsel, Mr. Trammell, Mr. Harris, Vernell, Reverend Smith.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon.
It is time. It is time. For 50 years R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company together with other tobacco manufacturers engaged in one of the most massive conspiracies ever seen before in American history, for 50 years. For 40 of those years --or within those 50 of those years, for 40 of those years Reverend Smith smoked their products. He believed in them. He trusted them. He read their ads, and he smoked their cigarettes.
We know that from Dr. Proctor. He told you about the history of the tobacco industry. And we
know that with tons and tons and oodles and oodles of secret documents that were held until 1999.
And we finally got our hands on them and were able to look behind the curtain and see what they had been doing to the American public and Mr. Smith for the last 40 years.
So what did we do? We hauled them into this court. We hauled them away from Winston-Salem into this court so they could face a jury like you, so they could face him in Jackson County, Florida, where they can't hide behind Hill & Knowlton up in the Empire State Building any longer, where they can't hide behind the TIRC and the CTR and the TI, where they have to face a Jackson County jury.
It is time. Folks, my closing argument has six parts. I always believe in telling everybody I'm going to talk to -- I'm going to tell you what I'm going to say. I'm going to say it, and I'm going to tell you what I told you.
So we have six transitions here. The first part is an introduction. I'm going to talk to you about the case, which is the issues that you have to determine what the case is about, what it's not about, and to go through the verdict form, talk a
little bit about some of the law.
After that, we'll go into Stage No. 2, which is the history of the tobacco industry,
Dr. Proctor. We are going to relive 40, 50 years of the tobacco industry. We're going to talk about addiction, talk about causation, their defenses in this case, and then finally damages and comparative fault.
Okay. So without further ado, let's -- let me tell you first what this case is not about. Okay, please?
Folks, you are going to have the jury instructions, and you're going to have a verdict form. The verdict form has nine questions on it. Okay? I'm going to put it on the ELMO for now. We're going to talk about it a little bit.
But you are going to have nine questions on the verdict form.
Thank you. I'll move it.
Nine questions. This is the verdict form for
you.
Okay. We can shut that off for now. Thank
you.
I'm going to walk you through that verdict form, because you are not going to see one
question on that verdict form that asks you whether or not Reverend Smith had a free choice or if he made a bad choice when he first started smoking cigarettes. There is no question on the verdict form as to whether or not his addiction prevented him from quitting smoking. That's not a question on the verdict form.
The question is whether Reverend Smith was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and whether it was a -- remember in opening statements the other day I said "a"; it's not "the" -- it's a substantial contributing factor, one among many other causes. Okay?
So what are we looking at in this case? What is on the verdict form? Okay? And there is a reason -- go back to the screen, please -- the reason why I put "keep your eye on the ball," folks, is that's what you need to do in this case. You need to keep your eye on the ball. That's why I have that slide up there.
The next slide, please.
Okay. What you will have on the verdict form is a -- a decision to make on four counts, strict liability, negligence, fraud, fraudulent concealment, and civil conspiracy. Remember a few
weeks ago we talked about breach of warranty claims. We've abandoned those, so this is all you really need to worry about. Okay? That's what you need to worry about.
And to be sure, folks, one of the jury instructions which Judge Fishel just read you is your job in this case is only to determine the issues in the case. It's an instruction on the law, to make sure you keep your eyes on the ball.
Next slide.
Now, what is your guiding light? Except for the issue of punitive damages where the standard is a little higher, for everything else you are going to determine in the case, this is your guiding light, the greater weight of evidence. It means the more pervasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
I have got a little video here, a little --this is what we are talking about. Okay? If those two scales start out evenly and at the end of the case, Emmon Smith -- Emmon Smith's scale is a little bit lower — okay — just by one, we win.
Think about it as two people in the middle of the 50-yard line in a football field and they're pushing in different directions. And at the end
if the plaintiff is one step, one inch on that side, we win. That's the burden of proof.
Next slide, please.
Okay. Your first question on the verdict form -- can we go to the verdict form, please, on the ELMO?
Okay. Can you all see that? Was Emmon Smith addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and, if so, was such an addiction a legal cause of his 1992 cancer?
Take that off. Thank you. Back to our slide again.
All right. So that's the first question you have to ask. That is Engle class membership.
Once -- and if you decide by the greater weight of the evidence that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was the addiction a legal cause to his lung cancer, the Engle findings kick in. Okay. So let's break this down. Okay?
Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of lung cancer if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such lung
cancer so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer would not have occurred.
In order to be regarded as a legal cause of lung cancer, addiction need not be the only cause. Addiction may be a legal cause of lung cancer even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing cancer.
Now, hold that there. Let me tell you why that's important. This nonsense that he was exposed to pesticides 50, 60, 70 years and this claim that it might have been genetic, guess what? You can throw all those in there. Genetics had something to do it, pesticide had something to do with it, his exposure to wood dust at the wood mill. It doesn't matter. If the addiction was the primary -- the main cause of his lung cancer, as long as it contributed substantially to it, even though it operates in combination with something else, it's over. He was addicted.
So let's go back to the -- can we take that for a second, please? Can I see the jury verdict
form, please.
Engle class membership is critical. So was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? Folks, you heard from Dr. Burns. I'm going to talk a lot about him. You remember I told you we'd have a chapter in our closing on addiction?
He was addicted. We are going to go over his smoking history. You heard it from Dr. Burns.
You heard it from him. You heard it from his wife. He was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, make no doubt about it. They were made by R.J. Reynolds. There is not going to be a question about that. And was the addiction a legal cause of his 1992 cancer?
You heard the testimony of Dr. Burns on addiction. He also testified as a medical expert on causation. But the most important testimony in this case was Dr. Schwarting, the German pathologist. Remember him? He came with a broken foot.
And I asked him, Was his lung cancer caused by his cigarette smoking? Was it squamous cell carcinoma?
Yes, it was.
One of those questions -- we'll have a quote
for you -- he said beyond a reasonable doubt.
It's the greater weight of the evidence. He says, I know you don't need to hear that much, Mr. Diaz, but to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, yes. Yes, it was the cause of his cancer. The addiction was a cause of the cancer to a reasonable doubt.
They didn't bring one expert witness in this trial to refute causation. To refute causation, not one expert witness. So when you come to the second part of the Engle class membership, was the addiction the legal cause of his addiction? I mean -- I'm sorry -- was his addiction a legal cause of his 1992 cancer? There is no opposing evidence to that, not a witness, not a document, nothing. Dr. Schwarting's work was the final on it. We're the pathologist. We are the gold standard. They have no witness to establish that. We'll come back to that in a moment.
All right. So -- now, if we can take that off the screen, please. Thank you.
These are the Engle findings. Once you decide that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that it caused his lung cancer in 1992, these are findings that kick in:
That smoking causes lung cancer, squamous cell carcinoma; cigarettes are addictive -- nicotine in cigarettes are addictive; that RJR placed on the market cigarettes that were defective and unreasonably dangerous; that RJR concealed or omitted, kept out material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
Those are findings.
Number 5, that RJR agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects --
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, objection.
THE COURT: All right. Counsel, approach.
(At the bench)
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, I object because he has the warranty findings on there, and Your Honor --
MR. DIAZ: Oh, I'm sorry. I'm not going to talk about that. I'll explain that to them.
THE COURT: Can you move off of that?
MR. DIAZ: Yes.
THE COURT: I mean, I don't want to throw it
up there.
MR. DIAZ: I know.
THE COURT: Don't put it back up unless you can get those taken off.
MR. DIAZ: Okay.
(In open court).
MR. DIAZ: Okay. Let's do this. Because we withdrew the warranty claims, I had an Engle finding that applied to warranty claims on the slide, so let me just go off the jury instruction that you'll get. All right. Here we go. Let's start again.
Finding 1, that cigarettes are addictive.
Number 2, cigarettes caused lung cancer.
Number 3, that RJR was negligent.
Number 4, that RJR placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
Number 5, that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available.
Knowing -- I lost my spot here. Knowing that material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or -- or -- addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes or both.
Finding number 6 -- and we finish there --that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company agreed with other companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both.
Those companies include Philip Morris, Liggett, Lorillard, Brown & Williamson individually and as successor of the American Tobacco Company, the Council for Tobacco Research U.S.A. and The Tobacco Institute.
Now, that's with regards to the Engle findings. Those are the findings that apply.
Now, remember I told you -- I'm sorry --remember, I told you there is a couple of legal instructions that are in your book that are very important. Okay? They talked about the greater weight of the evidence.
Another one is it tells that you -- when you deliberate, you don't take your common sense out of your brain and leave it outside and hang it up on that chair. You take it back in there with you. You can use your experience, your life experiences. You can use your reason and common sense. Okay? And you are expected to do that.
Now, we're now going to transition into the second part of the closing argument. We're going to talk about the history of the tobacco industry.
Now, before we start that, folks, a person's word should be their bond. A person's word should be their bond. In 1940, in 1950, in 1960, all the way to today, people have a need for honesty. Now let's look at the honesty or the lack of honesty of the tobacco industry.
You heard from Dr. Proctor. What is the best thing they can say about Dr. Proctor? They can't attack his credentials. Look at that. Harvard University two times, expert in history and tobacco. Stanford University professor. He's written six books on this subject. "Cancer Wars," and I can't remember the name of all the others. You saw the books. He's written 75 publications.
You know what, my dad used to tell me when you can't kill the message, kill the messenger.
So what do they do to kill the messenger? He makes $4,800 a day, shame on him.
You know, folks, when Reverend Smith asked me to represent him in this case and we picked you as a jury, I felt that you deserved nothing less than an expert witness like Dr. Proctor. You deserve
nothing less. We are asking you to make a real serious decision here. And that's what you require, that's what you demand, that's what you're entitled to, and that's what we brought you.
Next, please.
It all starts out with -- and this is really the whole story. It all starts out in the 1900s with tobacco sales going up and up and up --okay -- the blue line. And the red line is the male cancer rate. There is a clear correlation of about a 20- or 30-year delay between the two.
But, you know, the cigarette company, they are making money; they are making money. You see the thirties. That's the Depression, that first decline. This is science. This is empirical evidence. What's happening in the first dip over here in 1930? It's The Great Depression. You go back up. You see 1940. It's World War II.
People are abroad. Men are smoking more than women. Keep going up and up and up. You hit the peak around 1952, '53.
Okay. What happens? What happens is -- and by the way, just a minute, going back to Dr. Proctor. Remember, he gets no bonus for his
testimony.
Okay. And this is what I call it's only business. This is the chart, It's only business. It's just money and deaths. It's only business. But that tells the whole story. Let's fill in some of the gaps.
Next slide.
What happens is two scientists, realizing what's going on in the country, concerned about it, do a simple experiment. They take mice and they have put the tar on their backs. Look at this. Eighty tarred mice. Forty-four percent develop carcinoma. Carcinoma is cancer.
Sixty-two make it to 12 months; the other ones die. Fifty-eight of those ones had cancer.
You know, this is like -- reminds me when I was a little kid and you watched cartoons on Saturday mornings. Remember the Tom and Jerry Show? No pun intended, because this is with mice. But do you remember when the cat is running after the mice and he goes into a little mouse hole, and the cat goes bam, and he gets hit right in his face? And he realizes that he just got hurt, and the mouse got away.
This evidence was like that to the tobacco
industry in December 1953. Remember about a person's word being their bond? What would a reasonable, responsible corporation do? Say, Hey, let's look at this. We don't have to accept it yet, but let's -- let's see whether we think there is any validity to this. Right?
Now -- no, no, let's reject it. Let's go on a doubt campaign. Let's create some doubt. Let's deny it. Let's create a controversy. That is the DDC, doubt, denial, controversy, equals delay.
And you are going to see what happens later on in 1970 when they go back and they start giving themselves a high five in the corporate boardrooms about, Boy, that was a brilliant move we did back in the early fifties.
Here is what happens. Folks, if that ain't empirical -- that is more than half getting cancer within 12 months.
So what does the head of the American Tobacco Company say? And there is R.J. Reynolds right there. Let's have a meeting, December. And, again, it's not to exchange Christmas presents, folks, or sing Christmas carols around the tree at The Plaza Hotel? No, this is where the conspiracy begins. And guess what? Remember, when -- let me
freeze this here for a moment. These documents were not out there until 1999. The next series of documents all come out later.
Next one, please.
What do we see here? This is the preliminary recommendations of the cigarette manufacturers. Houston, we've got a problem. December 24, 1953, a serious problem of public relations. And you know what, it would go away.
No, please go back up. Please go back. Please. Last page.
Look at this. All right. We wouldn't have this problem if people would just stop talking about the whole matter. Excuse me? They would --they would have loved to have been able to shut up Wynder and Graham and put that report down the toilet. We wouldn't have this problem if people just kept their mouth shut. Consumers don't want manufacturers to keep their mouth shut, consumers who are paying their hard earned dollars in this country to buy products want to make sure that what they're being told they are getting is what they are paying their money for.
Next page.
Here is the situation of extreme delicacy.
You bet it is. Remember the spike on the chart? 991 is the chart, folks.
Okay. We can't add fuel to the flames. And the first thing we need to do is say, There is no proof; let's deny.
And here is what they do. We've got to sell something hard. We've got to sell something fast. We've got to sell something to everybody. The Frank Statement three weeks later. Boy, Hill & Knowlton earned their money over that Christmas holiday season and New Year's. Those presses were going 24/7.
Here is what we're going to do, A Frank Statement. There is no proof. Denial. And if you look back and you don't -- you can't see it here. But if you look at paragraph 1, for those of you that want to write it down, paragraph 1 of the Frank Statement, which is Exhibit 307, they make a commitment, a commitment that they would break, as you heard from Dr. Burns who worked in the Surgeon General's office. I'm going to come back to that statement at the end of my closing argument. But please remember, it's paragraph 1.
Now they are going to sell doubt to the American public, and he bought it. He bought it.
And here is what they are telling everybody.
Please, the next clip. Watch this.
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: As Dr. Little said earlier, all of the research of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee is done independent of the cigarette companies. Nonetheless, each major cigarette producer has been conducting it's own experiments on this problem. This is the Richmond Laboratory of one of the major producers.
A SPEAKER: I'm Dr. Robert N. DuPuis. I am chairman of the industry technical group of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee. Our primary objective is to analyze all of the components of smoke. Of course, we do a great deal of research on analysis and technology of tobacco itself. But even if we knew all of the components of tobacco, we still would not know the components of smoke. And since smoke is what we sell, we feel that we should emphasize this phase of research.
A SPEAKER: After we have produced the smoke and separated it into fractions, the next step is to identify these fractions. These are then identified either photographically or on the
oscilloscope. The oscilloscope is now demonstrating the means of identification of one of the smoke components.
Using these instruments, we've isolated and identified some three dozen components of smoke. Many more will be identified. As we find these components, we publish the results of our work in technical journals, which are available to any scientist in any part of the world. So far we've found none that give us any cause for concern. If we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: That was in 1955. That was a year after the Frank Statement, which as you remember went out to about 42 million readers. The Frank Statement. So a year later, what is the tobacco industry doing? It's wait and see. That's what that's all about. That's what I call the wait and see. We've got to wait and see. And we've already identified some components in the smoke. We're looking to identify others. That's the wait and see. Remember, they are funded by the tobacco
companies.
Next clip, please.
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: As scientific director is the eminent cancer investigator, Dr. Clarence Cook Little, head of the Jackson Memorial Laboratory at Bar Harbor, Maine.
A SPEAKER: Dr. Little, have any cancer-causing agents been identified in cigarettes ?
A SPEAKER: No, none whatever, either in cigarettes or in any product of smoking as such.
A SPEAKER: Suppose a tremendous amount of research now going on, including that of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, were to reveal that there is a cancer-causing agent in cigarettes, what then?
A SPEAKER: Well, if it was found by somebody working under a tobacco industry research grant, it would be made public immediately and just as broadly as we could make it, and then efforts would be taken to attempt to remove that substance or substances.
I would like to say this, however, that I
have heard a sort of a point of view -- and I'm not aiming this again at any one individual, but a point of view that says let's eliminate the agent in tobacco that is harmful. Well, it seems to me that we can't possibly eliminate an agent that hasn't yet been identified or the presence of which hasn't yet been proven.
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: That is the psychological crutch that smokers in 1955 needed to continue smoking. That is exactly what they wanted people to hear. That's the doubt. That's the addiction. We talked about the tug-of-war. Secretly, behind closed doors we know what the documents said. Publicly, out in the open they're telling people, We're looking into it. When we find something, we'll let you know. What is everybody doing in America? We don't know yet. Just keep smoking, keep smoking, keep smoking.
Next, please.
This is a 1957 document. Okay? This is the high five. Okay. This is an R.J. Reynolds document talking to Paul Hahn, the one who sent the telegram: Let's have the meeting at The Plaza Hotel. You took a bold and courageous action.
How about telling the truth?
December '53, when they called for a meeting of the manufacturers and other industry groups, formation of the TIRC was the result. There is absolutely no question in Paul Hahn's mind that if this committee had not been formed, the industry by now would have been in a deplorable position.
No kidding. But the truth would have been out there. And that sales chart, instead of going like this, would have started going like this.
And all of -- all those deaths that followed and all of those cancers that followed could have been avoided. Money mattered more than morals.
1957, tobacco was right in the thick of it. They had the opportunity to stop it. And what do they do? They high five and say, You know what, what a brilliant thing you did. Look, if we hadn't done that, they could have really made our stock price go down. It would have put our industry in a deplorable position.
Sales were more important than safety. 1957.
Let's go, next one.
Remember, you heard a little bit. Just go to page 2 here. This is an internal document in 1959. Remember when Mr. Gentry came in here and
denied that there was nicotine manipulation? You heard Dr. Burns say, Oh, yes, there was. Well, here is a document that talks about the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco. There it is. Keep them addicted. Keep that psychological dependency going.
Now, we come to 1963. As you can see, we're moving closer now to the next decade. This is an internal document.
Now, this is what I call the obstruction of justice document. This is at a point in time when the Surgeon General's office -- and they had an advisory committee on smoking and health -- okay? You see that there? They wanted to know what the TIRC was learning. They wanted to know what was going on out there. They wanted to know about the components of smoke.
And what does White & Case, the fancy lawyers in New York, tell the tobacco company they should tell the Surgeon General. Man, just write them a report that is so vague and so incomplete that it will be irksome to the reader. They will just get tired. Put it all up there, and they won't bother
with it. But make sure you assure them that they will continue to have our full cooperation.
All right. So don't tell the Surgeon General -- or not -- don't tell them but make it so hard to read that they can't figure it out and they get bored about it. But let them know we're going to continue to cooperate with them. And that's how we can keep this thing going.
Folks, what do you think the Surgeon General would have done in 1963 if he had known about this letter? Would he have relied on the information they were giving him, or would he have said, I want a specific and a complete report? They hid it from the public. They hid it from the Surgeon General. The Surgeon General is the people who we rely upon for our public welfare and health. And they were lying to him back in 1963. It's all about money, money, money, money, money, so they can take bigger bags of money to the bank. That's what it was all about. It wasn't for the public good. It was for the bankroll.
Lie to the Surgeon General back in the sixties. Here is your psychological crutch. You can just go down to the second yellow part. Remember, I talked about that? Here is an
internal document from Mr. Cullman: You are going to see his video in a moment. We must in the near future provide some answers which give smokers a psychological crutch -- that is that tug of war --and a self-rationale to continue smoking. Keep them going. Okay?
It doesn't say anything in there about, Let's tell me -- what it should be saying is, We in the near future need to give some answers to the rat or mice experiment that is now 10 years old? No, no. We don't need to do that. We need to give them the psychological crutch and the self-rationale to keep them smoking, keep them addicted, to keep those sales going up so we can carry bigger money bags to the bank. 1964.
Next.
Here is what they are telling the public.
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General committee.
A SPEAKER: In our studio this afternoon, following the Surgeon General's news conference, CBS News correspondent Richard C. Hottelet put
some questions to one of the leading spokesmen of the industry, Howard Cullman, president of the Tobacco Merchants Association and a long-time director of the Philip Morris Company.
Mr. Cullman, prominent in the New York theatre and civic affairs, is a third generation member of the tobacco family.
A SPEAKER: Mr. Cullman, the conclusions are pretty stark and pretty solid. They say, quite flatly, that it's the judgment that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from --
(Video clip paused.)
MR. DIAZ: Watch his eyes.
Go ahead.
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: -- certain specific diseases and the overall death rate than they have the rate that ten times as high for smokers in the case of lung cancer, and rather higher in other cases.
A SPEAKER: Well, that's awful hard to define, the word "substantial." I don't believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. We are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. We
eat more carefully. We have cholesterol habits.
We have drinking habits of lighter whiskey. We have smoking habits, which, incidentally, are today changing the type of something cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters.
Now, I was surprised, at the beginning of the conference, when Dr. Terry is supposed to have said that they have very little evidence, if any, on the effect, if any, of filter cigarettes. So when we have today's 60 percent of the business in the filter field compared to three percent 10 years ago, I think we need a little more research.
I'm convinced that eventually they will find some element through a filter or through some leaf growing, or special type of seed growing that will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking for. We want to be the detectives just as the Surgeon General and the AMA. We'll cooperate in every way.
A SPEAKER: Well, are you saying then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco which is removable by filter?
A SPEAKER: Well, obviously, a filter takes out the tar and nicotine. I don't think the industry admits that there are any bad elements.
If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed. But at this point we do not know.
A SPEAKER: Does any of the research that the tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any part of the findings here or the conclusions as a whole?
A SPEAKER: Without reading the report, I could not answer that. I don't think the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the conclusions.
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: He's saying that maybe God or luck. Maybe God or luck -- an act of God or luck will tell us what's in our product? Is that what a manufacturer is supposed to do? Do you think the next time you go somewhere and buy something, you should say, Hey, is this product warranted?
Is it any good? They can say, I don't know.
We'll have to see. Maybe you'll get lucky, maybe you won't.
Next slide, please. Page 3, third page.
Internal document, Doubt is our product.
Since it is the best means of competing with the
body of facts that exist in the mind of the general public, it's also a means to establish a conspiracy.
How about -- what should this say? That should say, Honesty is our product. Sincerity is our product. No, no, doubt is our product.
That's their state of mind in 1969.
Now we move to 1970.
Next slide, please.
Here we go. Another denial. What does it say? The CTR -- here we go. I'm sorry. Let's face it. We are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease.
What should a manufacturer be saying? Let's face it, we're interested in evidence that tells our people whether what they're smoking is injurious or not. All they want is information to deny the allegations that it can or does cause cancer. That's what they're doing; that's what they're saying. And, again, do you think this document, if it were in the hands of the Surgeon General, they would have waited as long as they did to take action?
Here is what they were saying behind closed
doors. Look at what they're saying publicly,
1971.
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: From CBS Washington, in color, Face The Nation, a spontaneous and you interview with Joseph Cullman, III, chairman and chief executive officer of Philip Morris Incorporated and chairman of the executive committee of The Tobacco Institute.
A SPEAKER: We have no program that I know of to try to help people to stop smoking. We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. And this industry can face the future with confidence because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: Now we come one year later. That was Mr. Cullman. Continued lies, continued deceit, continued denial. May 1972. This is the high five. Okay? Now, what's happening in 1972?
It's now been almost 20 years since the mouse experiment. And what is the tobacco industry doing? They are high fiving themselves behind closed doors, behind the boardrooms, and this is what they are saying to each other.
For nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts. Okay? While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, -- brilliant strategy helping us to win the important battles. It is fair -- it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory.
Right ?
On the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy -- okay -- consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it.
See, it's a holding strategy. What they knew was the longer we can keep this state of flux --okay -- as long as we can keep doubt and make it a controversy, that is a psychological crutch for everyone who has been smoking to keep smoking and buy the next pack of cigarettes. And here they are 20 years later. The holding strategy has
worked. Man, Hill & Knowlton, they earned every dollar that they got paid, don't you think?
Let's go, please, to -- moving right ahead to 1980. Ten years down the road, Mr. Kornegay, this speech.
Go to the next page, please.
New York, New York. Now, what's happening here is that there is a Surgeon General report that is coming out. But what does the tobacco industry do? They want to beat them to the punch, the American public. So what do they do? The Surgeon General's media event was preempted by the institute's first strike news coverage. We beat them to the punch.
For the first time in the history of the cigarette controversy -- it's now the 1980s, thirty years since the mice experiment. For the first time in the history of the cigarette controversy, the secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare had to share the spotlight. In fact, we won top billing that night on all networks. Their plan was working, and it worked for the last 30 years. Let's beat the Surgeon General. The lies continued. They continued into the seventies. They continued into the eighties.
Move forward to 1983, please.
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: First of all, we know cigarette smoking is bad for our health. Why does the tobacco industry continue to promote smoking?
A SPEAKER: Well, The Tobacco Institute does not promote smoking. It promotes the right of an individual to make the decision to smoke and then supports that individual in making that decision.
And I have to disagree with you in that we don't know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking. Certainly, I am not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people and some of the problems that they might have. But I don't think that there is a causal relationship established between cigarette smoking and any diseases. If there were, then I don't think there would be a cause without the effect or the effect without the cause. And we all know that that happens.
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: Cause without effect, effect without a cause? What's all that mumbo-jumbo?
It's 30 years after the mouse experiment. How long does it take you to do what these two scientists did and figure it out? I think we put a man on the moon in 1960. This is 1980.
Next slide, please.
This is Mr. --
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: Earlier this week, the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company took out this ad in a number of major newspapers and magazines, calling for an open debate about smoking. In brief, the ad contends that medical studies that show that cigarette smoking causes disease are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary.
A SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
A SPEAKER: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
A SPEAKER: All right.
A SPEAKER: That has not been causally established.
A SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking. No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
A SPEAKER: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
A SPEAKER: No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
A SPEAKER: No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that, while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over 10 years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces.
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: Classic example. Science is still confused. Here we are 1980. Now what we have is a clip from Mr. Heimann. You will remember,
Robert Heimann testified in this case by video deposition. It's a 1986 video deposition. He had left the industry in 1980.
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, objection as to the
clip.
THE COURT: Counsel, approach.
MR. DIAZ: It's in evidence, isn't it?
(At the bench).
MS. PARKER: Your Honor said when we -- when I raised this last week, Your Honor said that the clip is marked as an exhibit in evidence. It can
be used. I objected to any of those. This is a videotaped deposition. That's something different.
THE COURT: I agree with you. But you are not planning on using any trial testimony?
MS. PARKER: Correct.
THE COURT: I mean, I agree that if it's an exhibit, it can be shown to the jury because it's going to be taken back in the jury room. You can certainly talk about Heimann's testimony.
MR. DIAZ: Okay. Okay.
THE COURT: But you can't show his testimony. I'll sustain that.
MR. DIAZ: Okay.
(In open court.)
MR. DIAZ: All right. Here is what he said --
THE REPORTER: Excuse me, sir.
MR. DIAZ: Ready? Thank you. I apologize for that.
He was given a pack of cigarettes. And he was asked, Would you please read the warning label that's placed on these, please?
The Surgeon General warning: Quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your
health.
This is not a warning that is voluntarily placed there by the American Tobacco, is it?
ANSWER: No, it's not.
Would you put that warning there if Congress did not require it?
No.
Any reason?
So here he is telling in a deposition that if the Surgeon General warning had not been required, they wouldn't have even put that on the label.
Folks, when it comes to concealment and deceit, if that isn't Tom and Jerry evidence, nothing is. When you're making a product as dangerous as cigarettes -- it's now 1986 -- those cigarette sales are going up, people are dying, 440,000 a year. And you don't think you at least should put up on the warning label what the Surgeon General says you've got to do? He is telling us in a deposition that if the labels weren't required, he wouldn't put anything on there.
1988, the Surgeon General comes out with a report. This was a strong report, you may recall. And he came out and said, After carefully
examining the evidence, this report concludes that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting, that nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction, and the pharmacologic and behavorial processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
We can go right to -- not to the video but to the next clip, please, PT2510.
All right. What does the tobacco industry say to the -- I mean, this is a hard Surgeon General report in 1988. This is a hard report. They go on the defense, and they call him irresponsible, an attack on the Surgeon General. Okay? That's what they do.
And, finally, moving right ahead, 1994. It's now two years after he's lost his lung to lung cancer. That was 1992. R.J. Reynolds lied to U.S. Congress under oath.
A question by one of our government representatives: Do you believe that nicotine is not addictive?
The person in the little red square is Mr. Johnston. He was the RJR guy in 1994.
Cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet
the classic definitions of addiction.
Let's play the clip.
(A video clip was played in open court as follows:)
A SPEAKER: I'd like you to rise and those who will be testifying as well, could you rise? Raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
Please consider yourselves to be under oath.
A SPEAKER: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first -- and I would like to go down the row -- whether each you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it. And just yes or no, do you believe that nicotine is not addictive?
A SPEAKER: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
A SPEAKER: Mr. Johnston?
A SPEAKER: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no --
A SPEAKER: We'll take that as no. And, again, time is short. If you can just -- I think
each of you believes nicotine is not addictive and --
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: Stop right there.
Folks, if that's not a denial in 1994, then what is? What is? You heard the testimony of Dr. Burns when we asked him about the Frank Statement. Remember, I told you in paragraph 1, when they talked about the Frank Statement, was the industry, in paragraph 1 — you may have written it down in your notes.
Were they promising to do anything?
And Dr. Burns said, Yes. The language in the document makes it very clear.
And I asked him -- next please -- Dr. Burns, from the mid fifties, sixties, seventies, eighties, and nineties, in the tobacco industry, was it aware that its products contained nicotine?
Absolutely, sure.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: All right. Counsel, let's approach again.
MR. DIAZ: Take it off the screen, please.
Is the objection to reading on the screen?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. DIAZ: All right. I'll read it from my notes.
THE COURT: Approach.
(At the bench)
MS. PARKER: We have no objection to him paraphrasing, but he's actually -- whether it's on the screen or whether he reads it as a quote, again, I thought we talked about this on Monday. He's given me no notice of any of this.
THE COURT: All right. I don't think you can read it verbatim from a transcript. We did discuss it, but you can certainly discuss with the jury the substance of his testimony.
MR. DIAZ: That's fine.
THE COURT: I'll sustain the objection to the reading of it.
MR. DIAZ: Okay.
(In open court)
MR. DIAZ: Thank you.
All right. Remember that Dr. Burns told you that in the fifties, the sixties, the seventies, and the eighties that the tobacco industry knew that its products contained nicotine? Do you remember that testimony?
And then we were -- we asked him whether or
not the tobacco industry knew the nicotine caused addiction and he said absolutely.
I then asked him whether or not the actions of the tobacco companies in the fifties, sixties, seventies and eighties had an impact on the addictive nature in terms of the way people became addicted to the product. And he said absolutely. He said the tobacco industry was sustaining addiction, he said that they were denying it was addictive, and he said that the conduct of the tobacco industry influenced people to smoke.
We then talked about the commitment in 307, paragraph 1, and I asked him based on your 30 years of experience in the Surgeon General's office, did you see that play itself out?
He said -- he chuckled. You may remember he laughed on the stand. We were across the street at the other building. And he said yes, it certainly did. He said they did everything they could do to oppose what the Surgeon General was doing.
Okay. Now what do they do in response to Dr. Proctor? Next slide, please.
Dr. Stueck. You know, he's an expert on the Korean War. There is no question about that.
This case is not about the Korean War. He hasn't written one book or published anything on the tobacco industry or its history. He really doesn't know much about the tobacco industry. I think he said that this was his first tobacco trial. Remember? He still hadn't gotten around to putting it on his website yet. We are still waiting for that. Okay? All right?
And you saw the research that he did. He did research to try to show what kind of public information was available to Mr. Smith back in the thirties and the forties and the fifties.
And you know what I learned from Dr. Stueck? You know what I learned from you? I learned something my daddy told me a long time ago. Sometimes less is more. I could have asked him one question on cross-examination that one of you asked. One question. I could have sat down. And I realized my shortcomings as a lawyer in this trial. One question: Do you really think you know what access he had in the rural parts of Jackson County in the thirties and the forties and the fifties?
What was his answer? I thought some of your jaws were going to fall off your mouth. He said
yes.
Are you kidding me? Is that the best they can give us? You know, there's a lot of instructors and professors in this town, in this county. Florida State University is an hour drive away. University of Florida is a few hours drive away. You don't think that with all the money that they have they couldn't have gone out and brought somebody to you better than this to try to prove something to you other than what he did? That's the best they can do.
Next.
We're now moving on, folks, to the issue of addiction. Okay. Do we have Dr. Burns here? His picture? Do we have it? If you can't find it, don't worry about it.
You all remember Dr. Burns. We may come up with his picture later on. The important thing --
And, Danny, do me a favor, don't show me any clips that have trial testimony. Okay?
All right. Let's talk about addiction. We first get in this trial from Reverend Smith. What does he tell you? He picks up his first cigarette when he is 13 years old.
Next clip, please.
Thirteen years old. It's 1944 now. What's going on in the forties? Sports figures all around.
Next, please.
Powerful, penetrating advertisements. Look at these advertisements and ask yourselves if these advertisements have the power and the penetration of a little black and white newspaper ad that Dr. Stueck talked about. They use glamour, they use sexy figures, they use signatures, John Wayne signs off on the ad. You are going to see -- we had doctors. Okay.
Smoking was all over the place. It's not like it is today. That's why I took you back in time with Dr. Proctor. Okay. More doctors smoke Camel, the MD.
Next slide, please.
Remember when we used to go to -- we still, some of us, hopefully would go get our eyes checked, and he says, Better other worse? And you try to get your prescription set. Which one looks better, this one or that one?
Well, which one looks more impressive to you? Which is the one that catches the person's eye and attention? This? If you go back one, please. Or
that? Remember? Better or worse? This or that? There you go.
It's the power of penetration. And they have letters signed by John Wayne.
Keep going.
Now, reliance. Reliance is important because you are going to see that he didn't have the ability to work in the TIRC or the CTR or the TI. There is a jury instruction on reliance that tells you that if they had a better chance to know that he did, then that has -- it's one of the things you need to determine on reliance. So when you are looking at reliance in the jury instructions, and you're talking about that, don't forgot that he didn't have the same knowledge about the dangers of the products that the tobacco companies had. Okay? All right.
So I then asked Mr. Smith, When you first got a TV in your home, were there any particular shows that you remember watching?
This is in his deposition.
He said cowboys.
Cowboys. Which one did you like?
John Wayne.
What do we see? John Wayne. Remember when
we showed that on the screen? John Wayne. John Wayne. We just had those up.
And then I asked him about Lucky Strike.
Okay? And we asked him about Lucky Strike. And if you remember his deposition, he said he remembered something about the Lucky Strike going to war.
So what did we do? We started digging up and looking up all these articles from the forties and fifties. Watch. There it is. Right there. Camels. He smoked Camels. Lucky Strike was the last one. More reliance, more reliance.
Next, please.
Okay. That's reliance. He played softball. More reliance. Camel products. He relied.
And we asked him a question: You know, when you smoked cigarettes, were you inspired?
And he said, You know, you see a man and he looks like he is enjoying it.
That's exactly what he is talking about. That's what he relied upon when he coached softball.
We then asked him if he knew that --R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. He said he heard of it before.
I asked him about his favorite brands.
Keep going, please. There you go.
Pall Mall cigarette. Why did he like the Pall Mall cigarette? Because it was a little bit longer. You got more cigarettes and more puffs per cigarette. You get your money's worth.
Okay. We asked him about whether he smoked when he was in the military.
Yes, he did. He said he got his cigarettes from the PX. He now says that when he was in the PX when he was in the military buying cigarettes from the PX, he is now smoking cigarettes about --by the pack a day.
And let me go back a little bit into his smoking history for a moment. He picks up his first cigarette at 13. He bums it off his brother or steals it off his brother to smoke it behind the barn. He then, in his next few years, is in school. He may have smoked a little bit intermittently. Then he said he got some jobs and he quit school at 11. But if you do the numbers, there is about a two-or-three-year gap between 11th grade and the military, which is in 1951.
What he tells you he did is he went out there and worked. And he said, When I first started earning
money is when I was able to buy my on cigarettes. And he told you, I would shake peanuts, I would pick corn, I would cut pulp wood.
And so he's already buying cigarettes in the late forties. Okay? That's very important.
All right. So he goes into the military. He smokes. He comes back. He starts working at the veneer mill. He is smoking in the veneer mill. Okay?
Moving forward. He went to Gilmore Academy. He got his high school diploma. Okay? Remember, he had dropped out. Got his high school diploma. Came back. He worked at Gilmore Academy. He went to actually Jackson College to get his high school diploma, but he worked at Gilmore Academy as a cottage parent. Smoked as a cottage parent, smoked in college before classes, after classes, not on campus, because he didn't want the kids there to be affected by what he was smoking.
Okay?
All right. Then he goes to Florida State Hospital. That's where he did his long-term of employment until he could no longer work there in 1992. Do you remember that? Florida State Hospital. Now he's building up to about a pack a
day. A pack and a half a day. I'm sorry. His wife told you under oath that in his later years he was up to two packs a day.
So his smoking history starts off in the teens with a few years in there. Then in his late teens, in the military, he starts smoking about a pack a day. At the end of it he's smoking two packs a day. And somewhere in the middle he is smoking a pack and a half. That's his smoking history.
All right. He told you about how he could smoke at work in designated areas. Okay? So he couldn't smoke everywhere, he couldn't smoke with the inmates, but you could smoke as long as you weren't in direct contact with the inmates. And he would smoke at the designated areas whenever he had the urge to do so. Okay?
He then talked to you about -- yes. When we were taking about withdrawal symptoms, remember that one of the questions was if you smoked even though you are having difficulty doing certain things. And he said that he had difficulty walking up or running up the stairs at the Florida State Hospital. Even though he had that difficulty, he continued smoking. That's the
testimony, of course, that Dr. Watson forgot or didn't want to talk about -- okay? -- when I started cross examining him.
We asked about quit attempts, and he told you all the quit attempts he made. And this is important, because Dr. Watson has forgotten about that. Dr. Watson said he made one quit attempt.
My report shows the one quit attempt.
I said, Well, let's go back to his deposition testimony. Do you remember when he said he had multiple quit attempts?
I don't remember that.
And I took him to line and page in the deposition. When I caught him he then said, Well, that's not just -- I don't really take that into consideration. I really care more about what I see there in my face.
He is evaluating Reverend Smith in a two-and-a-half-hour interview. Remember when I asked Ms. Smith, Do you think that you knew more about his smoking habits in 40 years of marriage to him than Dr. Watson could have learned in two and a half hours?
Absolutely, absolutely.
And what did he say? He -- Dr. Watson. No
symptoms of irritation. He wasn't irritable.
He -- he just smoked when he wanted to.
I brought him right back to the deposition time after time again. And I had to show him, he said irritable.
Oh, yes. Well, I'd forgotten about that.
But even if I did, it wouldn't matter.
I said, He was sleeping at night, and he told you in the deposition that he would have cravings and chew gum.
Forgot about that. If he didn't forget about it, he didn't consider it.
Every piece of evidence that he had from Vernell Smith, from Reverend Smith's deposition, that showed unsuccessful quit attempts, withdrawal symptoms, he just ignored.
Remember the one where I said, Did you miss his part where he said that he would -- he'd quit for a few days and then he would smell a cigarette or after a meal and he would light up another one and then another one and then another one?
And it was just constant with Dr. Watson. Constant.
So we asked Reverend Smith. You heard the testimony from the video deposition that the
warnings didn't have any effect on him. They didn't have any effect on him. He was addicted.
He was hooked.
He talked about the difficulty, like I said before, at his job. He talked about his cravings.
Oh. Remember this one? Remember when he talked about short patient? You all know what he meant. When he stopped smoking, how he would get short on his patient? He just didn't pronounce it the way the court reporter wrote it. But you all know what he meant. He would get short on his patience when he got irritable.
He was asked, Reverend Smith, what was it that you liked about your cigarettes after you would light one up after meals? And his answer was, I guess it was the nicotine.
Folks, do people smoke cigarettes for 40 years, if not more, puff after puff after puff, eight puffs on the average per cigarette, because they like the way the smoke feels in their lungs? They smoke because they are addicted for that period of time.
And I asked him, Back then, do you think you were addicted?
I didn't think I was.
Classical denial. I didn't think I was.
Asked him again. During the years that you were smoking, were you addicted?
I didn't know it.
But then I finally asked him a question, Sir, were you addicted? Were you addicted?
Yes, I was.
Those are his answers and his testimony.
You then heard from Dr. Burns. I think we now have his clip. Sorry about that.
Okay. Again, if you can't kill the message, kill the messenger. Dr. Burns, Harvard Medical, Dartmouth Medical School. We brought you the best of the best, folks. The best of the best.
They can't -- they can't beat him on his qualifications, so what do they do? Look at that. Surgeon General's office 30 years. He wrote and edited Surgeon General reports. He wrote eight books on addictions and nicotine. One hundred fifty publications on addiction. He's qualified to testify not only on nicotine addiction but also on causation.
And what did he say when I asked him about the DSM-IV?
He said, That's really not the best way. For
me, it's useless. I have my on system, and I know when a person is addicted or not. That was Dr. Burns.
We asked him what his opinions were. And his specific opinions were that Mr. Smith was addicted to nicotine in his cigarettes.
Just one moment.
His specific opinions: That Mr. Smith was addicted to nicotine in his cigarettes; that addiction was the lynchpin that connected his smoking behavior with the causation of his lung cancer; and the third opinion, that his addiction caused his lung cancer just as much as the exposure to the cancer-causing substances in cigarettes.
That was Dr. Burns, an expert, a real expert in addiction.
I asked him, What did you base that opinion
on?
I didn't examine him. I don't need to talk to the patient in 2010 to know or give an opinion as to whether or not he was addicted in the forties and fifties and the sixties and the seventies and the eighties until 1992. What use is it? What I need to look at are the medical
records. I need to look at his deposition testimony about what happened back then, her deposition as to what happened back then, and that's how I know that they are addicted. And that man was a classical case of nicotine addiction.
And he said -- and he said everything that Watson didn't either remember or know or didn't --he must have thought I was asleep at the wheel sitting there; that I didn't have his testimony from the prior cases. But Burns didn't miss it.
What did you base your opinion on, Dr. Burns?
He describes trying to quit and had substantial difficulty doing so. He had cravings for cigarettes. Would wake up at night. He became irritable. Had a sense of irritability and nervousness as part of his stopping smoking.
These are classic withdrawal symptoms from somebody who is addicted to nicotine.
Match, point and game. Greater weight of the evidence? Dr. Burns?
Here is what they say. No, we got somebody better. Dr. Watson. A charming individual. A charming individual. Good looks. Soft voice. Right ?
But what's important about him is that this is not a contest for looks or a charming voice. This is about qualifications and expertise. And you know what? He's a great expert for his field. You would want him to make a decision or recommendation to a judge: Is a person, from a psychiatrist's standpoint, their brain, are they a danger to themselves or somebody else and we need to commit them civilly, involuntarily? Okay?
In Florida here, we call it the Baker Act. Okay? All right.
Do we need to take this person off the streets? He is extra qualified for that.
And then he also gives opinions to judges in criminal cases: Does this criminal defendant have the mental capacity to stand trial?
It's a competency issue. It's not a nicotine addiction issue.
He testified that his experience, he's never written on nicotine. He's never written a single book, not a single publication. His experience is limited to two months in a cessation clinic, a smoking cessation clinic with 40 addicts.
And I asked him: Of the 40 addicts, how many people or how many of them do you think are not
addicted?
His first answer was they all were. Yeah. Yeah. And then he caught himself and says, Well, let me not commit because I'm not a hundred percent sure. You know, maybe most of them but not all of them.
Well, but the point is he wouldn't know the difference between a person who is addicted to nicotine and not with the level of experience and expertise that he has.
And folks, Dr. Burns is not the only addiction expert out there. He's, I suggest to you, very, very good, but he's not the only one out there. Don't you think if they had somebody close, close to Dr. Burns's credentials, that they would have brought somebody in here that had more than two months' experience in a smoking cessation clinic? Don't you think they would have brought that to you? To bring an expert like that, that expert has to really feel comfortable with his opinions. And you can infer from their inability to get something like that as to why they couldn't bring you somebody other than Dr. Watson, who is wonderful in his field, but not --
MS. PARKER: Okay. That's an improper
argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DIAZ: Who is not an expert in this, in nicotine addiction.
As I said, you know, he's -- he's a nice guy. He just -- he's not the right guy.
Next slide, please.
This is his smoking exposure. Forty years of smoking. It's a 60-year pack history, folks, at a pack and a half a day. I'm not going to sit here and quarrel and say it's two. If they want to sit here and quarrel and say it's one, that's fine.
It doesn't matter. He was addicted. But a pack and a half a day, 300 cigarettes -- I'm sorry, 30 cigarettes a day with nicotine, 10,900 a year, 438 cigarettes in 40 years. That's 40. Now remember, if you were adding all the junior years that he was smoking, it would be higher. But we're not even throwing that in there. We're going basically back about 1950 to 1990, because remember, there is this big issue out here that he stopped in '90, not '92.
And then they came up with this. I've got to take a minute for this. I would never forgive myself if I didn't do that. Shut that off.
Please.
Do you remember? Keep your eye on the ball? Why did counsel try to get you to believe that he stopped smoking in 1968 in this trial? Why? Clearly a mistake in the medical record, right? But, you know, again, I wasn't asleep at the wheel. I said, Wait a minute, wait a minute. He smoked 40 to 50 years, about one to one and a half packs per day.
And they had to sit down, put your tail in between your legs.
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, that's improper argument.
THE COURT: I'll sustain that.
MR. DIAZ: Back to the slide, please.
Addicted. Eight puffs per cigarette. That is 3.5 million injections of nicotine over a lifetime of smoking. You know, if you put the cigarettes together, based on those numbers, look at that. You could run 33 miles, from here to Dothan, with cigarettes to count all the cigarettes that went into his lungs.
Last slide, please.
Okay. And here, before we get to the slide, let's go back a second, please.
Okay. Dr. Burns's testimony. I asked him, you know, what's your ultimate opinion on this issue of addiction?
He says, You know, the only reason that people repetitively expose themselves to those carcinogens every 40 minutes -- okay -- all day long is the need for nicotine. And it's that need for nicotine, that addiction, that creates the repetitive, long-duration exposure and results in cancer.
Last. Last clip, please, on addiction.
That's the summary, folks. He was addicted, started at 13, nicotine cravings, one to two packs a day for 40 years, 40 hits of nicotine every day to the brain. First thing in the morning when his feet hit the floor, last thing at night before he went to bed. Smoked everywhere -- in the bedroom, after dinner, in front of his kids. Multi unsuccessful quit attempts. Withdrawal symptoms, irritable, and short patience. Okay?
I'm going to transition over to causation, folks.
Danny.
Causation. I don't have his picture. But that was that Dr. Roland Schwarting. Remember
him? The man with the broken toe?
All right. We asked Dr. Schwarting -- do it this way -- what he did in this case. And he looked at the slides. And what's important is that those were the actual slides that he was able to get from the hospital in Tallahassee to look at his tissue. You heard his expertise. What did he say?
He says, We are the gold standard. We make diagnoses. We are the gold standard. I got that lung tissue. I looked at it, I photographed it.
It's in evidence. You can see it.
And we asked him: Can you say to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that but for Reverend Smith's addiction to cigarettes, he would not have suffered lung cancer to his left lung in 1992?
And he said, Yes, to a reasonable degree of medical scientific -- no. This is Dr. Burns. I apologize. Dr. Burns was asked about causation first. Then we'll get into Schwarting.
Dr. Burns was asked that question. And he said, Yes, to a reasonable degree of medical and scientific certainty, he would not have developed his lung cancer absent the addiction.
Okay. Then I asked Dr. Burns this important question, since we had him here anyway, and we heard some noise about his cancer in 1992 came from his prostate. We got Dr. Burns in here.
Let's see what he has to say about it.
Dr. Burns, when we talked about causation, do you think that his prostate cancer caused his lung cancer?
No, no, no. His prostate cancer occurred after his lung cancer, and the two are not connected.
And I asked him, Those two opinions, have they been made to a reasonable degree of medical certainty?
Yes. And to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty.
Now I go back to Dr. Schwarting. He said that the pathology was the gold standard. So I asked him the ultimate opinions, what he did, and here is what he told us.
He said that, No. 1, that Reverend Smith in his left lung in 1992 had squamous cell carcinoma. He said that it's a tumor that actually started in the lung. He said that it was not a metastasis from somewhere else; that it was really what we
call a primary lung cancer.
And we asked him about what else did he review.
And he said, I reviewed the medical record and information about his smoking habits. One pack -- not even one and a half -- one pack for 40 or 50 years before he was diagnosed. So I had a very significant, longstanding history of cigarette smoking.
His second opinion. He suffered from a type of cancer that occurs in more than 90 percent --many people say 95 percent -- and that it's causally related to cigarette smoking. There is no doubt in my mind that squamous cell carcinoma was caused by his chronic smoking. No doubt.
We've just got to show you reasonable -- the greater weight of the evidence, folks. There is no doubt in Dr. Schwarting's mind.
Remember, I told you at the beginning of my closing argument that they didn't put one witness on to challenge that opinion.
How strong are you in your conclusions that what he had in that lung was squamous cell carcinoma? I said, Let me ask you the question a different way. And I said, Is your opinion to a
reasonable degree of medical certainty?
Do you remember these words?
Well, it goes even higher. That is my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt. But here, of course, I testify as to the reasonable medical certainty. And yes, that's my opinion.
Last question to Mr. Schwarting was: Is his addiction, in your opinion, direct —
Now, this is important, folks. Remember when I was doing the initial screens?
Is it possible, Danny, to go back to the first slide of Engle membership? This is critical. Do you know which one I'm talking about? Can you find it? If not, I'll read it. Don't worry about it.
I got it right here. This is very important, folks. Very, very important. Do you remember when we talked about what is a legal cause? And this is really important for purposes of class membership. And we talked about legal cause.
There we go.
All right. We talked about addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. Nicotine is a legal cause of lung cancer if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced, or
contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer would not have occurred. Remember that? That's there? Okay.
I asked that Dr. Schwarting the question right off of that jury instruction. And here is what he said.
My question was: Did Reverend Smith's addiction to cigarette smoking, in your opinion, directly -- you see it right there on the screen -- and in natural and continuous sequence — right there on your screen — produce or substantially contribute to his lung cancer in 1992?
His answer: There is no question in my mind that it did.
That's real cause. That's Engle class membership right there. He was addicted from Dr. Burns, it was a legal cause to his injury. That's it, match, point, and game. He is a member of the Engle class. Make no doubt about it.
Next screen, please.
Folks, class membership is not about comparative fault. They are going to try to get
up here, I suspect, and suggest to you otherwise. Class membership is not about comparative fault.
Okay. I want you, and I'm asking you to please apply the law in this case. You are going to have it in writing. You are going to have the verdict form. This is applying the facts. This is keeping your eye on the ball.
Addiction to nicotine caused the smoking, caused the lung cancer. Addiction to nicotine comes from Dr. Burns. We know it came from the smoking from the medical records from Dr. --Reverend Smith's testimony, from his wife's testimony. And we know that caused his lung cancer based on Dr. Schwarting's causation opinion. Okay?
And so there it is: Directly produces or contributes substantively to the loss. It's an open-and-shut case.
You know, folks, the evidence in this case is just overwhelming. I only have to give it to you by the greater weight of the evidence. It is overwhelming, inconclusive, unrefuted.
Next, please.
Statute of limitations. Okay. We're almost done. Okay. Here the defense is saying that
Reverend Smith somehow should have known before 1992 or before 1990, and a particular date in 1990, that he was going to get lung cancer. Okay? And he had --
MS. PARKER: Objection, Your Honor.
Misstates the standard.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DIAZ: The judge is going to give the instructions on the law on the statute of limitations. Let me tell you what the evidence is on that. Do you remember Dr. Burns's testimony and we talked about coughing? Do you remember that? Okay?
I asked him: If a person coughs, does that mean that they are going to get lung cancer in the near future?
We were across the street. Remember?
He said, I hope not, because everybody coughs.
And I said him, Well, what's a cough?
He said, A cough is just a symptom. It's the result of irritation of the trachea. You can get it from a lot of things -- post nasal drip, hay fever, air conditioning, get some infection.
Okay? It's a cough. It's a cough.
Then I asked him. Critical question. In your review of the medical records for Reverend Smith, did you see anything in the records that would indicate to you that before 1992 he had symptoms that manifested themselves in a way that he was going to get lung cancer in 1992?
He says, No. There is no evidence that I reviewed in the medical records that indicate that he had symptoms that would lead a physician to believe that cough, earlier cough was going to give him cancer in 1992.
Okay, folks. That is a red herring. We all know what a red herring is. That is an effort to keep your eye off the ball. You may recall, and I think you have some record there in the medical records. You may also have in there the Florida State Hospital X-rays. I believe in there you will find a chest X-ray, I think, in 1990. Okay? There was nothing before 1992 in terms of medical history and records that would tell Reverend Smith that he was going to get lung cancer.
They do their test in 1992. They immediately do the biopsy. It's an emergency, somewhat of an emergency procedure. You can look at the records and you can see that they got him prepared and did
that surgery right away. Okay. And they got the lung removed.
Now, let me go to the jury form. Back again.
Okay.
Because, folks --
Can we have the light on there, please?
Thank you.
All right. Folks, this is chapter 6 of my closing argument. Here we are, final stretch.
Okay. Was Emmon Smith addicted to cigarettes containing cocaine -- excuse me, nicotine manufactured -- God forbid. Was Emmon Smith addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his 1992 cancer?
He is, by the greater weight of the evidence, a member of the Engle class. And you should check the first question yes.
Did he know, or by the exercise of due diligence should he have known, before May 5th of 1990 that he had been injured or damaged and that there was reasonable possibility that the injury or damage was caused by smoking cigarettes?
He's not prophetic. He couldn't know before
1990 he was going to get cancer later on. The obvious answer is no. That's just a red herring.
Then you go to No. 3. Now, folks --
Slide this over a little bit here.
Remember, once he's here and you disregard the red herring, you come -- he is now an Engle class member. Okay? And the findings kick in.
So now you go down your verdict form, and we have the 4 counts. Count 4 is -- excuse me. Count 3 is your strict liability count. Count 4 is whether or not it was a legal cause of his cancer. Okay? So there is two parts to it. Okay? Then the next one is the fraud and concealment. And that is the conspiracy. We will talk about the bottom part in a minute. So let's stick with No.
3 for now.
If you look at the Engle findings, the minute he becomes a class member, one of the findings is that they put a defective and unreasonably dangerously cigarette on the market by 19- -- R.J. Reynolds. You just have to determine whether or not it was a legal cause of Emmon Smith's 1992 cancer.
Well, guess what? If you accept that Schwarting's testimony, it's that simple. Yep.
The Engle findings says that they did this. Dr. Schwarting says they did this. Yes, right there.
Number 4. Negligence. Okay. This is the second count you've got to determine.
Was the negligence a legal cause of his cancer?
The Engle findings says they were negligent. The jury has already made that decision. You just have to say was the negligence a legal cause of his cancer. Well, if you find from -- if you believe Dr. Schwarting by the greater weight of the evidence, they put no evidence in this case against him, if you find here, you can't not find there. You've got to accept the Engle findings.
Number 5. Was R.J. Reynolds' concealment and omission of material fact or information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both -- or both, it doesn't have to be both -- a legal cause of his cancer?
Again, you know, the Engle finding says that they concealed and omitted facts, so that's already determined. You've just got to decide whether it was the legal cause. Was it? Yeah, of course it was. Schwarting said it was. He told you he relied on their ads and when he saw them.
He's got reliance.
Okay. Number 6. This is the conspiracy.
Was R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's agreement with others to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of Emmon Smith's 1992 cancer?
Well, Engle says, other jurors said, Yeah, they conspired. You've just got to say was it the legal cause. Sure, it was.
Okay. That brings us down to the percentage of fault, which is comparative fault. You know, I told you the first day, and you may recall when we did that pre-qualifications of you, and we talked about smoker's fault, smoker's choice. And we said he admits, he admits he's got some blame here. He's not blameless. He's not blameful.
He's got some blame.
They admit nothing. After everything you now know and everything you have now seen that they did, they still say to this day, we accept zero. Nothing.
Now, this number is up to you. You know what, folks? Once you go back there, you will have more power than anybody else in this
courthouse. Nobody can ask you what you did or why you did it and why you didn't. Your deliberations are secret and they are private.
But I do remember, and it's the main purpose of me asking Dr. Burns, Look, how many people --as a demo aid. You may recall the demo aid. It had some lines on it and some numbers. And I asked him, you know, look at this chart. And he told us that about 3 percent -- that only about 3 percent of addicted smokers ultimately quit for good. A lot try. They don't succeed. But of the ones who try -- some don't want to try at all, some try and don't succeed, some succeed but go back. But of the ones who really try and succeed all the way --
And I asked him: What's all the way?
He said, Well, we really give you that, you know, clear, clean, fully, cold-turkey, done-for-good after five years. Okay? He says three percent.
So you know what? At the very least, at the very least, shame on him for not being in the three percent group. It can be more. But at the very least, I could not be honest if I didn't tell you he's got to bear at least 3 percent. At least
3 percent. If you want to make it 5, if you want to make it 10, if you want to make it 15, it's up to you. That's just a marker. You decide what percentage is his fault.
You put the percentage down and then -- I'm sorry. It's the other way around. I saw you. I got it wrong here. Thank you. Speak up.
All right. So, of course, this total amount, the total amount has to be 90 -- I'm sorry -- 100. So it's 9 7 and 3.
Okay. Now, the next question here on No. 8 is the total amount of damages. Now, the way it works is you will decide a number if you find that there is liability on any of the counts. Okay?
And then you put the number in here, and the Court will take this calculation and do it for you. All right? So you don't do it. If you award damages, you don't take the percentage off. That will be done for you. Okay?
All right. So let's talk about compensatory damages. The judge has told you mental pain and suffering, the loss of the quality and enjoyment of life. Folks, you can't go out and buy a lung. You can't live the same way with one lung as you can two. God gave us two lungs, not one, you
know. And when you put that pressure and that stress on the second lung -- okay -- you can't do the same thing he has done up until 1992 ever again.
Vernell Smith told you he could not do the same things before. He wasn't the same person. They can't even take a walk through a park. He gets winded coming up, walking into this courthouse. Has to stop to catch his breath.
Not just today, but you've got to go back to 1992. He was 60 years old. And do you know what was very telling in this case was when I asked Vernell about when she was courting him. And I learned a lot about what her life was like in Jackson County, in rural Jackson County in the sixties when she met him and started dating him and married him in the '70s. And the most wonderful answer was she said, We would go to the movies. There really wasn't much to do back then.
She has been with him for 40 years, and she doesn't need to go to the Plaza Hotel to be happy with her husband at Christmas time. And it kind of made you think about the priceless value of spending time with your husband, holding the hand and walking down the dirt road in the cottage
where they live out in Cottondale, to a neighbor's home. He's lived there for 78 years. He can't do that no more. He can't garden no more. He couldn't do it back in 1992. Twenty years of having to live with one lung.
Bicycle has two tires. You take off the front tire, you've got one left. The second one gets punched. It's under too much pressure. It's not the same. It's not a finger. It's a lung. Everything in your body revolves around your lung and oxygenation in your system. And it's the 20 years that he has been robbed of being able to share that time with his wife.
Now, think about this. He was a preacher. Preachers do things that are incredible. Like doctors, they save people, not with medicine, but with prayer, with hope, with inspiration. You can only but imagine how many people, how many kids who he touched and inspired and turned their lives around. And he today has that wonderful memory. And he could have been doing that for the last 20 years.
What must it have been like from 1992 forward, getting up every morning wondering when you have to go to your next doctor's appointment,
is it going to be the other one? What must those 20 years have been like? They are priceless.
There is no credit card, there is no checkbook that can pay for that.
I'm going to suggest a number. For all of you, you put whatever number you want.
Rationalize it based on fairness what you think he is entitled to, and nobody can ever come back and question that number.
We have 20 years, robbed of the quality of life with his wife, being able to throw a ball to your grandkid, being able to take a stroll down to the park. There is no amount of money that can pay for it. But since it was 20 years, folks, I suggest the number that you put here is $20 million, $1 million for every year. The records are in evidence. The trips back to the doctor.
The bouts of pneumonia.
You get pneumonia in the wintertime in Jackson County, in rural Jackson County, you can do it with two lungs, you ain't going to do it with one. You will see the hospital records.
They are all in evidence.
You can't go fishing. You are not going to go out fishing on a lake with one lung and
something happens to you, you can't make it back. The entire quality of life. He might as well have been on a respirator. He can walk, go to church, a couple of things, and that's it. But they are very simple, basic things. They were important to him, and cannot do them for 20 years. A man's life at age 60 is precious, as is that of a woman. You're going down the last chapter, perhaps of your life. You want to make it memorable. You want to make it count. And he couldn't because of them.
Finally, folks, on the second page is the last question. Under the circumstances of this case please state whether the clear and convincing evidence — punitive damages is appropriate.
Okay? Again, here, the clear-and-convincing standard of proof is a little bit higher than the greater weight of evidence. You have it in the instruction. I'm not going to reread it to you. But you cannot apply the other standard. This is a higher standard. But you know, folks, we have met that standard up and back. Okay?
Generally speaking, what it says is it says that was this intentional misconduct. Look at the records. If that is not intentional misconduct,
nothing is.
Was it a substantial cause of his lung cancer?
Well, sure it was. Sure it was.
Their conduct behind board rooms, high-fiving it, talking about their delay, their deception, selling doubt. Doubt is our product. That's what we sell. Manipulating nicotine.
They still today come in here and have the nerve to talk to you about the harm reduction.
Harm reduction. They weren't thinking about harm reduction in the 1940s, in the 1950s, in the 1960s, and 1970s, and the 1980s. Sell a cigarette. The value of a human life is the value of a cheap pack of cigarettes you can buy at Walmart. That is callous. That's egregious wrongdoing, and it constitutes a public wrong.
Folks, the evidence in this case is that there are about 440,000 people a year that die from cigarette smoking, 440,000 lives, not to mention the illnesses that others have who haven't yet died but will die unnecessarily because of the consumer fraud.
I wouldn't put that warning label on a pack of cigarettes if Congress didn't tell me to. What
does that tell you? We don't care. Well, they do care about that first line. Sales. That's what they care about.
And whether or not the intentional misconduct was that the defendant had actual knowledge or had wrongful conduct.
Are you kidding me? From that first telegram, December 1953, the idea was let's get together, let's lock arms, let's put out that Frank Statement, let's deny, let's say there is no proof, let's create this TIRC, let's fund it, let's buy ourselves some time. It's a brilliant strategy. We are making money. If that hadn't happened, the industry would be in a deplorable position.
How callous. Who are these people? Who authorized that?
And they pursued that course of conduct. Let me show you this on the issue of punitive damages.
Please, next slide.
This kind of sums it up. Okay? 1968, somebody figured it out inside. Our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to
promote the sale of cigarettes.
So somebody in 1968 wrote a letter. And it's on The Tobacco Institute stationery. They are saying, You know what? We may just get caught one day. We may just get caught. Our position in this controversy could cause us to be charged.
Yeah. We charge them in this case.
And to a finding -- the Engle findings --that we are making false or misleading statements.
Yeah. The only problem is that continued '68, '78, '88, '98.
In 1994, R.J. Reynolds' CEO went in front of Congress and swore he didn't think that cigarettes containing nicotine were addictive.
Our Surgeon General back in '64, right around before this came out was saying, Hey, there is some evidence here that links smoking and cancer. Okay? They went on the attack.
The person who every American citizen looks up to. You turn on the TV, the Surgeon General today is speaking on anthrax. Stop what you're doing. We listen to him. We respect him. We rely upon him for our on well being. Is our water clean? Can we drink it? Is the air clean? Can we smell it? Can we walk around? Is it caustic
in the air? Right?
What they did is they called him irresponsible. Mr. -- I can't remember his name right now on the video clip. I could play it for you now. But you remember the video: Yeah, the Surgeon General is wrong, dead wrong.
Excuse me?
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, objection. No facts in evidence on that.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DIAZ: Folks, the tobacco industry, including RJR --
Next slide, please.
Forty-five million each year, 440 deaths every year.
Now, of course, let me be fair. They don't have the entire industry. They have a percentage of it. So while it may not be 440,000, maybe it's only 100,000. They chose concealment over disclosure. They chose safety -- sales over safety. And the bottom line is they sold out for money at the expense of American smokers' health. And it was money over morality.
Last clip, please.
I started with this clip and I'm going to end
with this clip. You know what this shows, folks? This shows the entire story of the tobacco industry. It was too late for Emmon Smith in 1992. He's already got it. It all runs 20 years later. He's a victim of their greed. He's a victim of their greed. He's a victim of their lies .
Now there is a little story, when a rabbit goes through a rabbit patch, he looks back to see which thorn stuck him when he goes through a briar patch. Remember that? Well, guess what. R.J. Reynolds came into the state of Florida, and they came into Jackson County, the rural parts of Jackson County. And he was one of their customers. Fifties and sixties and seventies and eighties. And you need to let -- through your verdict today, speak back to R.J. Reynolds as to what they do to a member of this community, to a member of Jackson County. We hauled them into court. There is no Hill & Knowlton here. There is no CTR. There is no TIRC. It's only you.
The question today is, What are you going to do about it? The sign up and down Lafayette Street says we believe in Jackson County. Ladies and gentlemen, make R.J. Reynolds believe in
Jackson County. Thank you.



MR. DIAZ: Yes, sir.
Good afternoon, again, once again, ladies and gentlemen. The reason why I'm up here one more time for the last time is because we have the burden of proof. So we have the obligation to prove our case to you. And because Ms. Parker has come up here and made an argument, now I'm going to tell you what I have to say about that argument. Okay?
She said a lot of things. I know it's late in the day. I don't want to speed too fast here, but I want to hit the points. I will do my very best. Okay?
The first thing she says is that he successfully quit. She started off with that and she ended up with that.
Let me tell what you records show. The medical records in this case show that he quit --I think she had nine medical records -- '91, '90, '92, '87.
You know, we're splitting hairs, and it really doesn't matter. You know, what I think the reasonable inference is from the evidence, and you're to think about what is the reasonable inference from the records, is that during his smoking career, he tried to quit on more than one occasion. And the first time that he really successfully had a meaningful quit attempt was when he was raised to the pulpit when he felt that he was called by God to do the Lord's work. But it lasted only for so long. The medical records tell us that. He's a very proud man. He's a very proud man. But his wife came in here under oath, and she told you, Until we left Dr. Price's office and he now knew he had lung cancer, that was the second, serious, final, end-all, be-all quit attempt, because now you know you've got lung cancer.
The second thing she says is he's cured. Excuse me? I give you cancer in your eye and you take it out and you're cured? How about if I take
out the second eye? You're blind, but you're cured. Right? No eye cancer, but you're blind.
He's not cured. The cancer was removed.
That man hasn't been cured for the last 20 years. If you think that a person functions at any age,
13 or 62, the same way with one lung as he does with two, then why didn't God put us on this earth with just one lung?
Keep your eye on the ball, folks.
Okay. Cigarettes are legal. You know what I have to say about that? They have two affirmative defenses. One says the statute of limitations.
And I've got a lot to say about that. The other one is it's his fault.
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, objection. Not legally correct.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DIAZ: The other one says that it's partially his fault, comparative fault.
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, same objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. DIAZ: The instructions, you'll have them, folks. They're saying it's partially his fault. Actually, they're saying it's none of their fault, it's all of his fault, to be sure.
You're not going to see an affirmative defense that says, if you find that cigarettes are legal, you go home.
That is a smoke screen. That is a red herring. If that were the issue in these cases, nobody would file a claim against a tobacco company, because they're legal.
What's going on? She then says -- and she challenges what is the unrefuted, unrebutted testimony of Dr. Schwarting that his 1992 lung cancer was squamous cell carcinoma. Dr. Burns said the same thing. It was caused by his smoking. Ninety-five percent of people who get squamous cell carcinoma in the lung and smoke, it's from smoking. You know what that means, folks? That means you can line up 100 people out there and 95 out of a hundred, he's going to have lung cancer.
You only have to show by the greater weight of the evidence. The statistics alone show there is a 90 percent probability. Forget Schwarting; forget Burns. Ninety-five out of a hundred, his lung cancer came from smoking. I'm not asking you to believe a statistic. You have got Schwarting. You've got Dr. Burns. That's another red herring.
You got to use your reason and common sense. His parents told him, Smoking is not good for you. Of course. What parent wouldn't. Do you-all think that a 13-year-old kid has the same ability to make an intelligent choice in rural Jackson County in 1938, '39 -- no, we're '44, 13 years old, 1944 -- than one of our kids today with what we know? That's why I told you at the beginning that I have to take you back in time.
You need to understand what was known at the time. Do you think the brain of a 13-year-old is as developed and matured as a 20-year-old to make those type of informed decisions? Of course not.
And it's reinforced by what they did in the forties. Remember, he's a teenager in the forties, and it's reinforced.
I'm not going to play any slides. You can turn off the machine. Thank you.
So while mommy and daddy may be telling him, Reverend Smith, Emmon, you know, you shouldn't smoke, what are they telling him on television with doctors and Joe DiMaggio and everybody else you saw on the slides? Smoke. It's good for you. The T zone, soothe your throat. They don't want you to award him damages because he didn't listen
to his mommy and daddy when he was 13 years old, but it's okay for them to have told him with doctors on advertisements that it was okay to smoke.
Again, come back to Dr. Proctor. If you can't kill the message, kill the messenger. A million dollars, yeah, in 15 years of work.
Again, folks, how can I be blamed. If I brought Dr. Stueck, do you know what they would say? How can you -- what does he know about the tobacco industry? Plaintiff hasn't proved her case. They didn't bring you somebody here who studied the industry, who wrote a book. Let's twist it around.
What would Ms. Parker have said if I had used Dr. Stueck to try to give you the history of the tobacco industry? She would have torn him to shreds. And then said, Don't believe him; he's got no experience in this.
Do you think I like paying Dr. Proctor $4,800 a day? No. But he's the best. And the best, they don't come cheap. Same thing with Dr. Burns. I won't waste your time on that. Same issue.
Well, let me say one thing about him, because I think something is very, very important from
Dr. Burns, because what's going on in the sixties and the seventies and the eighties is there is a battle going on between the Surgeon General's office and the tobacco industry. He's an insider. I think he said he went back to the tobacco industry, I think, to the eighties or so.
So he was there. He was inside. He wrote those reports. He knew what it was like, what the Surgeon General's scientific advisory committee was relying upon. He was there.
Guess what, if I didn't bring Dr. Burns, do you know what they would have said? Were you in the Surgeon General's office? Do you know what was going on? Can you say they were being lied to? You can't win. If I bring you somebody with no expertise, I lose. If I bring you somebody who has got it all, we pay him too much money; don't believe them. I can't win.
Well, you know, Reverend Smith made a lifestyle choice, and he just smoked and smoked and smoked. Well, you know, I won't repeat the testimony, folks. He told you he put them down.
He tried. He would smell the smoke again. He would have a meal, and he would get another and another and another. That's addiction.
That's what -- she said, Well, we asked him at his deposition, Do you have withdrawals?
No.
You asked Reverend Smith at age 78, Did you have withdrawals? He probably isn't thinking from a doctor's standpoint about the DSM-IV.
But what he tells you is, I had nicotine cravings. I picked up another one, another one.
I was irritable and I was short patient. Oh, he didn't use the word p-a-t-i-e-n-c-e. He didn't spell it right, so it must not have been short patience.
She says this case is not about Reverend Smith -- or excuse me. She says this case is only about Reverend Smith. Look at the verdict form. The verdict form asks you a bunch of questions.
But it seems to me like questions 3, 4, 5, 6 in the punitive damages, all talk about them and their conduct. That's what the form says. That's what you're judging in this case.
Okay. This issue about -- I'm trying to go through as fast as I can.
All right. Warning labels. She talked about warning labels and she said 1966. Folks, you know, again, I don't mean to split hairs here, but
we need to understand this. There is four years between 1966 and 1970, and there is a big difference in terms of what went on the labels of the cigarettes in 1966 versus 1970. In 1966, it was a caution label. It was not a warning label. Okay? And it says, Warning -- or, excuse me, Caution: Smoking cigarettes can be hazardous to your health.
You know what Dr. Burns said about that? That's useless. I could tell anybody right now, Warning -- excuse me, Caution: Crossing Lafayette Street could be -- could get you run over. Are we all going to run around the other side and not cross Lafayette Street? No. You cross it every day. You know to turn left and you know how to look right. You cross. '66 warning labels, the caution labeling said nothing.
Sitting at the dinner table at night and you're having your meal and you're full, if you double up on your meal, your mom and dad could say, That could be hazardous to your health.
What does it tell you? If you're addicted, it doesn't matter. And by 1966, he had been smoking for almost -- let's see -- 50 -- at least from '50, a pack a day. That's 16 years. He was
hooked. The warning label doesn't go on until 1970. Cigarettes can cause cancer. Ain't going to happen to me, right? They're out there telling everybody, Keep buying and smoking; doctors say it's okay.
Then she says, Well, you know, people out there, you know, drink wine and beer and mixed drinks, and all those things can be bad for you. When was the last time you saw a chart like the one I showed you, Exhibit 991, that shows that the last hundred years in this country hundreds of thousands of people, Americans in this country buying Pepsi Cola that have died from cancer?
When was the last time you saw that people in this country were dying at the rates that they were dying in that chart from drinking beer and drinking wine? How many?
He knew. He should have known. He was out there. There was newspapers back in the 1910s and the 1920s and the 1930s. Well, here is what I have to say to them. Then you certainly knew too. You want to hold Reverend Smith to a standard of what he should have known in the early 1900s,
1930, 1940? If it was available to him, it was available to you.
You think that the predecessors, the people who were in R.J. Reynolds before Mr. Gentry, didn't know what was out there. Yeah, they did. And they were manufacturing the product, and they were lying about it. They were deceiving the American public. If you haven't sat in this trial and listened to Dr. Proctor, you probably would never have known what was really going on in American history, the tobacco industry, in the forties and the fifties and the sixties and the seventies, eighties. Now you know. We know. We knew it when we came in here, and now you know, every single one of you. Had it not been for those 1999 documents, the secret documents that we got our hands on, we may never have known.
The statute of limitations. The verdict form says, Did Emmon Smith know or by the exercise of due diligence should he have known before May 5th of 1990 that he had been injured and that there was a reasonable -- "and," okay -- and that there was a reasonable possibility that the injury was caused by smoking?
Folks, his injury is not a cough. His injury is lung cancer. And there is no evidence in this case. There is no evidence in the medical records
that before they went to -- for an annual checkup at Florida State Hospital that showed the mark on the lung, they ran over to Tallahassee Memorial. And they did the check and they did the biopsy, that he had lung cancer. Dr. Burns told you a cough today -- you hear people coughing all around you. You're going to get cancer tomorrow. It's absurd. But you've got to consider it and think about it. Is that sensible or not? Look at the medical records. Are you going to see a medical record that predates 1990 that says, I told Emmon Smith he's going to get lung cancer if he doesn't quit today? It's not there.
Ms. Parker told you that Vernell Smith said, He wasn't going to quit until he was ready to quit. Well, he was ready once. He thought he was. He stayed off for a while, continued, went back, unsuccessful, and that is a classical, classical indicia of withdrawal.
Think about it. He finds the Lord in the seventies -- I think it was '78. And it may be in the records. But we know from the medical records he was smoking up until the late eighties and nineties. And as strong as his commitment was to his church and his people, he couldn't stay away.
It didn't make him any less of a preacher. He's human. When you become a preacher, you don't become God. You still try to do good. But that's how powerful this addiction was. And we're all humans.
Ms. Parker talks about legal cause and legal cause and legal cause and legal cause. Where in the verdict form does it say, Legal cause equals smoker's choice? If it did, you may have something to think about. That's not what legal cause says. You have it in the instructions.
She said that he said in his deposition -- or in his testimony, that he didn't like -- I'm sorry -- that he liked the taste of cigarettes.
He told you that after his meal he liked the nicotine.
Let me jump ahead here, if I can. Oh, something too, folks. Going back to this issue of what he remembers when he quit smoking. Remember, he gives a deposition in 2010. He is at the time 79 years old.
MS. PARKER: Objection. Facts not in evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DIAZ: Okay. You saw or heard -- I
thought I saw and heard a lady standing up here at a -- at the podium a few days ago with another gentleman from a law firm, and I thought they were reading in a deposition of Emmon Smith's prior testimony, the deposition. Okay?
Do you remember a few weeks ago when I asked you at the very beginning about your grandparents and whether as kids they told you stories, and sometimes they might have even told you some jokes, and then you might have heard the joke or the story one time too many, but you may have rolled your eyes, but, out of respect, you wouldn't tell your grandpa or grandma, Well, I have heard that too many times, because you couldn't do that. You wouldn't do that today. Right ?
And I asked you if could judge the evidence in this case understanding that Emmon Smith was 78, now 80 years old. And you-all told us that you could. So, please, don't let a simple lapse of memory when it's clear that he doesn't have the same mind today that he did in the fifties and the sixties and the seventies and the eighties affect you in any way.
You know, they also talked about cigarettes
and whatnot, that he didn't throw out the cigarettes. And I think you heard some testimony during the trial about he put them in the drawer, you know. That's classic withdrawal symptoms.
You want it -- you don't want to see them, but you don't want them too far away from you. It's the crutch. If you don't see them, you're not going to pick them up. But when the urge kicks in, you open the door and take them. That's a classic definition of addiction.
The position is this: If you don't quit --if you never quit, right, then we're not responsible, because you chose to not quit. If you quit, you didn't quit early enough. You didn't quit hard enough, but we're still not responsible. Can you imagine any scenario under which they could ever be responsible with that logic, ever?
She said nicotine doesn't take over your brain, and you don't become a robot. No, you don't. But what did Dr. Burns say? Nicotine does control your brain. You don't become a robot, but it controls your brain. We talked about the receptors, the key and the lock. I don't need to spend much more time on that. But keep your eye
on the ball.
She talked about there is no medical case. Folks, you heard the same Dr. Burns that we all heard. You've heard Dr. Schwarting. You heard both of them. They have both testified hard and fast that the lung cancer that he had was squamous cell carcinoma, from Dr. Schwarting. And both Schwarting and Burns said that it was -- the reason why he got it was attributed to his smoking. Hard, unequivocal evidence.
Then Ms. Parker seems to suggest that, you know, he had four different kinds of cancer, you know. I normally don't split hairs. And I probably shouldn't buy into this one, but I will. He had three. He had one in the prostate, 1994, and it came back in 2003. Same cancer. If you want to mince little pieces of dice here, we can do it. He had lung cancer in 1992. Prostate cancer doesn't set in until 1994. He gets treated for it. It comes back in 2003. You've only got one prostate. It's like a left and the right; you get it here but you don't get it here, not there. One prostate.
Okay. And this was new lung cancer. That is a red herring. We have a stipulation, because we
don't want you to be confused. We don't want you to be confused. His current -- whatever it is he has in his right lung is not something that we are claiming as an injury for his cigarette smoking.
So all of this nonsense about you need to have a needle biopsy and this type of a test and that type of a test -- you heard the testimony from the witnesses, Dr. Tan, Dr. Chin, you know.
If you are a doctor, you have to tell your patient, Look, we can do this. You have to keep trying to give them hope. You have to try to get to the bottom. You have to try to find out what it is to get treatment.
But you heard him also say, When the life expectancy is what we know it is and it could threaten his life by piercing -- a needle biopsy aspirating the lung, he doesn't have another one -- we could kill him. For what, so we can all know what that other cancer is? It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter whether it's squamous cell carcinoma, whether that cancer in that lung came from the prostate. It doesn't matter. We're not claiming that it was. Why kill him so we can find out and put him through more misery?
All right. Let me see. I'm trying, folks.
You've got to keep your eye on the ball. He didn't go back and test the workplaces at the mill where he used to work. And the pesticides. I guess in 2012 we're supposed to go back to the veneer mill and do air testing samples today to try to find out what might have been in the air in 1938, '39, or '40. What are we talking about?
Okay. Reliance, this is important. In the jury instructions you're going to see that the fraud counts -- okay -- which have to do with reliance -- okay -- the fraud counts -- give me one second here, and I'll get them for you.
Okay. Yes. Ms. Parker talked about how --the Philip Morris jingle, Call for Philip Morris. Did you get that?
Okay. All right. She said, you know, that's a Philip Morris product. That wasn't one of ours. Well, you know, folks, guess what you're going to see in the jury instructions? You're going to see Jury Instruction No. 10, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is legally responsible for the acts of each of the co-conspirators -- Philip Morris --named above as long as those acts were in furtherance of the agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects
or addictive nature of smoking their cigarettes or both.
With that jury instruction, why are we even talking about whether he saw it? It doesn't matter. Philip Morris is a co-conspirator. If he listened to and relied upon it, it's as if RJR had done it. Keep your eye on the ball.
You need to look carefully at the jury instructions, particularly No. 15, because the fraud in this case is not alleged as the traditional fraud that you might think about.
Okay? It talks about reliance on concealment and omissions.
Now, it's important to understand this.
That's huge, because fraud -- a fraudulent statement -- if I tell you something that's false, that's a fraudulent statement. But if I know something, if I know the truth about something and I omit -- I fail to tell you -- that's also fraud. So when we're talking about the reliance, this whole concept about, Well, he saw these ads, you know, that Dr. Stueck talked about, or it was in his informational environment -- okay -- that's not what we're talking about here.
It's fraud by concealment. It's him relying
on what they're not telling him. That's huge on reliance. Look at the instructions. I don't have the ELMO up here because I didn't want to move this down, but there it is, jury Instruction No. 15, concealment or omission. That's the type of fraud we're talking about here. It's not telling people what they need to know.
But, of course, we saw a ton of evidence of the other type of fraud too -- okay -- the denial, the controversy, you know. As I said at the beginning, anywhere in the world, whether you're at Winston-Salem, whether you're in the Empire State Building or whether you're in
Jackson County, your oath is your bond. What that means is you tell the truth. You don't lie. But it also means you don't hold back. You don't omit or conceal.
Why do you think every witness who got on that stand raised their hand and said, I swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? There is a reason for that. The reason for that is because you have to decide whether they're telling the truth, and the oath is supposed to make people tell the truth.
For 50 years R.J. Reynolds and the
co-conspirators engaged in a massive conspiracy as I told you before. This isn't about harm reduction, what you do after it's too late. It's about what you did for 50 years, which affected him. All the harm reduction in the world -- you can come up here in the ELMO and put a bunch of those little mechanical cigarettes up here and try to show the world how great you are.
Of course, when I asked him on cross-examination, All that stuff failed.
Yeah. We tried; got nowhere with it. We tried Premier; we tried Eclipse. Didn't do too well.
That doesn't save you from what you did in the past. It shouldn't save you from what they did to him.
Folks, the bottom line is this, like I told you, for 50 years they hid the truth; for 5 0 years they hid behind Hill & Knowlton; for 50 years they hid behind the law firm of White & Case. They can no longer hide. We brought this case in Jackson County for a reason. You let RJR know Jackson County is not going to stand for that type of conduct. It was reprehensible. It killed people. It took his right lung out.
You write "no" on Question 1 of that verdict form, and they'll be whistling Dixie out of this room quicker than you can blink an eye.
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, I couldn't hear that, but I think I have an objection to the part I did hear.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. PARKER: You find a verdict in favor of the defendant in the case, then you say, That's the way we want you to do business in America.
You let them know by your verdict. It's all up to you now. I am done in this case. I can't talk to you anymore after that.
I do want to thank Reverend Smith for allowing me to be his lawyer in this case. I want to thank you for your time and attention. It's been tough. It's been difficult. It's been strenuous and stressful. And I understand that.
So do we. I want to thank the members of my entire team as well. They have worked very, very hard behind the scene to bring this case to you.
I now have to give this case to you, and I do it, in some way, in a very jealous manner, because he's my client. They hurt my client. I now turn him over to you.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, in the case of Emmon Smith against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, the plaintiff finally rests. Thank you.
Thank you, Your Honor.
