MS. BARNETT:
Good morning.
Yes, Your Honor.
In a little while, you're going to
go back into the deliberation room and you'll have three
jobs to do.
The first job is going to be to answer the
questions on the verdict form that the judge is going to
give you.
The second job you're going to have is to make
sure that everybody on the jury follows the law as the judge
instructs you.
And the third job before you answer any questions
on the verdict form is going to be to explain to each other
why you feel the way you feel about the answers. 57
And so what I'd like to do is spend a little time
this morning trying to talk through and give you some ideas
of ways to do that.
And I wish this could be a question and
answer, but that's just not the way it works.
been told to slow down, so I'm going to try to speak a
little bit more slowly.
And I have
Remember, we sued Reynolds for five reasons.
The
Reynolds chose to violate the
first reason was negligence.
safety rule that a manufacturer can never hide and lie about
a danger it knows about in its product.
And Reynolds knew,
there's no question about it -- by the early '50s, long
before Wanette Smith ever picked up a cigarette, Reynolds
knew its cigarettes were deadly.
choice to lie about that and to hide it.
never allowed to pretend something is safe when they know
it's not.
And Reynolds made the
A manufacturer is
A manufacturer can never trick people into doing
And we know not just that they
something that's deadly.
hide the dangers about cigarettes, but they hid the dangers
about filtered cigarettes and about low -tar, low-nicotine
cigarettes like those Doral cigarettes and the Vantage
cigarettes that you saw those ads for.
The proof that this happened comes straight from
Reynolds' own documents.
truth.
Reynolds should have told the 58 And the other part of negligence is that Reynolds
violated the safety rule that a manufacturer can never make
its product more addictive, more dangerous, just to increase
sales.
Again, we know, you saw from the documents, you
heard from the witnesses, Reynolds knew it had to keep the
exit doors closed.
addicted, stayed addicted and kept buying their products for
as long as possible.
It had to make sure that people got
And we know -- we heard a lot of testimony about
how Reynolds went to great pains to study and understand
addiction and to rig cigarettes to make sure they delivered
just enough nicotine, at least enough to sustain -- create
addiction and sustain addiction.
comes right out of Reynolds' own records.
here and told you it wasn't true.
This, again, the proof
Nobody came in
Reynolds should never have rigged their cigarettes
for addiction.
The second reason we're suing is because Reynolds
sold a defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes that
killed Wanette Smith and they should not have.
And the third reason we're suing is because
Reynolds omitted and concealed the information about the
health risks, the hazards and the addictiveness of their
And, again, there's a question, was it just
cigarettes. 59
negligence or did they intend and know exactly what they
were doing?
That's this third reason:
The fraud.
Reynolds lied about the dangers, lied about the
They haven't come in here and
filters and the low tar.
shown you anything to demonstrate that's not true, and we
know it from Reynolds' own records and Reynolds should never
have lied and hidden the truth.
The fourth reason is Reynolds conspired with the
The question is whether they do
other cigarette companies.
it on their own.
cigarette manufacturers, because they knew they had to be
hand-in-hand, lockstep with the same message out there to be
the most effective.
They worked with all the other
No.
And that's the fourth reason.
Not one person from Reynolds showed up in this
courtroom to tell you that didn't happen or that's not true.
MS. PARKER:
Objection, Your Honor.
Objection.
Commenting on the party.
THE COURT:
say is not evidence.
Ladies and gentlemen, what the lawyers
MS. BARNETT:
Again, we know this all from
Reynolds' own documents.
Now, finally, the fifth reason that we're suing is
because Reynolds has refused to accept any responsibility at
all for what they did.
Now, I want to talk about the instructions the 60
court is going to give you.
instructions when you go back.
from over at that ELMO.
And you will get a copy of the
I'm going to try to do this
You'll get something that looks like this.
And I
want to point out to you page 5, which is very important.
We have the burden -- for most of the things
you're going to decide, we have the burden, the court will
tell you, of proving the claims by a preponderance of the
evidence.
And here's...
A preponderance of the evidence simply means an
amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that
Mr. Smith's claim is more likely true than not true.
And you can have doubts on both sides.
I'm going to come back over here so I can talk to
What that means is what we've been talking
Is it more likely right than wrong that we
You can
But if at the end of the day,
you about that.
about all along:
are right?
have all the doubts you want.
when you weigh out all the doubts and the evidence, if you
find that you think we're more likely right than wrong, even
by a little bit, then the law is you must decide that issue
in our favor.
And so if during deliberations someone says, I'm
just not sure, I have some doubts, remind them they can have
doubts.
consider all the doubts and all the evidence, are we more
Do you decide -- when you
The question is: 61 likely right than wrong?
slight amount.
And you can -- just even by a
That's the law.
It's right there on page 5 of the
instructions.
do, now you know where it is.
And you may need to remind anybody.
If you
So I want to look at the verdict form.
And I'm
going to go back over there.
Question No. 1:
Do you find from a preponderance
of the evidence that Wanette Smith's lung disease --
death -- sorry -- was caused by a non-BAC form of lung
cancer?
And I don't want you to let that non-BAC part trip
What that simply means is, did she have
you up.
adenocarcinoma, and is that what caused her death?
And we know that she did.
Wanette Smith's doctors
who treated her, every last one of them, said what?
said she had adenocarcinoma.
They
Can you put up that Exhibit 1362.
This is that discharge summary.
go through all the medical records at all.
I'm not going to
What was her discharge diagnosis when she had that
surgery to have her lung taken out?
right upper lobe of the lung.
Adenocarcinoma of the
And not only did her doctors tell us through their
medical records that Wanette Smith had adenocarcinoma of the 62
lung and not this BAC, Dr. Burns came to you; he explained
to you the difference; he showed you the medical records; he
explained to you how it is that smoking causes
adenocarcinoma, which is what caused her death.
And we know he said she had adenocarcinoma and not
this rare BAC, because we know the cancer in her chest grew.
It grew and it killed her, and BAC does not do that.
He showed us the slides.
Dr. Figlar came here.
MR. WILNER:
MS. BARNETT:
Dr. Feingold came in here, and he showed us the
Not Figlar.
Dr. Feingold -- apologies.
actual cells.
Wanette Smith's cancer grew, it invaded, it killed her.
does not do that.
And he explained it, too -- he showed you --
BAC
That's how we know she had this non-BAC, this
And the
adenocarcinoma, and that that is what's killed her.
only suggestion different from the medical records came from
Reynolds' witness Barsky, who said he would call this cancer
something called BAC, because the invasive carcinoma,
adenocarcinoma, had around its edges some BAC.
I want to show you a couple of slides over here.
Did Dr. Barsky admit that there was some non-BAC?
He did.
Remember -- this was from his deposition, where he
marked, Here's the cancer that grew and invaded and killed
her.
That is a solid non-BAC.
That's what killed her.
Out 63
here is the BAC.
And I thought a better diagram was the one
Dr. Feingold showed us -- I -- at least it's more colorful.
MR. WILNER:
MS. BARNETT:
It's upside down.
All right.
Here it is.
bull's-eye.
carcinoma that killed her.
This is the carcinoma that grew.
This is the
This is the
Dr. Barsky admitted this is adenocarcinoma.
And,
sure, he says out here on these edges, there's some things
You don't have to
he'd like to call BAC.
decide that.
She
could have both, and that if you want to call it BAC, you
can.
It was this, which even
Barsky admits is an invasive adenocarcinoma, something BAC
doesn't do.
That's not what killed Wanette Smith.
That's fine.
That's not what killed her.
And the progression -- one more of these -- is
People can get
And it's also from Dr. Feingold.
4 percent of them don't go
Those are the BACs up here.
this.
these early precancerous things.
on to get lung cancer and die.
You continued to smoke, like Dr. Burns explained, the
continued exposure over and over and over and over and over
again to the carcinogens in cigarette smoke drives somebody
down here to invasive adenocarcinoma.
And that's what kills
someone.
And Dr. Barsky, by the way -- you probably 64
remember this chart, and I won't go through all of those.
But Dr. Barsky, in saying, Well, we'll just call this what
the outside edges were and not the part that killed her,
Dr. Barsky stands alone.
There's no accepted published
literature that has Dr. Barsky's definition.
There's no
group or organization that has accepted Dr. Barsky's
definition.
heard about it from Dr. Barsky.
And if there was, you certainly would have
That's what killed her.
So, again, Wanette Smith's doctors were clear.
That's
She had adenocarcinoma.
been the testimony you heard from Dr. Burns and from
It was invasive adenocarcinoma; that's what
Dr. Feingold.
killed her.
If you want to accept Barsky's definition that
some of these outlying things were a BAC, that's not modern
science, that's not the accepted -- "nomenclature" is the
word he used, but if you want to accept that, it doesn't
change the fact it was the invasive adenocarcinoma, that's
what killed Wanette Smith.
And so when you look at that question on the
verdict form, whether it's more likely right than wrong that
Wanette Smith's death was caused by a non-BAC form of lung
cancer, the answer is yes.
And, remember, Dr. Barsky was very careful not to
He kept
talk about whether cigarette smoking caused what?
way out of that. 65
Now, Question 2:
Do you find from a preponderance
of the evidence that Wanette Smith had a non-asthma, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease?
That's question 2.
We know she did.
Her doctors said she had COPD.
Dr. Burns explained that Wanette Smith had COPD.
Dr. Feingold came in here and showed the slides that
demonstrated that she had COPD.
And let me just show you Exhibit 1362 again.
If
you have any questions, 1362 will be back there with you.
That's what the doctor said:
obstructive pulmonary disease."
the way.
Smith also had asthma.
What's not an issue here is whether or not Wanette
And there's no issue, by
"Asthma with chronic
You can take that down.
Yes, she had asthma.
We've never disputed that.
And Dr. Burns, Dr. Feingold, and Dr. Farber all agreed you
can have both.
They're separate diseases.
You can have asthma; you can have COPD.
And, in fact, having asthma doesn't mean that you
And if you remember, Dr. Farber was
can't get COPD.
familiar with that study I asked him about where 43 percent
of the people with asthma also had COPD.
So the question is whether it's more likely right
than wrong that Wanette Smith had COPD in addition to her
asthma.
The answer to that on question No. 2 is yes. 66
Now, Question No. 3:
Do you find from a
preponderance of the evidence that Mrs. Smith was addicted
to cigarettes containing nicotine?
Again, Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both concluded
for you that she was addicted.
decades, researching and publishing in this field, working
with the Surgeon General's office, working with addicted
smokers trying to help them quit.
They've spent years,
They showed you the accepted definitions for
They showed you how they applied them to what
addiction.
they learned about Wanette Smith, and they explained their
conclusions why she was addicted.
She started as a child when she was especially
She smoked compulsively
vulnerable to addiction.
one-and-a-half or more packs of cigarettes a day, 30
cigarettes a day, 10 puffs a cigarette, more than 3 million
exposures of nicotine to her brain.
She smoked first thing in the morning.
When she
And ultimately, to be
tried to quit, she had withdrawal.
able to finally conquer her addiction after she had surgery
to take out part of her lung, she had to have two or three
patches at a time and gum to be able to stop smoking.
That is the picture of addiction.
That is not
somebody smoking just because they like it.
And, remember,
Reynolds hasn't brought you any witness in here to tell you 67 otherwise.
If there was somebody out there who would come and
say she wasn't addicted, you would have heard that; but you
didn't.
likely right than wrong that Wanette Smith was addicted to
cigarettes, the answer is yes.
So when you consider the evidence, is it more
Question No. 4:
Do you find -- I -- let me do it.
Oh, okay.
Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence
that Mrs. Smith's addiction to cigarettes containing
nicotine was a legal cause of her injuries?
And there is a lot there.
But what I want to talk
about is this legal cause, because that's very, very
important, what that means.
page 7 of your jury instructions.
And you will find that over on
In order to prove that addiction to smoking
cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of
Mrs. Smith's COPD or lung cancer, Mr. Smith must prove that
such addiction directly and in natural and continuous
sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing
a COPD or lung cancer, so that it can reasonably be said
that but for the addiction, COPD or lung cancer would not
have occurred.
Here's the important part:
In order to be
regarded as a legal cause of her death, addiction need not 68 be the only cause.
Addiction may be a legal cause of COPD
or lung cancer even though it operates in combination with
the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause,
if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such
COPD or lung cancer.
And what's important is the law says, the judge
will instruct you, addiction doesn't have to be the only
cause of her injuries.
It just needs to be a cause.
So legally, if you find that Wanette Smith's
addiction was the only cause of her injuries, or if you find
it was a cause and that it was one of a number of things
that caused her injuries, if that's what you find, then you
must find for us, yes, addiction was a legal cause of her
injuries.
You're allowed to think multiple things may have
contributed; but if at the end of the day more likely right
than wrong, you believe addiction was a cause, one of the
causes, then the answer is yes, her addiction was a legal
cause of her injuries.
So if, in deliberation, someone says, Well, I
think someone else may be at fault here, too, not just
Reynolds, for this, remind them the question here, the
Question No. 4 is, addiction, a legal cause, not was
addiction the only cause.
And we will talk in a minute about what to do 69
about other possible causes.
Did it contribute substantially to her injuries?
cause?
But the question is simply:
Was it a
And Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings came in here and
explained to us that addiction led to Wanette Smith's
continued and compulsive smoking.
Dr. Burns explained how people who -- if people
are addicted, their brains become wired for nicotine and
they crave nicotine; they have withdrawals for nicotine;
they seek it out.
it is that addiction causes the smoking.
And Dr. Burns also explained to you how
But it's not just Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings.
It's the
showed you the Surgeon General -- Exhibit 237.
2010 Surgeon General's report.
We
Let me show you one finding.
If we can switch over.
Here's what the Surgeon General says:
"Nicotine
addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist
in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use
contributes to many diseases described in this report."
And if you remember that video from last week of
Gentry, the guy from Reynolds who came in here by videotape,
he even admitted -- he said, Nicotine is a fundamental
reason.
fundamental reason.
But even Gentry, Mr. Gentry, admitted
in his testimony here that nicotine is a fundamental reason
He wouldn't go so far as to say it was the 70
that individuals persist in using tobacco.
And let me show you one more thing from
Exhibit 572, which is the 1989 Surgeon General's report.
"Two additional factors make smoking among young
people a preeminent public health concern:
initiation of smoking and nicotine addiction.
factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free
choice."
The age of
These two
So -- you can take those down.
Did Reynolds bring you any witness to come and
say, not true, in this case, or in any case, addiction
didn't cause her injuries?
No, they did not.
No.
When you weigh the evidence you've heard in this
case, yes, is it more likely right than wrong that Wanette
Smith's addiction was a cause of her injuries?
It was.
Now, there's a Question 5.
Let me go back over
here.
This is back on COPD.
Did Mrs. Smith know, or should she have known in
the exercise of reasonable care, on or before May 5th, 1990,
that she had COPD and that there was a reasonable
possibility her COPD was caused by cigarette smoking?
Dr. Burns explained -- well, we know -- we know
she was diagnosed in '95 and she was never diagnosed with
COPD before she had that pulmonary function test.
explained there was no way for her doctors to know she had
Dr. Burns 71 And he furthermore said,
COPD until they did that test.
there's certainly no way for Wanette Smith to know --
there's no question.
or should have known that she had COPD.
cough; not asthma.
Those aren't COPD.
is:
Did she know before May 1990 if she had it.
The question for you is when she knew
Not a smoker's
The question for you
And the answer is no.
No, she didn't know until
they diagnosed her.
diagnosed her.
She had no way to know until they
And, remember, Reynolds certainly hadn't tried to
prove anything about this.
And this is one of the questions
where they have the burden, they have to convince you, that,
yes -- but the answer is no.
Their expert says he still can't tell whether or
not she had COPD.
The
answer is -- here, no, there's no evidence for her to know
she had COPD before May 9th -- May 5th, 1990.
So she's certainly not on notice.
So once you get past those questions -- once you
get past those first questions, then you move to the next
part of the verdict form.
And then you pull out the Engle
These are in the preliminary instructions which
findings.
will go back with you to the jury room.
They're on page 9.
And these are the rules that have been determined
as a matter of law in this case, must be applied by you,
cannot be questioned by you. 72
So you want to have these out from this point on.
And the next question on the verdict form...
I'm going to try to quit running around on you.
All right.
Do you find from a preponderance of
the evidence that negligence on the part of Reynolds, or the
defendant, was a legal cause of Mrs. Smith's injuries?
Now, at this point, here's what you don't have to
Was Reynolds negligent?
Because that has already
All Engle
That is Engle Finding No. 7.
decide:
been determined.
defendants were negligent.
That includes Reynolds.
And you'll see it in your jury instructions right
on page 13, where you have this question.
One of the Engle findings was that Reynolds was
negligent with respect to its manufacture and sale of
cigarettes, and you must accept that determination.
So if in deliberations someone says they aren't
sure, they don't know if Reynolds was really negligent here,
remind them that's already been determined; it cannot be
questioned by you; yes, Reynolds was negligent.
The only
question is whether Reynolds' negligence was a legal cause
of Mrs. Smith's injuries.
And I want to go back -- the legal cause question
is the second time in your verdict form -- here -- in your
jury instructions.
critically important.
Page 13, and this is critically,
Sorry. 73 If I can get it all.
It's just like the legal
Legal cause
cause thing we just talked about for addiction.
of damages resulting -- sorry -- well, you -- wrongful
conduct is the legal cause of someone's injury or damages,
including the legal cause of damages resulting from
someone's injury if it directly and naturally and in
continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to
producing such injury or damages so that it can reasonably
be said but for the wrongful act, the injury or damage would
not have occurred.
In order to be regarded as a legal cause
of injury or damage, wrongful conduct need not -- need not
be the only cause.
Again, you can decide that you think there were
other causes and it wasn't just always Reynolds' negligence.
The only question for you is more likely right
That's fine.
than wrong.
Do you believe that Reynolds was a -- one of
the causes of her injuries?
And we'll talk about how to deal -- if you think
there's other possible causes, later, in a few minutes.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings explained to you
Reynolds knew the truth.
exactly how Reynolds' negligence caused Wanette Smith's
Reynolds lied about it
injuries.
for years and years before Wanette Smith ever picked up her
first cigarette.
Reynolds made the choice to go and promise
people, If we ever find anything, we'll take it out. 74
They're not hazardous.
Don't worry.
one reason, to get Americans smoking.
Wanette Smith was one of the millions who did.
And they did it for
And it worked.
And, worse, Reynolds knew that Americans were
And so what did they do?
worried about cancer.
They made
the choice to sell filter, low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes
like those Doral you saw, the Vantage you saw, and the
Belairs, and sell them as safer, even though Reynolds knew
they were not any safer.
reason only, to keep people smoking.
They did it for one reason and one
And that's exactly what Wanette Smith did.
She
And we know -- not just Dr. Cummings and
fell for the lies, and she smoked those filtered and low-tar
cigarettes.
Dr. Burns gave you their conclusions based on their
understanding -- their broad understanding and their review
of her history, but we also heard from Esther Stone,
Wanette's own sister, who told us about the conversations
they had about the controversy that Reynolds was creating
and the conversations they had about smoking light -- or not
light, but filtered cigarettes, the low-tar cigarettes,
because they believed Reynolds' lies and they thought they
were safer, but it was more to negligence than the lies
about the hazards.
We also know from Reynolds' own documents they
studied addiction and they studied children and addiction, 75
and they rigged their cigarettes for addiction for one
reason, to get people hooked and keep them hooked, to make
it as hard as possible to quit.
And we know for Wanette Smith it worked.
She
It got her addicted.
started as a teenage replacement smoker when her brain was
especially vulnerable to addiction.
And the cigarette did
just what it was supposed to do.
And
when she tried to quit, her brain had been wired for
addiction, just like Reynolds designed the cigarettes to do
and made it very hard for her to quit.
And because it was
hard for her to quit, it took a long time and many tries to
quit.
customer as long as they possibly could, long enough to
cause her injuries.
And during that whole time, Reynolds kept her as a
And, remember, again, nobody from Reynolds came in
Nobody came in here and said, Aha,
here and disputed this.
here's this document that shows this isn't true.
witness.
Not one
So the question is, is it more likely right than
wrong that Reynolds' negligence, its violation of these
safety rules -- is it more likely right than wrong that that
is a cause, one of the causes of Wanette Smith's injuries?
The answer to that question is yes.
Question No. 7 on the verdict form -- can you put
that up, 7? 76 "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence
that the Defendant's," meaning Reynolds', "placement of
cigarettes on the market that were defective and
unreasonably dangerous was a legal cause of Mrs. Smith's
injuries?"
If anybody back in the deliberations has any
question about what the legal cause means, I've shown you
where it is.
It's on page 13 of those jury instructions.
It applies to all of these.
You can pull them back out.
Here's what you don't have to decide.
You don't
have to decide whether Reynolds' cigarettes were defective
and unreasonably dangerous.
That has already been decided,
and it is the law in this case, and you cannot question it.
It's Engle finding No. 3, that Engle defendants, including
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, placed cigarettes on the
market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
So if in deliberation someone says, Cigarettes are
legal; I just -- I don't know; I'm not sure they could be
defective or unreasonably dangerous, remind them that's
already been decided.
in this case, and you cannot question it.
That's determined as a matter of law
The only question for you, again, is whether the
unreasonably dangerous cigarettes were a legal cause of her
injuries.
Now, remember, all that means is that they were -- 77 they substantially contributed to her injuries or were a
cause -- could be multiple causes.
And Dr. Burns explained to you, yes, cigarettes
Yes, cigarettes caused her lung cancer
And Reynolds brought you not one witness
caused her COPD.
that killed her.
to say otherwise.
Dr. Burns explained how these injuries -- how
But I want to show
these cigarettes caused these injuries.
you something out of the Surgeon General's 2010 report that
goes right along with what he said.
Surgeon General's report from 2010.
This is the whole
"Moreover, whereas squamous cell carcinomas had
been the predominant form of lung cancer by the late
20th century, adenocarcinoma of the lung was becoming
increasingly common, presumably reflecting deeper inhalation
of smoke that was facilitated by ventilated filters, as well
as other factors, such as changes in agricultural practices,
tobacco curing, and the cigarette manufacturing process that
could lead to increased concentrations of
tobacco-specific" -- I can't say that word --
"nitrosamines."
It says right there you don't have to just rely on
what Dr. Burns had to say and what the other witnesses said.
It's right there in the Surgeon General's report.
And, again, you didn't hear any witness come tell 78
The question is, is it -- well,
you that's not the fact.
that's for her lung cancer, and the same for the COPD.
Nobody came and said that that wasn't caused by smoking.
It's exactly -- in fact, Dr. Farber, their expert, admitted
that COPD is caused by smoking, and that's the hugest cause
of COPD.
So you don't have to decide whether they're
It's already established.
You don't even have
That's Engle finding No. 1.
defective.
to decide if COPD and her lung cancer were caused by
Smoking cigarettes
smoking.
causes chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lung cancer,
and other diseases.
determined.
So that is binding and already been
There's really no question here.
The answer is
yes.
It's more likely right than wrong that the defective
cigarettes were a cause of Linda Denton's [sic] injuries.
The next question is Question 8.
"Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence
that Mrs. Smith relied to her detriment on the Defendant's,"
meaning Reynolds', "concealment or omission of material
information concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes?
a legal cause of her injury?"
And, if so, was that reliance
Now, there's -- there's a lot in that question.
But here's what you don't have to decide. 79
Go back and look at the Engle findings.
Let me
show you.
Engle finding No. 4, "Engle defendants" -- that
includes Reynolds -- "concealed or omitted material
information not otherwise known or available, knowing that
the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a
material fact concerning the health effects of the addictive
nature of smoking."
Really, that's what this
So if -- and here's how this is different from
We've already talked about the concealment.
negligence.
But this question here is about whether just being negligent
or did Reynolds mean to do it?
comes down to.
And if somebody in deliberations says, Well,
you know, the information that Reynolds kept was already out
there in the public, and I just don't think they really
should be held liable for that, remind them the Engle
finding is specific.
material, meaning it made a difference, and not otherwise
known or available.
already been determined.
The information they withheld was
You can't question that.
That's
Dr. Burns showed us what Reynolds knew long before
He showed it from Reynolds' own documents,
Wanette started.
and he showed us the choices they made.
from Reynolds' own documents.
coming in and interpreting what happened.
This wasn't a historian
These were
He showed us that 80
documents that Reynolds wrote from inside their own company.
And by the way, if somebody at deliberations says,
Well, we didn't see everything; they only showed us snippets
or pages here and there, remind them.
beginning we didn't have time to show you every single
document there was, but we said we were relying on
Reynolds -- if there is some other document that says
something else or some other part, we're relying on them to
show it to you, and they never showed you anything that was
different than what Dr. Burns said.
We told you at the
We know not only did they hide the truth about the
dangers, but Reynolds spent millions and millions to deny
and lie about that, to create a fake debate and to make
market gimmicks.
And they did so -- these gimmicks of the filters
and the low tar and the lights, they did it for one purpose,
to get people like, and including, Wanette Smith smoking,
and to have them continue smoking.
Dr. Burns explained how the cigarette company
messages, including Reynolds', were intentionally designed
for addicted smokers to keep the exit door closed.
were incredibly effective at intercepting addicted smokers,
making sure it took as long as possible to quit.
Dr. Burns showed us that Figure 22, where we saw for girls
who started smoking when Wanette Smith did.
Very effective.
They
And 81
They didn't have that drop-off you see in the
Those people got hooked and stayed
general population.
there.
Dr. Burns explained why he has concluded, more
likely right than wrong, that these lies and gimmicks were a
legal cause of Wanette Smith's injury.
doesn't have to be the only cause.
cause, if you decide it's one of many causes, that's fine.
The answer is more likely right than wrong.
It just is if it's a
And, again, it
Yes.
Yes.
And has Reynolds presented you anyone -- anyone to
tell you that, no, they've concluded she didn't rely on
anything they said?
They haven't.
But they did -- the only thing they presented to
And she showed
you was that historian, Professor Hoffman.
you those messages about the risks.
No kidding.
Dr. Burns had already shown you all of that.
We
already knew about -- you already knew before Dr. Burns told
you, about the information in the public about the risk.
Dr. Burns explained that that information coming
out starting in the '50s and throughout Wanette Smith's
lifetime was exactly the reason why Reynolds had to work so
hard to try to keep people smoking.
And that historian didn't tell you anything
different.
She doesn't know anything about what Reynolds
did and what was in the internal documents of Reynolds and 82
even whether or not Reynolds thought they were being
successful.
So more likely right than wrong on this question.
Whether she relied to her detriment on the admission, the
answer is yes.
Question 9, that should be easy.
Will you just put it up?
This is just a timing question.
Did she rely on
concealments before 1982?
concealments after 1982?
both before and after?
Did Wanette Smith rely on
Or did she rely on concealments
And this is one of the ones where the defendants
But there's been nothing
have the burden to prove to you.
to say, Oh, in 1982 it all stopped and we made no more
concealments; we made no more admissions; we told the truth;
we stopped lying.
know, and you saw documents.
We
That's why it took so long.
From the '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s of Reynolds'
That's simply not the proof here.
continued lies and concealment and hiding of the truth,
starting with the fake controversy, moving into the filters
and finally into those Doral and Vantage and Belair
cigarettes that were supposed to be lighter and healthier,
Reynolds never admitted anything, anything, in the years and
decades before Wanette Smith got lung cancer and COPD.
And
even then, as Dr. Burns told you, they didn't do so 83
voluntarily.
So the answer here is C, yes, both before and
after May of 1982.
Question No. 10 is:
"Do you find that Wanette
Smith relied to her detriment on an act taken in furtherance
of the defendant's agreement to conceal or omit material
information regarding the health risks or addictive nature
of smoking cigarettes and, if so, whether such reliance was
a legal cause of her injuries?"
I hate to keep belaboring the point, but if you
A legal
have any question about this, go back and look.
cause means if you decide that her reliance and their
conspiracy was one of many factors in causing her injury,
then the answer is yes.
It's more likely right than wrong
that their conspiracy and her reliance on it was a cause of
her injuries.
And we know -- and, by the way, that's Engle
We'll walk over there and show it to you again.
finding No. 5 on the preliminary instructions you'll have,
and it's also right there in your jury instructions you'll
have.
already been determined they conspired.
that.
had a conspiracy.
They knew for their message to be as
powerful as possible, they had to be lockstep in their
message:
Cigarettes aren't harmful; we don't know; if we
It's
You have to accept
We know that.
They agreed to work together.
They 84
ever find anything, we'll let you know, and we'll be sure to
take it out.
They made that promise.
They didn't fulfill it.
And they also sold the filters, and they sold the lights,
the low tars, the low-nicotine cigarettes.
They all knew
they weren't any safer, but they never told the public.
There's no dispute about that.
And it just -- the
It worked.
Wanette Smith, just like millions of
conspiracy just made the lies and the deception more
powerful.
Americans, did just what Reynolds and the other cigarette
companies wanted.
millions of other Americans, never knew, never knew the
whole truth, never had the chance to make a decision with
their eyes wide open, never knew all the things that
Reynolds had known for decades.
Just like Wanette Smith, just like
Dr. Burns explained this to us.
He showed it to
He explained to you how he concluded that, yes, it's
us.
more likely right than wrong.
cause -- not the only cause -- a cause of her injuries.
no witness said anything different.
This conspiracy was a
And
So the question -- or this question, is it more
likely right than wrong that Mrs. Smith relied to her
detriment on an act taken in furtherance of the agreement to
conceal or omit information concerning health effects and
addictive nature of cigarettes; if so, was it a legal 85
cause -- long question -- the answer is yes.
Yes.
And we heard it not just from Dr. Burns, who has
had a career in trying to warn Americans, and not just from
Dr. Cummings, who has had a career in trying to help with
addicted smokers, who understands it, we heard it from
Wanette Smith's family, too.
safer.
her addiction.
She thought the filters were
She heard the controversy, you know, that fed into
When you answer that question yes -- the next
It's the
question is 11 -- it's going to be easy to answer.
same as the question about timing I just asked.
Question 11
is whether it happened before May of '82, after May of '82,
or both.
And there's no evidence the conspiracy stopped.
It went right on through, and there's no evidence at all
that Reynolds pulled out of this conspiracy.
We know it started -- it started in the '50s, when
the first information started coming out about cancer, and
it kept right on well past when Wanette Smith had her lung
cancer and her COPD.
before and after May '82?
stopped.
So here the answer is -- did it happen
Yes.
Yes, it did.
They never
Now, the next question on your verdict form you
will see is the place to write the percent of fault, if any,
that Wanette Smith has for her injuries and death.
And it's
important for you to know here the defendants, Reynolds -- 86 Reynolds has the burden of proof on this.
prove to you what amount you should put down there for
Wanette Smith.
So they have to
Here's the thing.
In every case a person needs to
And if they don't,
use reasonable care to avoid harm.
they're responsible for the harms they could have avoided.
But this case is different, because the very things that
Reynolds did took away -- took away her ability to make a
knowing, fully-informed step to protect herself from harm.
And we've seen -- you can take that down.
Here's what we've seen on this question.
Reynolds
had 100 percent of the knowledge, 100 percent of knowledge
about its cigarettes, that they cause cancer, 100 percent of
knowledge years before Wanette Smith started to smoke.
They
had 100 percent knowledge.
There was no scientific debate,
and there was no doubt cigarettes caused cancer.
They knew they were deadly.
They also had 100 percent knowledge that their
gimmicks, these filters and low-tar/-nicotine cigarettes
And you've
weren't any safer.
They did everything in their
seen -- what did Reynolds do?
power to keep Wanette Smith and others from finding out, to
take away her right to make a free, knowing, eyes wide open
choice to -- they did everything they could to keep her and
millions of Americans -- their knowledge, as close down to
zero as they possibly could. 87
And they lied, promising that they would take out
They lied, saying smoke these filtered
anything bad.
cigarettes.
everything to keep her knowledge as low as possible.
They had 100 percent knowledge, and they did
Let's talk about power and control.
You've also
Reynolds was not helpless.
seen Reynolds had 100 percent power and control over the
choices it made.
not tormented by these decisions.
business decision to do everything it could to use all of
its power and resources to keep people smoking as long as
possible.
And that meant rigging cigarettes to make sure
they were addictive.
Reynolds was
It made a calculated
And you -- you heard Gentry, the guy from Reynolds
Would they go out of business if
who came by videotape.
they didn't do this?
We might have a smaller
business, but we wouldn't go out of business if we stopped
selling addictive cigarettes.
He said no.
They did everything they could to make sure people
smoked as long as possible and they got new replacement
smokers every year.
Smith's control and her power over her decisions.
And they did that to suppress Wanette
They did everything they could to make her choice,
as Dr. Cummings explained, a constrained choice, to make it
hard for her to inflate the power of addiction and
the influence of addiction over her, to set her up for 88
failure after failure when she tried to quit, to keep the
exit doors shut.
Reynolds had 100 percent power over its control
and choices, and Reynolds used that power to chip away at
Wanette Smith's ability to take control over her addiction,
to push her power and control as close down to zero as they
possibly could.
And if in deliberations somebody says, Well, on
That's why she used filters, and she used
this fault thing, Wanette Smith knew the risks, remind them,
yes, she was worried about cancer.
That's why she tried so
hard to quit.
low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes.
knowledge, this information about cancer, that's exactly why
Reynolds did everything it did.
They knew if they didn't do
something and do something big, most of their customers
would quit.
And they needed to keep the exit door shut.
they made it as hard as possible to quit and kept their
customers as long as possible.
And remind them this
So
The evidence, I think, would allow maybe as much
But you're the ones
as 10 percent fault on Wanette Smith.
to decide, and you can make that higher or lower based on
what you believe Reynolds has proved to you should be the
number on her versus the number on Reynolds.
Now, Question 13 is how much money the verdict
should be.
To figure this out, you take only one thing into 89
account, the level of harms and losses the cigarette
Nothing else.
companies caused.
this being about money damages.
Justice means a verdict measured in dollars.
There was statements about
Healing requires justice.
Page 20 of your jury instruction says you should
assess the amount that you find to be full, just, and
reasonable compensation.
I'm not going to run back over
there and put it up, but it's page 22 -- 22 of your jury
instructions.
And I want to talk about that.
What does compensation mean?
It means balancing
It means match the amount of money with the
the scales.
I said at the beginning harms
amount of harms and losses.
and losses are the only things that can be considered, and
everything else is outside the box.
For example, sympathy.
Of course you can feel
sympathy for this family and what they went through, but
you're not allowed to raise your verdict because of your
sympathy.
That's an outside reason, just like you can't
lower the verdict because you're worried a verdict might
encourage lawsuits.
Harms and
losses only.
that are outside, and juries have to avoid them all.
That's an outside reason.
That's the rule.
And there are other reasons
Let me explain it this way.
Somebody works a
40-hour week.
work a little more, the scale goes this way.
Their work tips the scale this way.
If they
If they work a 90
The boss pays for the work done.
little less, the scale goes this way.
them.
underpays, the scales aren't even.
the scales go this way.
Boss comes in to pay
If the boss
If the boss overpays,
You need to find the balance of the hours and work
The boss can't say,
Here's the outside part:
"Compensation" means a perfect
and money and equalize it.
balance.
Well, you know, John has -- doesn't really have a high cost
of living.
You know, he seems to be doing just fine, so I'm
going to pay him a little bit less money.
any good.
can't pay him less money because of it.
reason.
The boss can't -- the boss can think that, but he
It won't do him
It's an outside
It makes no difference.
Just like juries:
If a juror during deliberations
was to say, Lowell Smith and Brian Smith, they seem to be
doing just fine, they don't need all that money; so we
should allow less money, that is an outside reason.
not allowed.
It's
Another example is the boss can't say, Pay the
full amount or raise prices on the things we have to buy, so
I think I'll just pay John a little bit less.
outside reason.
keep reminding yourselves of this, and you can look back at
page 22 which says, "Fair, just, and reasonable
compensation."
That's an
So you might have to
And if a juror uses an outside reason, such
Just like juries. 91 as money can't bring Wanette Smith back, remind that juror
that's an outside reason.
If the juror insists, show them
what's in verdict -- in that jury instruction.
someone still resists following the judge's instructions,
you need to let the deputies know that somebody is not
following the law, because you know your most important job
here, your sworn duty, is to follow the law, and no one has
the right to make anyone serve on a jury that did not follow
the law.
And if
So if during deliberations a juror uses an outside
reason, like they're worried what people will think if your
verdict is for a full and fair amount, remind them that's an
outside reason.
And remind them, too, you'll be able to
tell people it was a complicated and long trial, and over
the course of the trial, I became an expert.
And if you'd
heard what I heard, you would have made the same decision.
So if anyone says it's more money than they need
or Wanette Smith made a choice to smoke, shouldn't be much
money, remind them, no outside reasons.
Question 13 is the total it would take to make up
for the harms and losses.
13 --
Can you put these up quickly.
I think he has --
okay.
We can do it this way.
Lost earnings to the estate.
That's fine.
Just put it back. 92 Lost earnings and accumulations and medical
We heard that from Dr. Raffa.
expenses.
and explained to you how he calculated that up as an
economist and that amount was $79,530.
Raffa came in here
The second part -- I want the slide.
James Smith's loss -- James Lowell Smith, his loss
of his wife's companionship, his loss of her protection, his
pain and suffering for the six years while they struggled to
fight cancer and COPD, and then his pain and suffering for
the 30 years -- 30 more years that he -- she would have had
if she had lived 30 more years of a happy marriage.
The second part of this is his loss of support and
And those are what are called the
loss of services.
Calculating an economic money amount on a
economic damages.
person in a relationship is complicated and difficult to do.
But it has to be done.
The court asks jurors to
do it, and the evidence we presented was intended to help.
That's why we brought in Raffa, to explain to you.
And he
showed us how to calculate it -- I will not do the math, but
he showed us that the amount of loss of services was
$555,000, the loss of support was $502,000.
And now the defense may tell you it's wrong for
Mr. Smith to want Reynolds to make up for the loss of his
loving wife -- they'll say it differently -- that he's wrong
to benefit from his lost wife's income and services when he 93 But no one, folks, no one is
A remarriage certainly gives an
When a wife dies, life is indeed still very
married a year later.
replaceable.
different, and everyone in this room knows the slates don't
just get wiped clean.
opportunity for -- for hope, for healing, for comfort, but
Every anniversary is fraught
it doesn't take away the loss.
with difficulty and struggle to deal with the past memories
and the desire to move on.
So taking into consideration how much each of
Taking into consideration the loss that he's
us -- sorry.
had, your thoughtful, deliberate discussions and decisions
is all that we ask for here.
Question 13:
Are Brian Smith's -- the total it
will take to make up for the harms and losses to Brian
Smith.
Can you put up the slide?
And there are four things -- five things here to
The loss of his mother's companionship, the loss
consider:
of his mother's instruction, the loss of her guidance, the
pain and suffering that he went through with his mom for
those six years while they struggled, and the pain and
suffering for the 30 years of his mother's life that he
lost.
Brian was just 24 years old when his mother died.
She had 30 more years.
He lost more of her life with him 94
than he had.
make up for the harms and losses to Wanette Smith?
And Question 14 is:
How much it will take to
The medical bills related to her lung cancer --
will you put that up?
Oh, sorry.
The medical bills related to Wanette Smith,
You heard that proof.
The other part's the
We're not trying to say her COPD caused her
Her pain and suffering for her six years with
$165,000.
harder part:
her COPD.
death.
years of struggling with that, her disability for six years,
her mental anguish for six years, her loss of enjoyment for
life for six years.
It didn't.
But her pain and suffering for her six
When you value these losses and harms -- you can
take that down -- you need to look at how bad the harm was
and how long the pain was.
example.
And let me give you this
If it caused you to lose the companionship of your
wife for a few days, maybe she was in the hospital and you
had to do more dishes and take care of the kids and the
laundry, you know, that would be a loss, but it wouldn't be
a very big loss.
That would be the kind of case where I'd ask --
have to ask for a verdict that wasn't very much, maybe in
the thousands.
A few days in -- out of a 30- or 50-year
marriage is just not that serious. 95
But let's move up the scale.
If the injury is
worse and you lose the companionship of your wife for
several years -- maybe she's in a coma or something -- well,
that would be more harm, more like a midlevel harm, and it
would take more money to make up for that loss.
That would
make it the kind of case where I'd have to ask for a verdict
in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.
And now let's move the scale up to the highest
What happens when your wife of 30 years is taken away
That's the worst kind of damage that someone can
And that's the kind of case where I have to ask for a
step.
forever?
do.
verdict in the millions.
case.
It's the highest level type of
Reynolds -- what Reynolds did was cost Wanette
And that same kind of scale can be used to
Smith her life.
figure out how much to allow for Wanette's son Brian, who
didn't lose his mother for a few days, for a few years, but
for the rest of his life.
And the same kind of scale can be also used to
figure out how much to allow for Wanette for her pain and
suffering.
a few days would be something, maybe $1,000.
Having shortness of breath and some coughing for
Being unable to breathe, having to get oxygen and
a scooter because you couldn't get around, but only having
that for a few months, that might be a higher level harm, 96 but still not a very serious harm.
Slowly getting worse over the months, over the
years as Dr. Burns explained, breathing like out of an ever
smaller and smaller straw for six years, it's not the worst
kind of harm.
It's not -- it's not an up-here kind of harm,
but it is a very high level of harm for what she went
through.
Wanette Smith and Lowell Smith struggled for six
long years fighting the cancer and the COPD, and never once
did Wanette give up.
fine."
And she would always say, "I'm just
And when she was diagnosed with lung cancer on her
40th birthday, she went in and had surgery to cut out part
of her lung, the cancer didn't stay away.
It came back in
'99.
They went through treatment after the treatment after
treatment, trying everything the doctors could think of,
even when the doctors said the treatment's worse than the
benefit, hand in hand, they fought hard.
But in 2001, when she was just 46, with nearly
half her life ahead of her, Wanette Smith died at home in
Lowell's arms.
And if she hadn't, she'd be 57 today.
The family might be getting together this
afternoon for a walk on the beach to collect sharks teeth
and make turtles in the sand with her grandchildren, or she
could be teaching her grandchildren how to bake and cook, 97
just like she did her sons.
She'd be picking up things at the flea market and
decorating them and painting them to surprise Lowell for
She and Lowell would be looking
decorations for the house.
forward to their retirement in what should have been their
golden years together.
I told you, based on the significant loss, I would
And when you consider the
ask for a significant verdict.
loss of this family, the loss of the sanctity of family, the
sanctity of life, it requires an accounting for the
wrongdoing.
than wrong, we believe the verdict should be $10 million.
But it's up for you to decide, and you can put either a
higher amount or a lower amount depending on what you feel
the evidence is.
And it makes it a case where, more likely right
But when you consider the value took place and the
harm to this family -- how much it will take to make up for
their loss, consider what Reynolds valued -- and that gets
to the last question on the verdict form, Question 15.
Do you find by clear and convincing evidence that
punitive damages awarded -- this is a higher level.
not more likely right than wrong.
And the questions are -- the -- you'll get instructed about
this -- can you put up the instruction?
It's
It's something higher.
I'll tell you this:
You'll hear the instruction. 98
These are the words to listen for:
intentional, reckless or grossly negligent?
Were Reynolds' acts
It's all right.
We know absolutely -- we know it from their own
words and their own documents, yes, they were intentional.
Just don't worry about it.
No witness has disputed that at all.
It was
explained to you in great detail by Dr. Cummings and
Dr. Burns, but not just by them, shown to you from their
very own documents, the actions were taken intentionally,
knowingly, for profit.
It was premeditated.
It needed replacements.
Reynolds knew it had to design cigarettes to hook
It knew
and keep people hooked or its sales would go down.
it had to get kids started.
Reynolds knew it had to intercept smokers who were worried
about those messages, people who were trying to quit.
And
so they created this doubt out of nowhere, this controversy
that didn't exist, promised people, if we find something
we'll take it out, and put out these phony filters and these
low-tar cigarettes.
Reynolds knew also -- sure as I'm standing here
today, and you heard Mr. Gentry admit it -- that their
actions would kill 400,000 Americans every year, year after
year after year, and that as it happened Reynolds would go
right along with business as usual, finding more replacement
smokers. 99
Reynolds made this choice with its eyes wide open.
It intended everything it did, and millions upon millions of
people have died all in the name of growing market share.
And punitive damages are important -- and this is
They're more than to
my last point -- because not just -- punitive damages are
not just -- they're not to compensate.
compensate.
They're to punish and, most importantly, they
are to deter other companies, to tell other companies and
other manufacturers, whether they sell baby food or
pharmaceutical prescription drugs or fire alarms for
schools, you cannot lie about and hide dangers you know
You can't trick people into doing
about in your product.
something deadly.
You can't say it's safe when you know
it's not safe, and you can't rig something for addiction,
especially, and go after children.
Punitive damages tell all companies this, and
other companies are watching to see what this jury says.
need you here on this question to be plain and clear.
Americans need you to be plain and clear.
lie, you can't hide, you can't trick people, you can't rig a
product to make it more dangerous.
It's not okay.
You just can't do it.
No, you can't
We
All
Thank you.



MS. BARNETT:
Now I'm between you and your break.
I'll be quick.
Let me just say this.
It's fine to defend
yourself when you've done nothing wrong.
But
when you're wrong, you're supposed to stand up, step up and
accept responsibility, not sidestep responsibility at the
expense of the very people you hurt.
That's fine.
And Reynolds failed to take responsibility in the
They
'50s when they learned their cigarettes caused cancer.
failed to take responsibility and kept lying to customers 146
during the years that Wanette Smith smoked.
They refused to accept responsibility for the
almost 15 years since she died.
And today -- or the last
six days, you've heard them in here doing nothing else but
being in front of you, trying to avoid responsibility
permanently.
usual.
in their office.
what you guys did with their verdict.
And tomorrow, Reynolds will be in business as
And wherever their representatives are, they'll be
Maybe they'll read a little note about
But Ms. Parker said over and over again this case
is only about Wanette Smith, only about one smoker, only
about her.
Don't be distracted by anything that we did.
The case is also about Reynolds
And this family -- we've
It's not true.
and the choices it made.
acknowledged -- we've said, yes, consider -- consider
Wanette Smith.
responsibility.
Consider her fault.
You heard Mr. Smith say it.
We've accepted some
Reynolds has done everything but that.
Did they
bring you a single witness to explain what they did?
In fact, Ms. Parker just talked to you for over an
hour, and nothing -- she said nothing about what Reynolds
did except at the end to say, Well, we worked with the
Surgeon General's office; we followed their recommendations.
But you remember.
The Surgeon General was
recommending filters because the Surgeon General didn't know 147
what Reynolds knew, which were those -- they didn't work.
And once the Surgeon General -- other authorities,
the National Cancer Institute and all those things we talked
about -- once they found out the truth, they changed their
position.
Because they
didn't just fool the Americans who were smokers; they
withheld information and got the Surgeon General itself to
make those recommendations.
How much harm was there to people?
So Reynolds doesn't want you to think about the
It didn't bring you anybody from the
But it did bring you this
choices it has made.
company in here to talk to you.
Hoffman, this historian, this paid expert witness created by
her, who has never done any research or publications in the
area.
She's one of a staple of witnesses like her that come
and show these movies.
And they never look at what Reynolds
did in response.
They define the question narrowly so they don't
have to deal with what Reynolds did or answer any questions
about what Reynolds did, just like Barsky.
He comes in with
this strained definition of what BAC is.
that question.
I haven't ever had that happen.
And I'll answer
Why didn't we do that testing?
clear she had adenocarcinoma.
killed her, and you saw that.
non-BAC in her chest.
Because it was
It was caused by smoking.
Their expert agrees she had
That's what invaded and killed her.
It 148
And if Reynolds was so sure this testing would have shown
something different, you know they would have done it with
all the resources that they have.
But they also brought you in Dr. Farber, who says,
Well, there's just not enough evidence just exactly --
Barsky has different definitions.
Like, Reynolds argued to Congress and to the
American public that, Well, they're not addictive because we
want to use the classical -- old definition of addiction, or
cigarettes don't cause cancer, because we have this
definition of what "cause" means, and it's not linked, and
we haven't proven it exactly.
definition that we want to use.
And now we have a new
It's called BAC.
And Farber says, We just don't know.
We just
Never mind what the doctor
They're just wrong, just like the Surgeon General is
don't know if she had COPD.
said.
wrong, just like the health authorities are wrong, the
doctors are wrong.
And Dr. Farber had the same message Reynolds has
We just don't know; there's not enough
had for decades.
evidence to prove it.
here.
want you to think about anything -- anything else except for
what Reynolds did.
That's who they chose to have you listen to.
That's who they chose to bring you in
They
Ms. Parker said she smoked because she wanted it, 149 It wasn't there.
And she made some
She told you BAC kills.
Where was a witness to tell
Where was a witness to
not because she was addicted.
you that?
tell you that?
statements, by the way, about what the law is.
kind of slide -- she put a slide up and said the question
for you was:
Did addiction cause her disease or could she
quit?
verdict form.
instructions the court will give you.
That is not a question that you will see on your
That is not a question that is in the
She said --
I showed you exactly where the instructions are.
And the question is simply whether addiction was a cause,
one of causes, not this -- this -- this question.
And she
told you, too, that clear and convincing evidence -- the
evidence for punitive damages is the highest standard there
is.
Folks, the clear and convincing evidence
So I just ask you -- Reynolds can't prove its
language -- it's in the verdict form -- the instructions,
and the judge will tell you what that is, but the highest
level would be beyond a reasonable doubt.
And that's not
the standard.
case by making arguments to you.
they need the law.
pointed out to you.
not sure Ms. Parker said this, while you're in jury
deliberations, see if it's in the verdict form.
So pay attention to those places I
And if someone starts to say, Well, I'm
They need witnesses, and
See if it's 150
on the instructions.
She said addiction doesn't relieve people of
What relieves Reynolds of responsibility
responsibility.
And how do they come in here and blame
for its choices?
people for not quitting earlier, when Reynolds made the
cigarettes to make it as hard as possible?
A couple more things here.
Ms. Parker stood in
here and said -- she said it in opening and she said it
again today, that Wanette Smith only tried to quit two times
in the '90s and never before.
Barbara Selph came here.
You heard her testimony.
And particularly, you heard the evidence
She talked about in the '70s and the '80s Wanette Smith
trying to quit.
from Dr. Hoffman yesterday about Wanette struggling to quit,
crying, feeling like she was less of a woman and not
understanding why she couldn't beat her addiction.
what evidence was in here, not that there were only two
quits.
And also, Esther Stone told you her sister tried
repeatedly to quit.
That's
And there was that comment about Mr. Smith in his
deposition saying that -- that Wanette didn't smoke low-tar,
low-nicotine cigarettes.
I'm going to show you something on
the ELMO.
MS. PARKER:
MS. BARNETT:
Objection.
It's a demonstrative, Your Honor.
Not in evidence. 151 evidence.
It's not in
No, Your Honor.
MS. PARKER:
We need to approach on this one.
THE COURT:
(Sidebar conference.)
THE COURT:
MS. BARNETT:
Okay.
What is this?
It's the fact sheet where he says
she smoked Doral, Vantage, Belair, and Raleigh.
MS. PARKER:
THE COURT:
MS. BARNETT:
THE COURT:
This is interrogatories in the case.
That's not a demonstrative aid.
I'm using it to demonstrate --
No, no, no, no.
That's not a
demonstrative.
should have offered into in evidence.
If you wanted to offer it in evidence, you
MS. BARNETT:
Well, I had no idea they'd make this
a misleading argument, Judge.
That's not a demonstrative aid.
THE COURT:
MS. BARNETT:
(The following proceedings occurred in open court,
All right.
in the presence of the jury:)
MS. BARNETT:
Apparently, I'm not going to show
you this.
Reynolds knew from the deposition of James Smith.
He said very clearly, with no question, she smoked Doral.
Remember those cigarettes you saw?
Remember the ad you saw?
She smoked Vantage.
She smoked Belair. 152
Now, if he didn't call them low-tar or
low-nicotine cigarettes, that doesn't change.
they were.
In fact, I'll wrap up here.
That's what
And they talked about -- well, let me say this.
Reynolds has not stopped the lies and deceptions
You heard how they attacked the Surgeon
and the attacks.
General going back to '54 and -- I've got to get water.
They -- they haven't -- they haven't stopped this plan that
they have.
They came in the courtroom, attacked Mr. Wilner,
who can't take the stand here and testify to defend himself;
attacked Dr. Feingold.
How long did Ms. Parker cross-examine him to try
What did she ask him about
to prove he was a bad person?
the actual substance of his opinions?
about his conclusions or his methods that were wrong?
Nothing.
What did she show you
She spent the whole time attacking him.
Attacked
Wanette Smith herself for not trying hard enough to quit,
ignoring evidence that she did -- of the many times she
tried to quit, and bringing out -- to talk about how Wanette
Smith -- this is the documents.
them to show you anything wrong.
Again, we had to count on
Out of Wanette Smith's entire life, they pull out
Did they prove to you anything
one life insurance document. 153
about that, what it meant, what she understood, what
discussions were had, whether it made any difference,
whether that form was ever submitted anywhere to everyone --
to anyone?
They didn't.
And then perhaps most remarkable of all -- well,
They said he lied because he
they also attacked Mr. Smith.
said he didn't know about the COPD and he lied because --
No evidence
Your Honor, objection.
MS. PARKER:
of that.
THE COURT:
ladies and gentlemen.
stand.
What the lawyers say is not evidence,
It's what you heard from the witness
You may proceed.
MS. BARNETT:
Well, you've seen what happened in
They attacked Mr. Smith, who lost his wife,
this trial.
attacked her son for bringing a lawsuit.
to try to hold someone responsible when you believe that
what they did caused your loved one's death.
It's legal, too,
But most remarkable of all is Reynolds came in
here -- they did it in the opening and again today -- and
they accused us of repackaging.
repackaging Wanette Smith and trying to tell you something
different, when Reynolds -- Reynolds is the greatest
repackager of our time.
this set of lawyers of that is quite astonishing.
For them to accuse this family and
They accused us of 154
They took cigarettes they knew were deadly.
What
did they do when people got worried about cancer?
stuck a filter on the end.
They
They made it a super fancy triple, quadruple,
quintuple, dumafajamad [phonetic], fancy filter.
And they
repackaged it and sold it as safer, knowing it wasn't any
safer.
And that wasn't enough.
Then they made those
cigarettes, low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes and sold them
as safer, when they knew that they were not any safer.
Reynolds made these choices.
And I want to end with a little clip of some of
the ads that you saw of how Reynolds did its own
repackaging.
(Video played.)
MS. BARNETT:
Thank you for your attention, and
You've
You've listened with -- you've put up
And I
we've all noticed how much attention you've paid.
taken good notes.
with all of our lengthy sidebars and carrying on.
really appreciate the attention that you've paid.
I will say this -- Ms. Parker pointed out -- if
you answer yes -- yes, we think it's appropriate to consider
whether to deter others, and Reynolds, from continuing,
there may be another day of proof.
the kind of jurors who would just write "no" so that you
But we know you're not 155
could be able to go home sooner.
Thank you very much.


