MR. SMITH: May it please the Court and counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to start off by telling you thank you. Thank you for your service over the last two weeks and thank you for your service yesterday, which seemed like an additional week.
Thank you for -- I've watched you take notes. I've watched you with diligence. I've watched everything that you've done. This system wouldn't work, can't work, but for the willingness of citizens to do what I think you were told in the beginning and I believe very strongly, outside giving your life for your country and working and being in the military. The next greatest cause for our country, and distinguishes us from the rest of the world, is our citizens coming in to resolve those disputes.
So on behalf of all the parties, and particularly on behalf of Lucille Soffer, thank you so much for what you've done.
Last week I assured each of you what I would prove in this case. I had a book, looked very similar to this one. It had "Opening Statement" on it, so I went back over it yesterday and last night.
I'm proud to say that I think almost every word that I promised you we would prove in that opening, that kind of preview of what was going to happen, has been proved to you in this case.
And, frankly, from the look in your eyes yesterday and today, I think it's enough already.
You ve seen this case. You know what its
Today I want to focus more on the task ahead of you, and I want to go back through the evidence briefly with you ana show you the decisions that you are expected to make because, frankly, in just a few hours, we will talk no more. And once you have been instructed on the law, the evidence will be yours and the decision is entirely your responsibility.
The threshold question in this case, which I suggest to you is a pretty straightforward and, frankly, I don't think a particularly difficult decision, because as you've heard since voir dire, this is not a usual lawsuit in some sense, because this is a case in which much of what will be decided here has already been decided.
Many of the decisions you would have otherwise made have already been made once we get you past a certain threshold. Because as you were told, this case emanates from a much larger case that was tried by a jury many years ago and went to the Florida Supreme Court for which the Florida Supreme Court has sent down instructions which will be read to you and provided to you to take back with you to the jury room. You've heard it called the Engle case.
But before we get to the Engle case, there is a first question and only a first question that needs
to be answered. And it is the following: Was Maurice Soffer, Maurice Benson Soffer, addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Company, Tobacco Company, and if so, was it a legal cause of his death?
As a starting point, I want to remind you of the first thing we did, was over a week ago, and that was a stipulation. And if you remember, I read a stipulation of I think 13 or 14 -- we'll go through it in just a moment, but I read you 13 stipulations. And the court instructed you before you received these stipulations that these essentially were facts that are not in controversy.
And I'm not going to go over all of them, but I will tell you they are going back with you as part of your instructions so if you have any question as to what a stipulation was, you'll have it there to look at for yourself.
But I want to focus just for a moment on what I think were three things that are critically important. Maurice Benson Soffer was diagnosed with lung cancer in December 1991. That's not in controversy.
But for Mr. Soffer's cigarette smoking, he would not have developed lung cancer. But for his
cigarette smoking, he would not have developed lung cancer. Mr. Soffer's death was a result of lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes. Those issues are not, in fact, in dispute.
Now, please for just a moment -- I don't want to spend much time on this, but there's been some sort of a, if you will, a subtext in this case that's come up about pipe tobacco. I want you to remember that the one thing that seems to me to
resolve that issue once and for all is, but for Mr. Soffer's cigarette smoking, he would not have developed lung cancer, ana Mr. Soffer's death was a result of lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes. The word "pipe tobacco” not only does not appear on the stipulation, the word "pipe" or "pipe tobacco" will nowhere appear on the verdict form in this case.
I suggest that the whole idea about whether he smokes a pipe on occasion or how frequently he did so is somewhat of a smokescreen from an industry that, frankly, and pardon the pun, has hidden by smoke, has hidden behind smoke for a long, long time.
But let me just briefly go over what the evidence would be. First, Mr. Soffer's former wife.
She testified yesterday, and you heard some of her testimony, that he smoked cigarettes heavily, more, much more than he ever smoked a pipe during the course of their first marriage.
His aunt Hermine, who is the -- kind of the historian that goes back as far as anybody we know in this case, because she's the one who's ten years older than him and can remember him being a heavy smoker in high school, and she recalled him being a heavy cigarette smoker even back in his high school days, though she doesn't recall the pipe.
His daughter by his first marriage, Joy. And you remember that testimony, I'm sure. She remembers him cigarette smoking much more than pipe smoking.
And his children, Joseph and Shelly, actually came in and testified to you and told you what their recollections are in the course of their life.
And let's admit it, that would be from the 1980s forward, and they said that their father smoked cigarettes all the time and he smoked a pipe occasionally.
And Lucille Soffer said that the following was true: A carton of cigarettes would not last a week because all the way back to Joy, if you remember
Joy's testimony, he couldn't get through the week without borrowing a cigarette or bumming a cigarette, or whatever term was used, and Lucille said a carton of cigarettes would not last a week, but a bag of pipe tobacco could last a week, two weeks or even a month.
One neighbor recalled his pipe-smoking about half the time in the evening when he would see him with a pipe, and another neighbor said that he saw him smoking a pipe more frequently in the evening and didn't see him with cigarettes. But interestingly, though, that last witness was very brief. He testified that he didn't move into the neighborhood until 1988.
But in the end, all you need to know about that issue is resolved by the stipulations 12 and 13. Cigarette smoking is what caused his cancer. But for the cigarette smoking, he wouldn't have gotten the cancer, and he died as a result of lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking. It is, for any other
reason, a smokescreen.
But what it is proof of, according to Dr. Burns, which we will discuss later, is that people who smoke cigarettes also when they have a nicotine addiction will smoke anything and, frankly,
if it is evidence of anything for you to consider in this case, his pipe-smoking is evidence of his need and steadfast need for nicotine.
Folks, this initial question on the verdict form that I just showed you starts off with, Was Mickey Soffer addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds? Well, the stipulation shows -- and we really won't spend a lot of time on it -- but if you look at Number 6 and 7, you will see this is not a brand contest case. No one brand is sitting around saying, It was their cigarette.
This is one in which the stipulation is the only evidence we have is of brands that were smoked that were R.J. Reynolds or American Tobacco or Brown & Williamson. Those brands. The primary brand I told you on opening was going to be Pall Mall.
That's never, I think, been in question. They -she smoked -- he smoked her Winstons from time -time to time. And that's never been in question. There is no brand issue in this case.
They -- R.J. Reynolds is the manufacturer of the cigarettes that he smoked during the course of his lifetime, or Brown & Williamson or American Tobacco.
And the stipulation is, and as you've heard us say throughout the trial, R.J. Reynolds is responsible for Brown & Williamson and American Tobacco Company. So that's an easy question for you in this case.
Then we need to talk about the magnitude of his smoking for just a moment because their argument will be that he was not addicted to cigarettes.
Well, let's go back and talk about what we have.
First of all, I'll talk to -- about him more later. Dr. Myers even concedes -- their expert concedes that he surmised from the entire record that the smoking history was about a pack a day for 40 years.
According to the medical records, Mr. Soffer reported a history or there was reported in his record a history ranging from 25 years at one pack a day. And I think that his oncology record -- yeah, a hematology report for Dr. Cusumano, who is his oncologist, says the patient has an 80-year-plus smoking history and quit a year ago when he was diagnosed with COPD.
You also have evidence from -- over the course of his lifetime. We know we heard from his aunt Hermine who said, I was a heavy smoker and I can
tell you when he was in high school, he smoked more than I did. You remember that testimony.
His daughter Joy from his first marriage, his oldest daughter Joy said that her father smoked heavily as long as she knew him. In fact, she said,
I have no memory of my father not smoking cigarettes.
Joy described her dad as a chain-smoker, and then in that deposition was asked to define a chain-smoker and defined it as lighting up one cigarette from another. She testified in answer to a question did he have a substance abuse problem, she said, Yes, he had a substance abuse problem when it came to cigarette smoking.
His former wife described Mickey Soffer as a heavy smoker from the time she met him in the mid to late 1950s when he was in the United States Air Force. And she also acknowledged, and you remember this testimony, that it was her impression that he had been a heavy smoker for years before they had even met.
Lucille Soffer testified that Mickey smoked constantly, either a pipe or tobacco, but that his cigarette smoking was such that a carton a week was insufficient to meet his needs and that it was a
regular occurrence that he would then resort to either getting additional cigarettes or using some of her cigarettes.
His children, Shelly and Joe, testified in some great detail about how much their father smoked during their childhood and early teen years. All day, they said. First thing in the morning when he woke us up to get us ready for school, he had a cigarette in his mouth. When he prepared breakfast, he had a cigarette in his mouth. When they went to bed that night, Dad was smoking.
And you may remember the testimony that was read in actually from Shelly in which she stated that in fact -- even when he would read to her at night and sometimes when he would get in the bed and read to the kids, she can remember him having a cigarette even then. The kids say the last thing they saw before they went to sleep at night was their dad smoking.
When he was in the car, they testified he smoked cigarettes. When he went to events, he smoked cigarettes. Even when he was honoring a friend's request or people who didn't want him to smoke in the house, he honored that request by what, stepping outside to have a cigarette.
Joe and Shelly recalled their dad could not make it through the highest of their holy days, Yom Kippur. Could not make it through a holy day -- Yom Kippur is supposed to be a day of fasting and restraint -- without sneaking out -- after about five hours, was the testimony, he had to slip out and have a cigarette.
Joe, he testified to that when their father would go to the synagogue, he would get through the synagogue without smoking, but his testimony was, As soon as I got about five feet from the door, I can remember hearing the sound of my dad pulling out his lighter because he was going to have a cigarette.
The kids testified that if their dad went without cigarettes too long, he got short-tempered. He started pacing. He got fidgety. He tried to eat
sweets. That s the testimony in this case from the children with whom he last lived.
We know from the medical records and the family testimony that he tried to quit smoking. He admitted to his children that he couldn't stop.
They asked him and he said, I can't. We know from Shelly that he tried. We know from Joe that he tried. We know from the medical records that he tried. He just could not kick his addiction to
nicotine.
We also know, as I told you that I would during the opening, that in 1990 he may have tried to quit. He certainly told his wife he quit. He told her it was easy. He certainly told some of his doctors he quit, but his children said he did not quit. Both children admitted to you in this courtroom that their father did not quit smoking until the fall of 1991.
Shelly -- Dr. Myers said, I discount that because, well, she would have just been a grade school child at the time, was his testimony. Actually, she was a freshman in high school at Buchholz. She testified the reason she actually remembered it is because she could remember that in the fall of her freshman year, she thought September or October, when he finally quit smoking.
Joey said, I remember him smoking in 1991 and I remembered him telling me not to tell mom that he was smoking then.
Now, clearly, if we talk about a quit attempt, he was no longer smoking a carton a week, he was no longer smoking at the rate before, but the idea that he had completely gone cold turkey and that it was easy for him seems to be defeated by the fact that
his own children knew that one of the ways he was combating and trying to quit was he was cutting back.
We know this, that by the time he ever actually quit smoking, it was because he was beginning to have breathing problems. He was beginning to have what they call upper respiratory problems. And he smoked until literally it began to be a matter of life and death and pain for him to smoke a cigarette.
We have two experts in this case who we brought to you and who have given their opinions to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Mr. Soffer was addicted to nicotine contained in cigarettes.
First, I want to talk about Dr. Burns. You can remember Dr. Burns. He was the last three days of the last week. With more than 40 years -- for more than 40 years, he has been a medical doctor and he is Board certified in pulmonary medicine. He has throughout his career diagnosed, treated and identified lung cancer. As part of doing that, he says he has regularly been involved in the process of diagnosing addiction to nicotine.
Dr. Burns did not just testify to you that to a
reasonable degree of medical certainty that
Mr. Soffer was addicted. Dr. Burns testified that from his review of the entire record, Mr. Soffer was heavily addicted to nicotine.
Recall this, please. Dr. Burns, unlike everybody else, has published hundreds of peer-reviewed articles on tobacco and health. He was the senior editor and reviewer on 30 Surgeon General Reports and specifically served as a reviewer on the 1988 Surgeon General's Report entitled "Nicotine Addiction."
He has an unassailable record in public health, has been recognized for his ability and his smoking cessation efforts and his work on nicotine addiction by state, federal and international organizations.
He told you, Look, it's no great surprise that Mr. Soffer was like a cohort of this generation of men. 76 percent of the men born in 1935 became cigarette smokers. We know that 85 percent of them did so when they were very young.
Now, we don't know the exact day. We don't know the exact minute. We know it may have been 1949. We know it was before 1952. But if you go back from 1991 or from 1990, we know that we have someone who smoked cigarettes without cessation of
any considerable time for 40 years.
We know he tried a few times. We know it was unsuccessful. We know it could be a few days; we know one time maybe weeks, although it's unclear how long that was; and we know that was related to health. But the fact is, every time he went back to cigarettes because he was addicted.
We also produced a psychiatrist who currently serves in a clinical line position over at the University of Florida at Shands. Dr. Tonia Werner spends every week screening patients for addiction, including nicotine addiction. She testified that she's yet to diagnose -- she's yet to treat a prolonged smoker who has not become nicotine-addicted.
Dr. Werner explained how she applied the Fagerstrom test, you remember that term, and the CAGE test, C-A-G-E, CAGE test, that these are common tools used in the assessment of addiction, not just in nicotine. They are used in the assessment of addiction.
And from the use of these, plus the DSM-T-R, and plus her clinical judgment and experience, she said that -- she gave the opinion that he was addicted to nicotine to a reasonable degree of
medical certainty. Using all these tools, she said that he was addicted -- addicted and that he had a substantial addiction.
The only evidence in this case that would even give rise to some contrary argument came from Dr. Myers. But I want to examine just a few minutes this morning with you Dr. Myers. You will be the judge ultimately of the credibility and you'll get an instruction on that, but I want you to, please, consider this. I think the best assessment of Dr. Myers is what he does not accept as a starting premise in this or any other case.
He sat right in this courtroom, and he told you that he did not consider Surgeon General C. Everett Koop as authoritative on the subject of addiction, even though C. Everett Koop was the Surgeon General of the United States at which time it published the 1988 Surgeon General Report on the subject of nicotine addiction.
Just to make sure that we weren't being mistaken, we played the following for Dr. Myers.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: I would say it is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine. Our nation has
mobilized enormous resources to wage the war on drugs, elicit drugs."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH: So we confronted him so that there was no question about whether this was about some semantics contained in the Surgeon General's Report. We said, Do you agree with the Surgeon General? He said, No, I don't accept that. He couldn't -- he even struggled with the question of whether or not Dr. Koop was misleading people by that.
Where have we heard that before? Well, you know what? The idea that the Surgeon Generals might be misleading the public is not new with the tobacco industry.
Go back to what they said about the 1972 Surgeon General's Report. It came out that very day, February 26th, and it said -- and it said:
"The Surgeon General's Report insults the scientific community and that the number one health problem is not cigarette smoking, but it is the extent to which public health officials may mislead the American public."
There's nothing new about the approach that Dr. Myers says on behalf of tobacco. It's the same thing they've been saying for 40 years about Surgeon
Generals.
And let's see how tobacco itself reacted back in 1988. "Claims that cigarettes are addictive, irresponsible in scare tactics," they said that day.
Press release at the same time, "Claims that cigarettes are addictive contradict common sense." That was the response and, essentially, that remains the position adopted by Dr. Myers.
So the truth is that the only psychiatric expert they have brought to you is one who denies or is unaware of definitions currently accepted by the World Health Organization, the United States Department of Health, the United States Surgeon General's Office.
More telling in many ways should be that Dr. Myers would not agree with a statement on nicotine addiction published by the Florida Department of Health and the University of South Florida and given to fifth-graders throughout the state.
Think about it. R.J. Reynolds brought you an expert; they touted his many publications in their producing him to you. But as it turned out you
learned on cross, his articles are mostly on pedophilia, child crimes, sex crimes, that sort of
thing. He has yet to have even one pub- -subject -- one publication, peer-reviewed publication on the subjects of tobacco or health or addiction to nicotine, the very things he was brought in this courtroom to testify about.
But, you know, he was an obvious choice if you think about it. After all, he testified in this case that he's now, counting this case, testified in Florida four times in the last year and a half, each time on behalf of R.J. Reynolds, and not once has he found the smoker to have been addicted to nicotine.
They have used and presented to you an expert who did not agree with a 2010 article published in the New England Journal of Medicine which said addiction causes cigarette-related deaths.
Dr. Myers has not accepted the definition of addiction set forth in the DSM-IV. He does not accept the definition used by the American Psychiatric Association, and he doesn't even accept the description of the symptoms of nicotine addiction that were set out in the DSM-IV-TR.
You know, there is an explanation to this expert, I think. It certainly is one that could be inferred from the evidence, and I will go back and
show it to you for a second.
You will see in a moment a document that -- you remember, you'll see later, Dr. Di Marco we presented. He was a chemical researcher for many, many years.
Well, Dr. Di Marco in 1982 was interviewed by then the R.J. general -- RJR general counsel. Reynolds was having them discuss, Well, how do you feel about the relationship between our lawyers and the research department?
And you remember why this was coming about, because there had been that big flag because the lawyers had not allowed them to do the mutagenicity studies. Because the reason the lawyers said that you can't do the mutagenicity studies, even though the scientists/researchers wanted to do them, is, Well, if you do the mutagenicity studies, that would be an admission that there are mutagens in our cigarettes which could be used against us in a cancer case. Remember that whole discussion?
Well, Dr. Di Marco in 1982 was being interviewed about the relationship. And in 1982, here's what Dr. Di Marco said -- excuse me, here's what the general counsel recalls from what Dr. Di Marco said.
"He also said, although I can't recall his exact words," referring to Dr. Di Marco, "that our medical/scientist witnesses will say whatever we want them to say," clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity.
Folks, I got to tell you something. There's an old country song from Hank Williams, Jr., I think says it's all about R.J. Reynolds. If they bring
you an expert into the courtroom who selectively focuses on what -- only what favors R.J. Reynolds, who ignores the record of facts, who doesn't accept the definitions of the major health organizations and is out of step with the entire public health community and the United States Surgeon General, folks, R.J. Reynolds is following an old family tradition.
And that's not enough. They finally got Dr. Myers to say, We assume -- will you assume with us for a moment that he was addicted -- if you assume for a moment he was addicted, did the addiction cause his disease or death? No, no.
Dr. Myers, their expert, recognizes the following: He says, Well, I know that cigarettes, his words, contain thousands of carcinogens, and he recognizes that cigarette smoking, even in
relatively mild terms causes lung cancer, but Dr. Myers -- and he recognizes addiction. He says it's only about half the time, but of course the DSM-T-R-IV, the document that the American Psychiatric Society uses, said that 80 percent of all smokers are addicted to cigarettes.
Dr. Myers even admits that cig- -- that addiction does cause, at least in that share, cigarette smoking, but he still cannot accept that addiction is a legal cause for tobacco-related lung cancer. Because, remember, this is not about whether it was tobacco-related lung cancer. They've admitted the lung cancer was caused by smoking cigarettes.
Folks, any opinion expert, anybody, expert or not, that is of the opinion that addiction is not a substantial contributing factor to lung cancer where the smoker has -- was addicted and smoked between one and two packs, you pick the number, for 40 years makes no sense. And, in fact, denies your common sense, a tool you are going to take with you as you make your decisions.
Recall that even R.J. Reynolds has recognized long in its internal documents that what Dr. Myers told you is inaccurate. But to be fair, he is an
addiction expert for Reynolds who's never asked to see any Reynolds documents, doesn't even know and couldn't tell you when tobacco finally admitted the addictiveness of their cigarettes.
Back in 1982, I want you to look at what RJR -now, remember, 1982, for 17 more years, they publicly denied what I'm about to show you, but this is what they were internally admitting.
"Most of those" -- this is Dr. Di Marco, remember -- to Dr. Di Marco. "Most of those who have smoked for any significant time would like to stop." That's not anybody but R.J. Reynolds saying that.
"Many, but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so." So read the sentence logically what they knew. Most of those who would like to stop aren't able to do so. That's in 1982. That's what Reynolds recognized internally.
Turn to Page 2, please.
And why were they so concerned about it? "However, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using, if they could."
But addiction, we know, to nicotine can only be
satisfied by nicotine. Now, how does that happen? Because this is inherent in the process of why the death occurs. It is by inhaling the nicotine -remember Dr. Burns' testimony -- down into the lungs. But this isn't something R.J. Reynolds hasn't known and the tobacco industry hasn't known.
Go to 3746, please.
This is a document in our package. And this is what they were saying long ago. "However, the ultimate satisfaction comes from the nicotine which is extracted while the tar is held in the lung, this being the nicotine in the smoke, as determined by chemical analysis."
Now, think about that. What they're saying is, what they knew was, to get the nicotine, which we'll talk about later, to keep them addicted, they got to smoke and they got to inhale it down in the lungs.
What do we know from -- remember all the demonstrative aids Dr. Burns went off and showed you the process what kills you from lung cancer. It's not a cigarette. It's not two cigarettes. It's the repetition of the one product they're really selling, cigarette smoke on your lungs. And why is cigarette on your lungs? Because you have to inhale it to do what, to get the nicotine effect.
Folks, it's the repetition that kills. And I want to remember what Dr. Burns himself said to you and I don't want you to forget this.
"Dr. Burns, do you have an opinion of the relationship of addiction to nicotine and the causation of lung cancer?"
"Yes. There is no question that absent nicotine people wouldn't get lung cancer because they would stop using cigarettes. It's the nicotine that results and the repetitive exposure, puff after puff, day after day, cigarette after cigarette, over 20, 30, 40 years that produces the lung cancer."
Now, once you've answered that initial question, then you got the benefit of the Engle instructions. And I want to show those to you very briefly. This is what the law is. And I want to really go -- because we know, one, they've admitted that lung cancer was caused in this case by smoking cigarettes and, two, they now admit what they never did during the lifetime of Mickey Soffer, but they now admit that the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
"It has been found as a matter of law that R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous; that R.J.
Reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health
effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
"That R.J. Reynolds agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature" -- now watch this -- "with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment."
Now, that's the law in this case once you get past question one. Now, we will not prove nor could we be allowed to prove -- we do not have to show the particular act of negligence, the particular defect of the scientific design or any of the particular concealments. We don't have to show how and how dangerous and to what degree the cigarette was dangerous. All that was before the Engle jury and it binds you now.
That would simply be a retrial and we weren't here to do it, and I don't think you'd want to be here with one that took that long.
But you've seen examples, just brief examples
that we've given you in this case of enormous, unrebutted evidence on every one of these subjects, almost all of them words of R.J. Reynolds or its front organizations or its coconspirators.
And I want to go back over a little of that with you for a moment.
We know some facts pretty clear. We know in 1953 what got them together. They got together because their stock was falling. Cigarette consumption for the first time in a century was declining.
They were -- remember that memo. All they were talking about is, We've got to do something about the market. And we've got to do something -- boy, wouldn't it be great if we could be the first ones to stop cancer? What were they really -- we need to get our profits back up. That's what it was all about. Not one comment in all of that memorandum from '53 about this is a real public health issue.
We know what got them started.
And we heard today that there were different issues about who knew what when. Let's find out what we know. We know in 1956 Alan Rodgman, chemist at R.J. Reynolds, recognized that R.J. Reynolds cigarettes contained polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, which were actual or potential carcinogens.
Blow that up, please.
"And considering the potential and actual carcinogenic activity of a number of these compounds, a method of either complete removal or almost complete removal of these compounds from cigarette smoking is required."
Folks, that was the chemist at R.J. Reynolds. 1956, no question, they knew they had carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in their cigarettes and they needed to get them out.
We know in 1958 that the whole industry was well aware of the cause-and-effect relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer because
remember the British industry came over? Remember the itinerary of that document?
Put the document up, please.
The itinerary of that document shows that they met with various tobacco companies and the TIRC owned -- which the TIRC was -- Reynolds was part of it -- on at least four occasions over a long -- and they went back and they summarized their findings from meeting with the American tobacco industry.
And here's what they said in 1958: "With one
exception" -- H.S.N. Greene -- "the individuals who we met believe that smoking causes lung cancer, if by causation we mean a chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer which involves smoking as an indispensable link."
We know they knew that. This is not about what some textbook or somebody else -- that's what they knew in '58. But, wait, we know that that's not their official position.
Show me the next page, please.
"Although TIRC" -- that's Reynolds -- "Although TIRC officially still takes the view that causation is not proven, in practice the industry in the USA has found a good deal in common with their opposition." In other words, their official position is not their real position. The official position is it's not proven. But in 1958, they didn't know about some epidemiol- -- they understood there was a cause-and-effect relationship.
We know that by 1961 an exhaustive list of carcinogens had been developed and found by the tobacco industry. Partial lists of compounds in cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens,
1961. We know that.
We know that in 1962 R.J. Reynolds research
chemist, Dr. Rodgman -- oh, before I leave this, one of the other things we know -- go to the next section, please.
We also know in 1961 that they recognized they had a problem.
Next slide, please.
"To achieve this reduction of carcinogens in smoke, to achieve this objective will require a major research effort" -- and the real -"carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke and present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke."
In other words -- we'll get back to it in a moment -- when they were telling people in '53, in '55, in '61 that we'll take it out, they knew they couldn't take it out. They knew it because they knew they didn't have the technology to do it.
We know that Dr. Rodgman at R.J. Reynolds in 1962 was aware of this. They knew -- he recognized the major part of this company consists of cigarettes. What this company sells is cigarette smoke, and then he realized the real problem.
Go to the next section, please.
Obviously, the amount of evidence to accumulate to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is
overwhelming. The evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. Folks, that isn't what somebody knew; that's what R.J. Reynolds knew.
We know that the year before the Surgeon General's Report came out in 1964, the year before the report came out, which they would not accept and attack and criticize, we know what RJR really -what the tobacco industry really recognized.
"Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms. But cigarettes, we will assume the Surgeon General's committee to say" -- which, of course, they did -"despite the beneficent effect of nicotine, have certain unattractive side effects: They cause, or predispose to, lung cancer."
That's what we know from the internal documents. Before the Surgeon General ever spoke in '64, they knew the truth. They knew they were selling nicotine and they knew it caused lung cancer. We know that Reynolds and its -- all its conspirators, and you heard it from Dr. Burns, they lied about it and continued to lie about it until finally in 1949 they were forced to disband The Tobacco Institute and finally come clean with the
truth.
It couldn't help Mickey Soffer. He'd been dead by seven years then. And we know from Engle that R.J. Reynolds did what they did so that smokers like Mickey and the public would rely upon it to their detriment.
Now they're going to say, But all this information was out there. Look, there were textbooks. There was everything. Let me tell you what, if they come in and lay down a single document that says, This is an internal document by which we admitted the truth that we knew, when we knew it, then they can defeat Engle.
But if they have to admit that we didn't give the full truth -- I don't care what is floating out in the universe, if they have to prove we withheld documents, that's enough to show they concealed material not otherwise available.
But during the lifetime of Mickey Soffer, what they do rather than tell the truth, they tried to drown out the truth, muffle it, beyond why? Very simple. They needed -- right after the Surgeon General's Report, "We must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to
continue smoking." And, frankly, they didn't care. They would say anything. Look at it.
Play Joseph Cullman back then. Face the Nation, 1971.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: From CBS Washington in color, Face the Nation, the spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with Joseph Cullman, III, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Philip Morris, Incorporated, and Chairman of the Executive
Committee of The Tobacco Institute.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "You believe cigarettes are safe? Have they been proved to be safe,
Mr. Cullman?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. I tell you that I did read that report, and I concluded from that report
that it's true that babies born from women who do not smoke are smaller, but they're just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "What about the higher rate of deaths?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "But some women would prefer having smaller babies, I" -(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH: There you go. They got an explanation for everything. But some women would prefer smaller babies. This is the industry that comes before us and says we told the truth or, even if we didn't tell the truth, everybody knew. Well, if everybody knew, then he just committed perjury.
You know, from the 1960s through the 1980s, all they were focused on was creating doubt controversy. That's all they wanted to do. 1967, "The cigarette controversy."
Go forward. Next one, please.
In the '70s, "The cigarette controversy."
Go forward, please.
1972, "The Surgeon General's, that statement 'There's no honest disagreement among experts on the effects of smoking' is false. This is a gross insult to the scientific community. Once again, HEW
has failed to make an objective report on smoking and health research required by Congress."
Go to the next one, please.
This is what they said. This is what they heard. This is what their response was.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: It was suspect from the start. HEW's secretary Califano launched his anti-smoking campaign a year ago with all the zeal of a reformed sinner. And now in an apparent attempt to bring some science to the side of his new Evangelism, the former three-pack-a-day secretary told the Surgeon General, 'Prepare a new report.' 'It's issuance,' an internal HEW memo said, and I quote, 'would be a media event,' closed quote.
"Turning a significant health question into a publicity stint is an insult to serious science.
"America, beware if Joe Califano ever gives up drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most intimate."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH: Go to 3340, please.
Think about it. "The cigarette controversy: Why more research is needed." 1984. Less than
seven years before Mickey Soffer died, tobacco was still telling the American people we need more research. And why were they doing it? It's simple. Let's go back to 1953.
The subtext is in 1953 and they never changed. Don't worry, keep smoking. You don't have to worry. If we find something, well take it out. You just heard Cullman say that in '71. We'll take it out. Don't worry. If we find something, we'll take it out.
Well, this is what they said in '53: "The fact is, of course, that no one who has been a heavy smoker is going to benefit himself by now falling into a panic and eliminating the pleasure and comfort of cigarettes.
"He might just as well go on enjoying his smoke in the interim while research pursues the facts with full assurance that if any cancer-causing agent is ever really found in tobacco, the manufacturers will quickly find a way to eliminate it."
That's an interesting argument because six months before that R.J. Reynolds was -- the doctors were identifying carcinogens that likely existed in their product. Did they ever take it out?
Dr. Burns says that they never once took it out. In
fact, we know that in 1955 they were carrying out this right away. This was part of their strategy.
Play DuPuis, please.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: As we find these components, we publish the results of our work in technical journals which are available to any scientist in any part of the world. So far we've found none that have given us any cause for concern.
"If we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we'll remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH: It was a lie. But what a genius, I mean, you can keep smoking until we find something, then if we find something. You can keep smoking because we'll get rid of it, but we don't know anything is in it. Both are lies. They knew what was in it and they didn't do anything to get rid of it, but they told the American people otherwise.
The subtext was, the strategy was this: Deny. No matter what the science, no matter what the epidemiology, no matter what the Surgeon General
says, no matter what the AMA says, no matter what the scientists in the universities find, just keep denying so that you can keep selling these cigarettes as long as we can sell them, as many as we can sell. We'll come up with new ideas to market this product, just keep denying.
You know, they said they would take out the
dangerous material in 1964. I won t play it for you because you just heard it during the redirect this morning. Remember Joseph Cullman was on there from The Tobacco Institute. What does he say? I'm sure that if we ever find anything, we will be able to extract it from -- well, they already knew. They already knew before the Surgeon General's Report two things. They knew they had it and they knew they couldn't -- they knew it had carcinogens and they knew they couldn't get rid of them.
Look at a document -- they kept saying in 1976, by the way -- I want to show the 1976 document.
This was one of my -- this was -- someone had called and they'd written them a letter to R.J. Reynolds, nobody else but R.J. Reynolds.
This letter said, You know, I've got some questions about tar and nicotine, and they said,
"The tobacco industry is vitally interested in
questions concerning smoking and health, and if conclusive laboratory proof should substantiate that any element in tobacco or tobacco smoke is causative of a disease, we believe it would be possible to remove the offending element from the product."
Dr. Burns said despite all of this, they just kept selling their product, never once admitting what they knew to be the truth. Folks, Reynolds says everyone knew everything about addiction and smoking habits. Apparently, everybody on earth; that is, except, well, R.J. Reynolds and their coconspirators.
And I don't expect today they will at long last come forward and say, By the way, we were blatant liars in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and by the way, we did it for the purpose of having people rely on our blatant lies to their detriment.
We know at least seven people who must not have known about the addictiveness of nicotine all those many years ago.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first -- I'd like to
just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it. And just yes or no.
"Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Mr. Johnson."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxicants" -UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "We'll take that as a no. And again, kind of short. If you can just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. I just would like to have this for the record."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I believe nicotine is
not addictive.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I believe that nicotine is not addictive."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I believe that nicotine is not addictive."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "All right."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH: Can you believe it, that they brought in this story and said everybody in the world new about nicotine? Well, I picked seven who didn't.
Now, how do they try to explain it? These guys are incredible. The story now is that it was some misunderstanding, a semantic misunderstanding about definitional meanings.
Well, R.J. Reynolds was not unclear about nicotine when they were trying to provide it in a freebase form. Remember when the doctor told you about they were trying to get a more -- a freebase of nicotine, free nicotine in 1972, and what was the reason? One thing. They wanted to increase their market share against Marlboro because Marlboro was doing a better job with free nicotine.
If everyone knew, as their historian suggested -- if everybody knew all about addictiveness, then how do they answer this internal RJR document explained -- which in 1978 said the following: "Very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, i.e., its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison." That's not somebody
else saying it. That's what R.J. Reynolds said.
They had no problem defining nicotine in that letter. Tobacco did not struggle with semantics or definitional issues in 1959 when they bluntly recognized -- show it, please -- when they bluntly recognized, "Why do people smoke? Addiction."
Or in 1963 when they said, "Nicotine is addictive." They had no problem defining their product as addictive internally.
3615, please.
"There's no problem with definitions here, moreover nicotine is addictive." This is from the same people who under oath said -- two years after my client had passed, two years after she lost her husband, two years after the children had lost their father, they lied under oath.
Ladies and gentlemen, they're going to try to make this case about one thing. They're going to say it's about Mickey's poor choices. Well, that's untrue. First, both our experts recognize that an addicted smoker makes a choice, has a responsibility to make choices. Nobody says they don't. But they also said it is not a free choice.
And, by the way, that's not something that was new with our experts. We know. And this is from a
document from The Tobacco Institute in 1980. But I don't think the questions I now raise are -MR. BARINGER: Objection, Your Honor. May we
approach?
Will you take that down?
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: All right. Please be seated.
Mr. Smith, you may continue.
MR. SMITH: Thank you, Your Honor.
Ladies and gentlemen, we were just about to talk about a document, and remember the context of where I was.
They say it's a free choice. We put on two experts that say it's not free choice. That's not new news to the tobacco industry, because, remember, back in '98, Mr. Kloepfer and Mr. Knopick, they were -- Mr. Kloepfer was the head of The Tobacco Institute. They had been -- one of them,
Mr. Knopick, and, clearly, his subordinate had been to a meeting at the National Institute for Drug Abuse, and at that meeting, they had talked about what later becomes, of course, is the position of the National Institute for Drug Abuse and later becomes the position of the Surgeon General regarding addiction.
But then on the next page he makes a comment to his boss: "I don't think the questions I now raise are academic. I'm told" -- reminds us -- "I'm told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a
lung cancer cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted."
Then why did they do it? Well, because they -the addicted market. They only had two markets, the adolescent and the addicted, and the addicted was the steadiest market they had. It was all about keeping people addicted as long as they could.
And they say, Well, yeah, but everybody knew. Well, we know they didn't know. We know in 1978 -but I want you to look -- and we'll get away from the FTC report for a minute. Let's go to what the 1978 Surgeon General found about what people really knew and appreciated about the hazards of smoking.
This was -- go back.
The 1989, if you remember, was the 25 -25th -- 25 -- the 25th anniversary. On the 25th anniversary, they went back and summarized everything they'd been finding over the years. In the course of which, one of the subjects was the under-appreciation of risks that people really had. They weren't personalizing the risks. They were -addicted smokers were not responding.
Go the next page, please.
And this was a poll that was done seven
years -- eight years, I guess, eight years before the death of Mr. Soffer. Louis Harris, Harris and Associates, clearly one of the most prestigious of the firms, did a survey.
They did a survey between a sample of medical school people and the general public. They wanted to compare what does the medical community know and what does the public know?
And here's what they find: A sample of 103 health experts was also interviewed when asked to make the same ranking. All the public's mean rankings were in the top half of the scale, thus none of the factors were seen as trivial. Not smoking was ranked near the middle, below keeping water quality acceptable, having smoke detectors in your home, taking steps to control stress and getting enough vitamins and minerals. In contrast, the panel of experts ranked not smoking at the top of the list.
And why did the Surgeon General in 1989, why did they determine that the message wasn't getting out there to the smokers like they thought it would?
Go to the next section, please.
"Although empirical evidence is sparse, tobacco industry activities in the form of advertising
promotion, public relations, and lobbying may interfere with the public's beliefs and personalized acceptance of the health risks of smoking, because most individuals may not understand how smoking causes the disease with which it is associated, many persons may be vulnerable to information that tends to cast doubt on such relationships." Exactly the strategy that tobacco pursued from 1953 to 1999.
Think about it. Dr. Burns told you that the tobacco industry so saturated the advertising and
promotional world, they drowned out the contrary messages. In 1958, the FTC found that the industry, including R.J. Reynolds, advertised safer cigarettes and gave smokers a false sense of smoking. Think about it, 19- -- the late 1950s, 1958. They were already found to be deceptive in their advertising.
Look how pervasive their advertising was. I want to show you the 1967 -- you heard it first earlier -- FTC.
Go to the '67, please. Go forward.
This was the false and misleading finding against tobacco in '67.
Go to the next one.
This was a recording by the FTC to Congress in
1967.
Go to the next section, please.
They outline -- there were only three networks -THE COURT: Mr. Smith, hold on just a minute. She's having a technical.
THE COURT REPORTER: I just need to queue it back up.
THE COURT: She needs to queue back the -THE COURT REPORTER: Technical difficulty.
(Brief interruption.)
THE COURT: All right. You may continue,
Mr. Smith.
MR. SMITH: All right. We're going to try it again here.
In 1967, when there were only three channels, think about that, three networks, 1.1685 billion viewers watched 60 programs during that week commencing January 11th. And it goes on to say, "This means that on average each of every -- of the 197 million inhabitants of the United States viewed every week 5.9 cigarette-sponsored programs during the week in question."
Go to the next session.
How pervasive was promotion and advertising of cigarettes in the '50s and '60s and into 1967?
Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all Americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. Cigarettes are advertised on both network and spot television, on radio, in magazines and newspapers, indoor media, and by means of many types of point-of-sale advertising aids. So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for Americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising.
But they want you to believe that it didn't have any effect on Mickey Soffer. They want to say that what they knew wouldn't have made any difference. Well, if everybody knew, as they suggest through their historian, then why did they spend their time creating these kind of false images?
14 and 15, please.
This is what they advertised to the American people. These are the themes they knew would work. "It found such advertising contained two principle elements: A portrayal of the desirability of
cigarette smoking and assurance of the relative safety of smoking." That was their themes. No matter how they presented it, those were their themes. It's pleasurable and it's safe. And that
was the finding of the FTC in 1967. Let's look how pervasive it became.
I want to go to the FTC report, which was a compilation, by the way, of 12 national polling firms, Roper just being one of them. And I want to go to Section 3230, Section 2.3, please.
"Cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in America. It has been estimated that the six major companies spent $1 billion in 1980 to sell their product. This figure is several hundred times greater than the amount government spends on public announcement on smoking hazards."
"The National Commission on Smoking and Public Policy reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the then National Clearinghouse on smoking and health, the government's primary agency working in this area, spent in one year."
And how did they do it?
Next section, please.
"The real growth in cigarette advertising between 1967 and 1979 exceeded 50 percent, despite the passage of the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act which barred cigarette advertising from the broadcast media after January 1, 1971."
"In 1979, two of the top five advertisers in magazines in the United States were cigarette companies. R.J. Reynolds was the largest single advertiser in magazines and its expenditures included $25 million spent on the promotion of just one product, Winstons."
Next section, please.
"In 1979, cigarettes continued to be the most heavily advertised product in America. The tobacco industry dominates outdoor advertising even more than it does magazines and newspapers. The top five advertisements in 1979 were the five largest cigarette companies. Almost half the billboards in the United States advertised cigarettes. Moreover, R.J. Reynolds, the largest manufacturer of cigarettes decided recently to increase substantially its billboard investment."
And why were they doing all this, folks? Why did they have the message? Because it worked. Why?
Go to 280, please.
"Cigarette ads have continued to allay anxieties about the hazards of smoking, to associate smoking with good health, youthful vigor, social and professional success, and other attractive ideas, individuals and activities that are both worthy of
emulating distant concerns relating to health, thus the cigarettes portrayed an integral part of youth, happiness, attractiveness, personal success and active vigorous strenuous lifestyle."
Now, that's what was found, that's what the background was for smokers during their lifetime.
In fact, $10 million were spent every day because it worked. Folks, this was not a fair game. It was always rigged. Reynolds knew smokers would rely on what they said.
The CEO of the American Tobacco Company -- I want you to remember this Mr. Heimann. He was asked about two subjects, about could they rely on your advertising to be telling the truth and would you fault them for smoking? Here's what he said:
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Would you swear the witness, please."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yeah. Mr. Heimann, will you raise your right hand, please."
(Witness sworn.)
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I do."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Mr. Heimann, would you state your full name?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Robert K. Heimann."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "You understand, then, that your deposition and your testimony today is just as though you were in court testifying before the Judge and jury?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I do understand that."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "You have been designated as a witness by American Tobacco Company in response to a request that they produce a witness that's familiar with various aspects of the company.
"Now, you also -- if I understand correctly -and by 'you' I mean your company -- also formed an association called The Tobacco Institute sometime in the '50s with the other tobacco manufacturers; is that accurate?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "That's true."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "And was this a -- more of a lobbying branch or a public relations arm of the industry?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I think that's a fair statement."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Can you tell us how the Tobacco Institute and the Tobacco Industry Research Committee were financed?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "They were financed by
the major cigarette companies."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "One source of expectations concerning the product which a consumer has are the advertisements of that product; is that accurate?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I would agree with that."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Would you expect a consumer to rely upon your advertisements?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes. Our advertising is truthful and we would anticipate that they would rely on it if they chose."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "That's sort of your promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, isn't it?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes, it is."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Now, throughout your
tenure with American, it was not only American s position but your position that cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is that accurate?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Through my tenure?" UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes, that is so." UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is
that correct?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "It's a statement that American Tobacco placed great reliance on."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "We -- we issued that statement, yes."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "As far as" -UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Certainly we wanted them to believe it."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "As far as you're concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I'm going to show you what's marked as Plaintiff's Exhibit 17, which is simply a package of Pall Mall cigarettes that's currently being sold. Can you identify that as a package of Pall Malls?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes, sir."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "And would you read the warning that's placed on that for us, please?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "'Surgeon General's Warning: Quitting Smoking Now Greatly Reduces Serious Risks to Your Health.'"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "That is not a warning
that is voluntarily placed there by American Tobacco, is it?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "No, it is not." UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Would you put that warning there if Congress didn't require it?" UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "No."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "And the reason is simply American disagrees with the warning, doesn't it?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "We certainly do."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "You don't think they
harm smokers, so there's no reason to put any
warning on them, do you?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "We believe our product
is not injurious to health."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "As far as you
concerned -- as far as you're concerned, is the
Surgeon General simply wrong in concluding that
cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I would use the
term 'misguided.'"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Okay. If it's
misguided, then, I take it that your opinion is he's !-» ||
wrong?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "I was simply trying to
be polite about it."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Okay. But not being
polite about it, in your opinion he's wrong, correct?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Dead wrong.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Congress was wrong in requiring these warnings, correct?"
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "We do not think they're justified."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "So they're wrong?" UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "They're wrong."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH: Dead wrong. That's what their position was all along. You know, what they want to focus on in this case is they want to say, well, that doesn't apply here. They're not going to contest that Reynolds marketed to kids.
Remember the documents. In the 1980s, they were focusing on 12- to 17-year-old kids. They said, well, that has nothing to do with this case.
It had everything to do because in the 1980s they got on TV and they lied about it. He's the one -you'll see the documents. He's the one in 19-- show me the Horrigan, please, 19.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the
court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "If there was doubt, should we not be leading our children in the direction of not smoking."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "Yes. In fact, as far as we -- was -- why I say yes, the cigarette industry's position is that young people should not smoke. I mean, as long as it is an open question, and I say an open question, and as long as science continues independent research to get at the answers, then we believe that people should wait until they are, let's say, young adults and make that informed decision."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "All right."
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: "That's a very strong position that our industry does take."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH: Put up 1237, please. That's Mr. Horrigan in 1984. Strong position that they take. This is from marketing to Mr. Horrigan. To Mr. Horrigan -- the same man who just testified --MDD report on teenager smokers 14 to 17 and they're complaining because they're losing market shares.
"Hopefully, our various planned activities that will be implemented this fall will aid in some way
in reducing or correcting these trends."
Put up 1222, please.
Their internal market, their internal market study, 1982. He's on TV in '84 saying, we don't believe young people should smoke. Teenage -according to MBR, teenage and younger adults, that males are highly sensitive. And what are they focusing on, the price elasticity and the reaction of 12- to 17-year-olds. And why is that important to them? Because they realize that's their replacement market.
Folks, these people lied about everything. We showed you Browder and Superman. Remember the lady
who said, We don't pay for advertising, and then we showed you the Superman contract. That's the one where Superman was flying into the mysterious Marlboro truck during the course of the movie.
You know, their answer is, yeah, but Mickey laughed at the warnings, his wife admitted he did it, and she admitted that she and everyone else did it. What did our experts say about laughter?
Doctor -- let's go onto the next one, please.
"Do you recall Mrs. Soffer's testimony with that -- when she used that term or others used that term, he would just laugh?"
"Well, that's the way the term is used. It's used as a form of humor to diminish the seriousness of the risk. So it wouldn't surprise me that someone would laugh when they said that."
And what did Dr. Werner say on the same issue.
"And you recall that Mr. Soffer and Mrs. Soffer used to -- what word should I put there about at the warnings labels? Blanked at the warning labels. Laugh? You recall that, ma'am, don't you?"
"Yes."
"Why did they laugh?"
"Probably as a defense mechanism. We use humor as a mature defense mechanism, oftentimes when things difficult for us."
You see that people laugh or they say -they'll either laugh or they ll cry. So one is coming in here and saying it and nobody has said that Mickey is blameless. It is just amazing to me that in light of the mountains of evidence that we present, they can still come in here and say they are.
They say, Well, yeah, but you can't show that it wouldn't have mattered. I want you to think for a minute. What would have happened in 1953, 1956, 1958, 1961 if tobacco had said to the American
people, including Mickey Soffer: According to our internal studies, we have carcinogens in our cigarettes and they cause lung cancer and we can't do anything about it by current technology?
You talk about headlines. You've seen all these headlines. Think what those headlines would have been. What would happen in 1964, 1972, 1982, anytime a Surgeon General came out with one of 30 reports, if the tobacco company had stepped forward and said, You know, we have reviewed the findings of the Surgeon General and we agree.
Think how many lives could have been spent, how many families could have been spared. I mean, think about it for a moment. You've been seeing all these news broadcasts. Can you imagine the news broadcasts, what it would have been in 1964, causes cancer and tobacco agrees. Causes addiction and tobacco agrees.
Not once. That's why 400,000 people have been lost. They want to focus just on Mickey, a man just like his generation. He smoked continuously. He tried to quit and he couldn't. He was nicotine-addicted and you know it. But here's the issue. Why did they do all this? Why would they
it going? Well, I think there s a tip.
46676, please.
They're talking about addiction and they're talking about the exquisiteness of addiction. Remember, this was the conference, the Strategic Group.
"Let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they are consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied." Remember he said that's code for addicted. "All we would want then is a larger bank to carry the money to the bank."
And what were they willing to do to win? What were they willing to do, R.J. Reynolds?
2181, please.
1969, Max Crohn, Legal Department, internal document from the research department. "We do not foresee any difficulty in the event that a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports from our files." R.J. Reynolds.
Ladies and gentlemen, we know what happened with Pall Mall. We know that they double-down in the mid-'50s. They tripled-down on their advertising budgets and it worked. They continued
to deny the connection between cancer and it worked.
In 1953 and 1954, we had the one window where cigarette consumption fell off and it was falling off, and that's why they got together in New York because they had to do something about it. That's why the story came up. They said we've got to come up with a defense. And that's what they did.
And what happened? Starting in 1956, record sales per capita consumption straight -- it completely went up till 1964. Then it levels off. There was a slight dip and then overall consumption in this country continued to increase until the 1980s, capping somewhere around 625 billion cigarettes smoked by Americans every year.
And every one of those packs from 1966 forward, it had some sort of warning on it. But guess what, it wasn't just Mickey Soffer, 625 billion cigarettes were smoked because of strategy they came up with. And it worked. The strategy was lie and promote and out promote anybody.
If you have to, come up with television gimmicks by which we'll get people to smoke on TV, even after they said take smoking off or we'll promote ourselves in movies and then we'll put them on TV. There's nothing they wouldn't do to win
because in the end they had one thing that mattered to them, making more money.
Ladies and gentlemen, I -- their defense for all this really is they provided you an expert for two days that said she's never considered the effect of advertising promotion, never considered or looked at internal documents of R.J. Reynolds, never written a single peer-reviewed article about tobacco or health and history, either one of them, was
recruited by attorneys for tobacco to say everybody always knew what tobacco was lying about.
They brought you an expert who started talking about tobacco prohibition and that happened 40 years before lung cancer studies even existed. They brought you an expert who complained about a book that she didn't recognize as authoritative on cancer. She's never written one or even a chapter in one herself.
Ladies and gentlemen, once we get past that first question, this case becomes easy. He was addicted. He was addicted to cigarettes, RJR-manufactured. He smoked them for 40 years. He died of lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes.
The ones RJR made. They contained nicotine. He was addicted and he died from it.
The only thing left for you to decide, I submit, is the verdict and the damages. And for that, I want you to give the same attention to my law partner, Mark Avera, on the issue of the damages and the verdict form.
Thank you for the attention you've given to me.
MR. AVERA: Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to discuss with you this morning allocation of fault and damages of the Soffer family and the issue of punitive damages in this case.
I think we all know that the husband and father's worth is not measured by the number of days that he spends in an office or the amount of money he makes. It is measured by the smile on a child's face when Daddy comes home in the afternoon, when he is there for Cub Scouts, when he is in the stands watching the band performances. It's measured by bedtime stories. It's measured by the description of the affect the husband and father has, as described by his wife and his children.
Mickey Soffer may not have been important to R.J. Reynolds, other than as a customer who did exactly what they wanted him to do, but to Shelly and Joe and Lucy Soffer, he was their rock. He was Lucy's companion and best friend, lover. For Joe
and Shelly, he was their daddy. He was the man who was there to show them how to lead their lives and to be good citizens. He was the man whose shoes they wanted to walk in.
He was the man that told his 12-year-old son as he was dying, and surely he knew that he was dying, to be a good person. His last words were, "Son, be a good person."
At a time when Mickey was dying a horrible death and his wife and children were watching him waste away from lung cancer, this defendant,
R.J. Reynolds was continuing to whisper in the ears of Americans to just continue smoking, that if we identify anything in cigarettes that's bad, we will take it out.
To Lucy Soffer, he was the man that she fell in love with. He was the love of her life. He was a gentleman that opened doors for her, had a smile for her. He was her best friend and lover.
As you could tell from the testimony to you
describing their loss, they still suffer from that today. Lucy is lonely. She will never again hear Mickey's voice. She will never again hear a kind word or any word from her husband.
She is left with the memory of a call to 911,
the shouts of a 12-year-old little boy, of blood all over the room, of blood on the carpet, a scenario that this defendant would have to know over the decades would play out over and over and over again in the family rooms and the homes of American families.
The life of a widow like Lucy is a lonely one. When friends ask about you, How are you Lucy, how are you doing? You don't talk about the loss or the
?rieving. You say what we all say, We're doing ine. I'm fine. You don't talk about how mucn you miss your husband. It's impolite to talk about your problems or your grief. That's exactly what she's done, carrying that standard for herself and her children over the years.
For Shelly, Mickey Soffer was her daddy and she was her daddy's girl. For those of us with daughters, we have some understanding of the bond between a father and a daughter. She will love her husband, she will love her sons, if she has some one day, but Mickey Soffer will always be the first man that she was ever in love with.
He was not there for her graduation. He was not there for any one of her performances on the field of the high school. He was not there for her
graduation and her pursuit of master's degrees, postgraduate degrees, and he will never again be there if she needs him in the middle of the night when she can call him and say, Daddy, come get me.
For Joe, his dad has amplified the kind of person that he wants to be. He told you he tries to walk in his father's shoes. His memories of his father include all of the activities that we hope we have with our dad's; Cub Scouts, ball games, driving kids around. You could tell how proud he was to be Mickey Soffer's son. It was his dad's involvement in his life that made Joseph the man he is today.
Mickey told his son with his dying words to be a good person. The message was very clear: Be kind to your fellowman. There may be no greater virtue, ladies and gentlemen, than being kind to your fellowman. That is a lesson that R.J. Reynolds still has to learn.
Our society has rules. These rules recognize that if you cause a person harm or a family harm, you are responsible. You are accountable for all of those harms that you cause. Our rules require a corporation to tell its customers when it has information about the deadly qualities of their product. Our rules require accountability, not just
by Mr. Soffer, but by corporations and the people that lead those corporations as well.
A corporation who lies for decades about the safety and health effects of their product must be accountable. Our rules require that. We cannot on
the one hand say as a society we require responsibility, we require accountability, and then allow a defendant who is engaged in this type of conduct over decades to point the finger at their customer, the victim, and say he is completely at fault.
Mickey Soffer could never bring up the subject of their concealment, of their conspiracy, of their conduct, because they never admitted to it until seven years after he was dead.
I'm going to show you the verdict form in just a second. Of course, the verdict form is something that you'll take back with you to deliberate. When you allocate fault, the first question will be was Mickey addicted. In considering fault, you have to consider the nature of the fault. And on the one hand, Mickey's frailness, his inability to break the cycle of addiction is based on human frailty.
You compare that to the choices that they made over the decades. Those choices were made based on
greed, simple greed. They knew it. They knew people would die, including the fathers of young children, husbands of women, from the poison that they pedaled.
What American families needed in the '50s,
'60s, '70s, '80s and '90s was someone with courage, by someone in the tobacco industry in general, and R.J. Reynolds in particular, to simply step forward and embrace what anti-tobacco advocates were telling or trying to tell the American people, trying to shout over the din of tobacco advertising in America, and that was: It will cause cancer; it may kill you; and you will become addicted.
Let's put this in perspective. The first question is: "Was Mr. Soffer addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death?"
If you have any doubt about that question -and everybody remembers the burden of proof that His Honorable Judge Roundtree will tell you about, the tipping of the scales. If you have any doubt about that whatsoever -- and the evidence is overwhelming that Mr. Soffer was addicted -- I'll point to two things.
This is a document from R.J. Reynolds. The following pages are a chemical analysis of nicotine. That's what they call it. Baby's pacifier, reduction of stress, aggressive behavior, irritability. Reason: Nicotine. That's what they call it. Not our experts. Not any of the witnesses in this case. That's what they call it.
In opening statement, R.J. Reynolds seemed to acknowledge that at various times in his life, if not during his entire life, Mr. Soffer was addicted.
Counsel said, "The best evidence that he could quit is that he did in 1990 and never smoked again, according to his wife. And keep in mind, there's no evidence that he was any less addicted the day he put down his cigarettes and quit than any other day during the 40 years he smoked. No evidence
whatsoever that he was any less addicted the day that he did that."
Can there be any doubt in anybody's mind at this point that Mickey Soffer was addicted during his entire adult life to nicotine?
The first question on that verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, must be yes.
The second, third, fourth and fifth questions have to do with those instructions that you will
be -- you will receive from Judge Roundtree about negligence.
Were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by R.J. Reynolds Company a legal cause of Mr. Soffer's death? Was R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of Mr. Soffer's death? Was R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's agreement with others to conceal or omit material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of Mr. Soffer s death?"
Mr. Smith has already made the case for all of those. And you know from those years, 1956, the Surgeon General's Report in '64, in '88, all of those years where cigarette smoking dipped and then went back up again in response to the marketing efforts of R.J. Reynolds and the tobacco industry.
As Mr. Smith said, imagine the headlines for Mickey Soffer and millions of Americans if in conjunction with the Cancer Society, the Surgeon General and others, R.J. Reynolds had the moral courage to step forward to say, Yes, we know it has
carcinogens and it does cause cancer and it will addict you. That's a headline. It makes Americans put them down and seek help.
As to any of these questions on the verdict form, addiction, negligence, defective and unreasonably dangerous, concealment or omission of material information, cancer, folks, and addiction, is material information.
Or agreement to conceal or omit information with the intent of having a detrimental effect on their customers, take a look at the overwhelming evidence that we put on for you.
And this has to do with the allocation of fault. And I'm going to suggest to you when you get to that question, you place the majority of the fault on R.J. Reynolds because you juxtapose, you compare the human frailty of Mickey Soffer against their evil choices that they made.
Next slide, please.
The PT numbers, if you'd like to write them down, refer to the exhibit numbers which you'll have back there if you want to look at these documents. But on the one side, on our scales, R.J. Reynolds has choice by Mr. Soffer. And as we've acknowledged from the very beginning, Mr. Soffer has some
responsibility here. He didn't try hard enough,
didn t try often enough. Pick one.
First, "We cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could."
Next.
"The amount of evidence to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. The evidence challenging this indictment is scant."
Next.
"Carcinogens were found in practically every class of compounds in smoke."
Next.
"Happily, nicotine is both habituating and unique."
Next.
"Think of a cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine, a nicotine-delivery device."
That's what they sold. It's always been about addiction. It always has been; it always will be.
"A partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens."
Next.
"It has always been the holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the actual health
charge without actually denying it."
Next.
"We are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease."
Next.
"Without nicotine, there would be no sought-after physiological response."
Next.
"No one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine."
Next.
"A cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy."
Next.
"Claims that cigarettes are addictive, irresponsible and scare tactics."
Next.
"The illusion of filtration."
Next.
"Will give some smokers a psychological crutch." Tnat's the self-rationalization that Dr. Burns and Dr. Werner talked about.
"We accept an interest in people's health, paramount to every consideration in our business."
Told the public one thing, did another.
Next.
"Filter tip, color changes." Dr. Teague talking about if we did conceive a filter tip that changed color, making people believe that we were filtering stuff out, although it really did not have an effect.
Next.
"It was set up as an industry shield. The Council for Tobacco Research has acted as a front."
Next.
"We are making false or misleading statements,
1968."
Next.
"We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug."
Next.
"We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
Next.
"The fragile developing self-image of the young person needs all the support and enhancement it can get. This self-image enhancement effect has traditionally been a strong promotional theme for cigarette brands and should continue to be
emphasized."
Next.
"The TIRC was conceived as a public relations gesture and it has function as a public relations operation. The most important type of story is that which casts doubt."
Next.
"It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit that they can't break."
Next.
"Very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine. It's addictive."
Next.
"In the case of filtered cigarettes, as much as or more tar and nicotine as unfiltered."
Next.
"The dominant specifications should be nicotine delivery."
Next.
"Doubt is our product."
Next.
"Nicotine is addictive. We are in the business of selling nicotine."
Next.
"The brand must increase its share penetration
among the 14-to-24 age group."
Next.
Let us provide the exquisiteness. The only problem we'll have is having a larger bag to carry the money.
I'm going to suggest, ladies and gentlemen, 80 percent on R.J. Reynolds and 20 percent on Mr. Soffer. Now, in your deliberations, in your debate, you may ask why 20 percent? For the last two weeks you've heard about quit attempts, that Mr. Soffer quit. Maybe he didn't quit, maybe he was sneaking cigarettes. If he quits, evidence that he can quit. If he doesn't quit, they blame him for not trying to quit.
Here's the question for each of you: Show us where their quit attempts are. Where are the quit attempts of R.J. Reynolds? What's good for the goose is good for the gander.
They're going to get up and talk about quit attempts, lack of quit attempts. I challenge them to get up and tell you, We are sorry for what we did for all those years. I challenge them to acknowledge to you that they have 1 percent fault.
What quit attempts are you talking about, Mr. Avera? Show us one quit attempt where they
stood up and quit misleading American families, where they quit misleading American children, where they quit misleading American smokers, where they quit misleading the American public. Not one, not one company, not one executive had the moral courage to stand up and say to American families, Sorry, we're going to knock it off. We quit. We agree.
Not one quit attempt and no attempt to do so.
You look through those documents and you find one document where someone says, We're concerned about American health. We're concerned about American children smoking. We're concerned about American kids smoking and becoming addicted and coming down with cancer. Not one document will you find anywhere in all of these documents where they show the concern about American health. What they were concerned about was their market share and making money.
And when you allocate fault, you consider those choices to not tell us the truth against the human frailty of Mickey Soffer and his ability to beat a nicotine addiction that they wanted him to have and that they were happy that he had.
The suffering of this family only becomes cheap when there's a demand that they should be held
accountable for that conduct. You should designate an amount, ladies and gentlemen, from your experience that reflects the degree of harm that they have caused this family, for Lucy's loss of her husband, for Shelly's dad never hugging her again, for Joe and his nightmares.
Your common experience is going to come to bear on this question because there's really no right or wrong answer on what is fair to compensate this family for the harms foisted upon them by the evil choices made by R.J. Reynolds and the tobacco industry.
We suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, the sum of $5 million for Lucy and the sums of $7.5 million for Shelly and Joseph.
I'll give you a point of reference. They tell you that these sums are unfair. You compare that to the amount of money they would spend in one day marketing and peddling their nicotine delivery device to American families and American children, about $10 million.
You should award this family the full amount of their damages without any consideration of the allocation of fault. The Court, if appropriate, will make reductions as for any fault that you
attribute to Mickey Soffer.
We either are a society that follows the rules or we're not. We're a society that requires accountability or we don't. People in corporations who would lie for profit and who don't want the light of truth shown upon them, they're the ones who blame the victim.
But a reckoning is coming, ladies and
gentlemen. Accountability for a corporation that just didn't bend the rules, but shattered them.
They made their own rules. The reckoning that I'm talking about is the one entity or body in the United States who can tell them, You are accountable. That's the American jury. That's you.
There will be a question on the verdict form regarding punitive damages. The question will be: "In the circumstances of this case, state whether punitive damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company." His Honor Judge Roundtree will instruct you about punitive damages, but they are intended to punish wrongdoers or to deter others who may be so inclined to engage in that type of conduct.
Let me give you a perspective why punitive damages are warranted in this case. Consider the
perfect business model. Folks, we make a product that will addict people. It will even kill our customers.
But if they get sick and they had the audacity to file a lawsuit against us, to hold us responsible for our actions, we're going to blame them. We're going to blame them, the victims of our conspiracy. We blame the folks that we lied to. We will make choices to addicted people and kill people and we will whisper in their ears the entire time, Just keep smoking. If there's anything bad in it, we will take it out.
If we can just get them to smoke long enough, we'll get that hook into them. That's the hook of addiction, and if they smoke long enough, hopefully it will be a (inaudible), and, boy, will it be hard for them to get it out.
We're going to make choices to give our customers a psychological crutch, a self-rationale of just go ahead and continue smoking. We can't come right out and deny it. We're going to say there's a controversy; there's no proof that smoking causes cancer. We'll say just keep smoking.
We're going to make choices to market to young people, many of them as young as 12 years of age.
We're going to call them replacement smokers because without them, we don't have a future in this business. In fact, children are our future. Teens, adolescents, pre-adults, that's our future.
We know these replacement smokers will be young kids and we will make all these choices freely in an informed matter to create public entities with fancy names that tell American families that they're wrong, that the Surgeon General is hysterical and misleading the American public. We want these folks to keep on smoking.
We'll create a controversy that would not exist in the science and medical community. This will be wonderful. We will have no accountability. We'll make these choices. We'll keep them smoking. We'll spend billions of dollars in marketing to young people.
The only problem is, is that we'll need enough bags to get the money to the bank. And the best
part of this plan, the best part of this plan is if we make all these choices and we make all this money, if any of our customers has the audacity after finding out after 1999 that we didn't tell the truth and lied, we're going to blame them. We're going to use our enemy's information that they were
trying to get out into the public over all of our advertising and marketing efforts. We're going to use that information to prove that you knew, you should have known better. If we weren't telling the truth, you already knew. We're going to blame them or we're going to say they are a hundred percent at fault and we're going to prey on their choices and their inability to break the addiction cycle that we want them to be in.
Folks, is that the perfect plan or what? The most perfectly designed scam ever foisted upon the American public by an American corporation. Not a foreign entity, not a foreign power, American corporations.
Their choices were made not because a movie star told them to or an athlete told them to or because of television advertising or marketing or letters to small kids in fifth grade saying, We don't know what causes cancer. Please pass it on to your students, There's no proof smoking causes cancer.
Their choices were based on one simple word: Greed. Greed. They knew it. They continued to engage in the conduct and they knew all along that there can be no doubt that they knew scenarios,
tragedies, death just like that described to you by the Soffer family when Mickey began coughing up blood and died a horrible death, they knew that would play out in bedrooms, living rooms, American families' homes all across America for decades. Of that there can be no doubt.
There can never be a better example of why they need to be punished, why they need to be deterred. There could never be a better example of why an American corporation needs to be held accountable and punished for their conduct.
They made their choices. Mickey Soffer wasn't able to break his addiction. It has always been about addiction. Cancer is really a byproduct of addiction. If you are addicted to smoking cigarettes and cigarettes causes lung cancer, addiction to cigarettes causes lung cancer and all of the other smoking-related diseases.
Just keep on smoking. It will be okay. If there's anything bad in it, we'll take it out. It has always been about addiction and forever will be about addiction.
You, ladies and gentlemen, are the body that can say, We understand your point, R.J. Reynolds, about Mr. Soffer and his inability to quit smoking,
but you are accountable for your greed, for your evil choices and what you've done to the American public and to Mickey Soffer and misleading, the lies and the harm caused to the Soffer family.
Napoleon Bonaparte once said that ten people who speak out are louder than 10,000 people who are silent. Six people get to say something today that will speak loudly and will ring justice for the Soffer family and tell them, tney who say we have zero responsibility, you are accountable, you are accountable here, and you are accountable for your actions, so say we all.



REBUTTAL
MR. SMITH: Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to try to touch back in rebuttal on a number of issues, but I want to tell you that you can't do, and I knew they would try to get you to do is we
are not here to retry the Engle case. Now, why do I say that to you? Because really question number one on the verdict --
Please put Question Number 1.
This is -- remember I told you, I started my closing today with the critical Question Number 1, "Was Maurice Benson Soffer addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds?" Now, we know the cigarettes were the cause of his death, and we know they're R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes.
The question gets much simpler: Is the greater weight of the evidence that he was addicted? Is it a fact that he smoked for 40 years one to two packs a day for that entire time, is that evidence of his addiction? Is the fact that we brought you both a practitioner who used the Fagerstrom stain test, the CAGE test, and a person who has spent their entire life in public health, but who is a pulmonology specialist treating cancer, and he says, "I used my common sense. I used what I use in my practice of medicine." He wasn't just addicted. He was heavily addicted. That's the easy question. That's an easy question.
They would like you to put away your common
sense and experience and say that a man smoked every day of his life because they got one -- they got our doctor to say, "Well, once in a while it's possible, a rare occasion it could occur." They want Mr. Soffer to be the guy that smoked for 40 years, tried to stop, couldn't stop, tried for six weeks to stop, couldn't stop, tried for several days to stop, couldn't stop, couldn't even stop for the entirety of his Yom Kipper, and they want to you say that he was not addicted. Folks, he was addicted.
The second question is, "If such was a -- "was his addiction such a legal cause," a legal cause. I'll get to it in just a minute, but every time they kept saying "the legal cause." In the law words mean a lot. A legal cause means simply was it one of the causes? If there were multiple causes, it doesn't matter. If it was a legal cause, that is sufficient.
Now, why do I say that? Well, let's talk about -- I'm not going to go back over all the evidence, but remember all the evidence on how you get it. To be addicted, to get the nicotine, which they admit -- R.J. Reynolds has readily admitted for half a century internally is their business.
They sell nicotine, a dosage of nicotine, a vehicle of vehicle. Their words not mine.
To get it you have to get it into your lungs. Now why does it work so well? You inhale it.
Five, seven, ten seconds it's in the bloodstream, goes to the brain, ah, satisfaction. We know that. It gets to the lungs. But when it gets to the lungs, what's the downside? I want to use their words. There are some apparent -- there are some problems associated with it. Remember what they said? One is it causes lung cancer. We're in the business of selling nicotine, and it has some negative side effects. One is it causes or predisposes lung cancer because the very mechanism
of repetition gives you lung cancer.
So was that a cause? Well, we had our doctor, the pulmonologist, a man who's been in public health for 40 years and what does he say to you?
In a reasonable degree of medical certainty, the repetitiveness of his smoking caused his lung cancer. So the first question is easily answered. It's a yes.
Now, why is that so important? Because -Please put up the instructions they're going to receive.
Because once you answer that yes -I'm sorry, the Engle instruction they're going to read.
I want to show you exactly what you're going to get because it's very important. Once you answer that yes, then these become -- then Mr. Soffer becomes a member of the Engle class, that large class of people out there. Large class of people. If that's answered then he becomes a member of that class. And then the findings may not be denied or questioned. They must carry the same weight that they would have had if you determined them yourselves.
And, remember, I asked that you this on voir dire, my partner did, and you said, "Yes, I'll accept that." And the findings are that cigarettes cause several specific diseases, including lung cancer. We know that, it's admitted in this case that nicotine is addictive. We know that, that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company was negligent. We know that, they were negligent. It is a matter of law. Now, I wouldn't have to prove any specific act of negligence or we'd be retrying Engle, and that's not this kind of case. We'd be here, sadly to say, a whole lot longer than you've already been
here.
Two, next, that R.J. Reynolds Company placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. Now, they want you to say, Well, he's got to connect that there was a legal -okay, let's just be real simple about it. We know they had carcinogens in them. We know they were unreasonably dangerous. We know they knew it, and they didn't remove it. And now they say, Well, we tried, we couldn't. When did they ever tell anybody that they tried and they couldn't? No, they never said that. They said, "We'll take it out," and they never did. And they never said, "Well, we tried and couldn't really do it. "
But they put a product on the market, this is going to the law that binds you after Question Number 1, that was defective and unreasonably dangerous, did that contribute to his death? Well, of course. If it hadn't been a dangerous cigarette -- remember, we had testimony about some cigarettes that weren't dangerous cigarettes. Unfortunately, R.J. Reynolds was focused on the fact that they didn't market, they couldn't sell them. Not that they weren't cigarettes, they couldn't sell the cigarettes.
And the difficulty becomes this, they want to say that it was defective and it was unreasonably dangerous and he died from smoking cigarettes, but you've got to show the nexus, you've got to show connection. Why? That is -- we'll show you, that a legal cause, if it was a legal cause that it was a defective product and it was a dangerous product, he smoked it, they produced it, he got lung cancer, the answer to that question is very simple, yes.
The next question. R.J. Reynolds -MR. BARINGER: Your Honor, may we approach?
(The following sidebar was held outside the hearing of the jury:)
MR. BARINGER: Your Honor, this is a misstatement of the law.
MR. SMITH: I'm reading this from the instruction.
MR. BARINGER: No, no, that isn't -THE COURT: That's the finding you need to redo but for. Just put "but for."
MR. SMITH: That was his argument. He's put but for. They're going to get the whole instruction. I don't have to make his argument for him.
MR. BARINGER: All you have to do is use the
finding and -MR. SMITH: I'll correct it.
(The sidebar concluded and the following further proceedings were held:)
MR. SMITH: Let's be real simple. But for, you heard that testimony, but for that product being dangerous and defective, we wouldn't be here. If cigarettes had not been dangerous and defective and had they not put them on the market, we wouldn't be here. That's what killed him.
Next issue. That R.J. Reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. That's what the law will be if you find he was addicted. They did it. Now the question becomes: Well, yeah, but for that would he -- well, wait a second, that's when they say, "We don't want you to imagine."
Well, we have to to a certain degree only infer.
We have to use our common sense. We have to logically put things together.
If R.J. Reynolds had told the truth or had not omitted the information, it was what Dr. Burns
said.
And I want you to slide up Dr. Burns just for a moment.
I'm going to read this question. "Dr. Burns, can we ever know what any smoker" -- remember he read this to you? -- "would have done if the tobacco industry had not concealed the information as to when they knew about the dangerousness of the product or when they knew it."
Answer: "No. You can never know with
certainty what an individual would have done.
That's not the burden, it's not the certainty. All you can know is that they were denying the opportunity to act on that information.
Now, folks, that's the standard here. They concealed it. There can be no question. Was that concealment a legal cause? Well, of course, it was a legal cause. But they want to say, "Well, he never said it was" -- wait a second, folks. He never in his whole lifetime could have known what they were concealing. And they said, "Well, yeah, but there was other information out there." No. This is about the information they had. They concealed. Yeah, but he could have a got it somewhere else. He couldn't have gotten that
information. They omitted it. They concealed it. Not somebody else. Not Reader's Digest, not TIME Magazine, R.J. Reynolds concealed it.
Final point is -Go back to the instruction, please.
And then this is the next one that applies. That R.J. Reynolds agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal, they had an agreement, or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public -- now, was Mickey Soffer a smoker? Yes. Was he a member of the public? Yes. With the intention -- let's just substitute, with the intention that people just like Mickey Soffer and Mickey Soffer would rely on this information to their detriment. They wouldn't do detriment. They wouldn't do what they would have otherwise done because they didn't have the information. It's that simple.
They want to give you -- they want -- because they can't get around it, they want you to retry the Engle case. It's not my obligation. I told you that from day one. In fact, I wouldn't be allowed to.
Now, there's a couple other things I want to
clarify. They talked about tearing off the filter. And isn't it true that she testified also that he told her the reason he tore the filters off was because they tasted better like -- he liked the taste better than before. Yes. He got more nicotine from it without the filter.
Question: "Well, taste, I think in your direct testimony yesterday you said there's more to taste. There's more to taste than just nicotine; is that correct?"
There's more to taste than just nicotine. If you don't have nicotine people don't perceive it as being a good taste. And then say, "Do you know what he admitted, he enjoyed smoking." Show me what enjoyment is about, from Dr. David Burns. And is that the feeling, the feeling they get from it that they express as enjoyment, they express it as enjoyment and more specifically they express it as satisfaction. The sensation when they inhale that nicotine, it goes into their lungs and it hits their head and they say, "Oh, boy, okay, I feel
better. It feels satisfying. They feel	full and
the sense of satisfaction. Of course, he	said he enjoyed it. He did enjoy it.
Why did he enjoy it so much, because	he was
nicotine addicted. And when he got that hit of nicotine, it was an enjoyable feeling. It's a feeling that he got every day of his life for 40 years. Of course he said he enjoyed it, because he was addicted.
Ladies and gentlemen, there were several other things they touched on that I want to talk about. They say that we can't know. We can never know what the truth was.
Would you put up the chart, Demonstrative A on what happened to tobacco usage?
Let me tell you what we can know, because we're allowed to use our inference, our common sense, our logic, that which you operate by every day. We know if you watch it, cigarette smoking was flying straight up. And then in the early 50s it had a dip. It had that dip and for two years it dipped because the information was about the medicine, about the science. But as soon as tobacco doubled up on advertising and began their denial campaign, looked what happened. It continued to rise. It continued to rise exactly at the time of his lifetime. It continued to rise right up into to 1964 and the per capita consumption leveled off, but what we know is that
overall consumption actually went up.
Now, what does that tell us? Well, he told you and explained it to you. Actually liked cigarettes and filtered cigarettes, one of the down sides is they have to smoke more cigarettes. So they were now getting more people -- I mean, the same amount of people but they were smoking more cigarettes. So overall consumption was going up, as consumption began to drop slightly for males.
But what happened? I want you to go to 1999. Go over here right before 2000. Watch what happened after 1990. Right when -- consumption began to fly down per capita and overall consumption began to go down in the 1980s.
Now, what did he say? He said had they told the truth, it is my opinion -- this is a man who spent 40 years -- you could have taken that chart and moved it 30 years this way. Think of the millions of people. If we had that downward curve in the '50s or the '60s and how could it have happened. Very simple. All they would have had to say, "Is the Surgeon General is right." All they would have had to say is, "We determined we've found carcinogens and we cannot remove them." And they said, "Well, everybody knew about the
carcinogens." No. They knew the specific properties that were causing cancer. They told us in documents -- you can look at them, cancer-causing agents. They knew they had them, and they knew they couldn't remove them and what did they continue to tell people? Keep smoking. I
promise you, if we find something, we'll get rid of it. And they never did.
And what is his answer to that today? Well, we asked him. You know, what -- we tried. When did they tell the American people, We're trying to remove it, we just can't.
Folks, they come in here today and they say, "Well, what's he talking about youth smoking?"
Well, you're going to be asked a question about punitive damages. I wanted to show -- and the reason I did is we know how long they did it. I showed you a 1928 document long before Mr. Soffer was alive, by which they say, Hey, get out there guys, it's summer school. It's time to get at those prep school kids, get at those high schoolers. And I said in those days were they typically underage? Of course they were. But I went to show you -You can take this down, please.
I showed you those youth documents because I wanted you to know this is a company that continued to talk about even how they could increase their market by -- not -- they weren't talking about nicotine as a health thing. They were talking about free-basing nicotine so that it increased their share of market against Marlboro. Not about whether or not we're getting it right somehow. No, they wanted to increase their share of market.
They had a company president who in 1980 -- 1975 at Hill -- remember that document, that Hill & Knowlton, what was the thing, number one, paramount -- paramount, their words, not mine.
We've got to increase our youth smoking. We've got to increase it and they said, "Well, there's no showing that we really did anything about it."
Guys, that would be the same logic that would stand in front of you and say, "The Flinstones" was an adult program. "The Flinstones" was an adult program, the lead-in show was "Casper, the Friendly Ghost." On Friday nights they were on at 7:00 o'clock. They became a children's vitamin. Why? Because "The Flinstones" was aimed at kids. And I loved what they said about their defense of the "Beverly Hillbillies." You know, we took it off
the air. 45 percent of their audience was underage. What? So 40 percent underage was okay?
You know, they also talked to you about the damages in this case. And I want to address what they ve said in just a moment. First, I believe it is absolutely correct in one way, the wealth of R.J. Reynolds for purposes of the loss of the daughter, son, and wife, we were just trying to show where their value -- but I can tell you that's not the measure. The measure is their loss. And it will be your decision. And it's a tough one because everybody here has been 12. Every woman here was a 14-year-old girl.
Everybody has somebody. For all their warts that they said today that they had arguments about money. Welcome to marriage. But everybody has somebody that they love more than anybody and she
said, I loved him. I loved him. And the children tried to tell you what kind of dad he was. And, you know, I told you in my opening statement, he was no captain of industry. He probably was not a great man in the annals of time. He was not going to be a huge success. But he was in once place, in the eyes of his children, irreplaceable.
Everybody has to use their common sense about
this loss. Everyone has been at an age, everybody's known someone at an age, everybody's seen someone at an age, everybody's listened to these children. And, you know, I love it when they say today that somehow these kids, because their story was off by a couple of months, the idea is somehow they were not telling you the truth. You watched them, you know what kind of young people they've turned out to be.
And, by the way, if you were going to be getting the story together, it wouldn't be different, it'd be the same. That's what they remember. That's how they remember their dad. That's how bad they miss him. Imagine a 12-year-old boy holding his dad in his arms as he bleeds out. Get over that in a lifetime, how?
You know, I don't know what -- I know what R.J. Reynolds values more than anything. Since 1953, we've got a record of it. They value money, earnings, and profit. They'll do anything apparently to make sure they can market their cigarette every way they can, fight everything they can. But as I think about it, it does seem to me that there are measures of great fathers. They're there. They're there in the morning, they're there
at night, and they tell you good lessons in life and they tell you, "Do as I say, don't do as I do." And they turn out kids like those. But they never, ever got to show their dad what they became.
You know, I think it's amazing that they come in on one of their arguments, and they argue to you that there are now more former smokers. That's their big -- you know, there are more former smokers now than there are smokers. You know what, we probably could have said that a long, long time ago. There probably would be a lot of former smokers if they had just told the truth to the American people. This case in the end is about one thing, one thing only, was he addicted? Because after that it's an easy answer for you. And every company should have the obligations in every boardroom not to -- to contrive and connive a way that they can lie for 50 years to sell their product to the people they know that are the most vulnerable, the addicted and the adolescent. Those ought to be the people they try to help.
I've gone longer than I meant to. And you get it. Thank you.
