MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Your Honor,
may it please the Court.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  You know my name
is Bill Geraghty, and I represent Philip Morris USA.  And I'm
going to start by saying on behalf of myself, my partner, Stan
Davis, and Philip Morris USA, we want to thank you for your
jury service.  Our jury system depends on good people like you,
who are willing to take some time out of your schedule, out of
your life, to help us resolve a civil lawsuit like this.
We know that you-all have been paying very careful
attention to the evidence.  We know that you were very patient
during all the questioning and examination.  And believe me, I
think on behalf of all the lawyers, we know there were times
when we tested your patience during the course of the last
two weeks.  No doubt about that. 100 But all I can say is, on behalf of everybody
involved, we really appreciate it.  We know that jury service
is inconvenient, but our system of justice wouldn't work if it
weren't for people like you who are willing to sacrifice some
of their time to be here with us.
Now, we are getting very close to the end of the
case.  I'm sure that is music to your ears at this point.  And
it is almost time for you to retire to the jury room and
deliberate.  Judge Bennett has provided you with a set of
instructions and a verdict form.  And pretty soon, you'll go
back and you'll decide the issues in this case.
But before you head off to deliberate, this is my
opportunity to summarize for you the evidence that we've seen
and heard over the last two weeks.
Now, when I spoke to you in my opening statement,
which was two weeks ago on Tuesday, I told you that Mr. Byrd
would spend a lot of his time talking to you about statements
made by Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, many of which were
made 25, 30, 40, and, in some instances, more than 50 years
ago.  And we told you we would not try to defend those
statements.  Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds made statements
and had ideas that today neither you nor I would say or think.
But I also told you if that was all this case was
about, if all Mr. Starbuck had to prove was that tobacco
company executives said inappropriate things, we wouldn't have 101 spent the last two weeks here together.  But we did.  And we
did because this case isn't about all smokers.  It's not about
whether you believe people should smoke cigarettes or not.
This case is about William Starbuck, his life, and the
decisions that he made.
That's why, when you go back and look at that verdict
form, you will see that all of the questions -- all of the
questions on that verdict form ask you specifically about
Mr. Starbuck, not all cigarette smokers and not the general
public.
Now, let me say something about that finding from
this earlier class action that you heard about.  And there is
no debate about this, ladies and gentlemen.  Those findings
don't provide you with the answers to any of the questions on
the verdict form.  And that's because with your verdict, you
get to decide whether any of those findings you heard about
have any applicability to Mr. Starbuck, his life --
MR. BYRD:  Objection.  That misstates the law, Your
Honor.
THE COURT:  Well, the jurors will have to follow the
law in the instructions.
MR. GERAGHTY:  Ladies and gentlemen, you will follow
the instructions as you see them.  But you will see in the
instructions, they don't give you the answers to any of the
questions on the verdict form.  And that's because you get to decide, based on your review of the evidence, whether those
findings have applicability to Mr. Starbuck, his life, and his
decisions.  After all, that class action is over.  And this
   102
case is about --
MR. BYRD:  Objection.  Misstates the law.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. GERAGHTY:  After all, ladies and gentlemen, that
class action is over.  And this case is about William Starbuck.
He is the one who filed the lawsuit, and he is the one that now
has asked you to award him millions of dollars for his decision
to smoke cigarettes for many years.
You are the only jury who has heard the story of
William Starbuck and his life, and you get to decide the issues
in this case.  And no one else.
Now, you remember when I first addressed you in my
opening statement I told you this case was about two words:
Control and responsibility.  And we're going to walk through
all of the evidence that we've seen and heard over the last
two weeks.  And as we do that, I would ask you again to
consider the following questions as we review that evidence.
Who was in control of Mr. Starbuck's lifestyle
choices?  Who was in control of his efforts to quit smoking?
Who controlled Mr. Starbuck's motivation to quit?  Was
Mr. Starbuck addicted?  And if he was, was he someone whose
addiction was so strong, so substantial, in the language of the 103 instruction the judge will give you, that it robbed him of his
free will, that it prevented him from sustaining a committed
effort to quit on his part?
And finally, ask yourself, did Mr. Starbuck ever rely
on anything that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds said or failed
to say about the health risks of smoking?
Now, we walked through the significant events of
Mr. Starbuck's life.  And we're going to do that again in just
a few moments.  And, ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to show
you that everything I told you about Mr. Starbuck two weeks ago
in my opening has proven to be true.
We also talked about something called the sources of
evidence.  You remember that.  Mr. Starbuck and his highly paid
expert witnesses, they want you to focus on documents instead
of Mr. Starbuck himself.  We asked you to pay close attention
to the important sources of evidence:  The medical records that
were written by the doctors who treated and cared for
Mr. Starbuck; Mr. Starbuck's own testimony, both here in the
courtroom and before the trial started, in his deposition; and
the deposition testimony of his closest family members.
We asked you to pay attention to that evidence
because you now know much of it was created before the lawsuit
was ever filed, before anybody had an interest in remembering
things in a way that is favorable to the outcome of his case.
And as you saw throughout much of the trial, many of 104 the things that Mr. Starbuck told you about his cigarette
smoking were contradicted.  They were contradicted by what he
told his own doctors in his medical records, what he said in
his own testimony both before the trial and in his deposition,
and by what his family members told you.
His testimony was contradicted on key parts of the
story, for example, whether Mr. Starbuck knew smoking was
dangerous many years before he was diagnosed with lung cancer
in 1994, whether his doctors told him he needed to quit smoking
in 1986 and 1990, when you now know he was diagnosed with
cancer on those occasions.  And finally, whether Mr. Starbuck
ever really made a sincere and motivated attempt to quit
smoking at any time before 1994.
Now, I told you at the very beginning of the case,
and the judge has instructed you, that you get to decide which
evidence you choose to believe.  
Brian, could you bring the first instruction up,
please.
Judge Bennett has given you instructions.  You'll see
this, I believe, on page 7, under the section called "testimony
of witnesses."  The judge has told you that there were a
variety of things you can consider in determining the
credibility or the believability of the witnesses you heard.
And among the things the judge told you is you can
consider the interest the witness has in the outcome of the 105 case, any differences between what the witness says now,
meaning during the trial, and what the witness said earlier in
his deposition.  And you can also consider any inconsistencies
between the witness's testimony and any other evidence that
you've heard and believe.
Judge Bennett instructed you that you get to make
those decisions.  When you think about it for a moment, the
only fact witness -- the only fact witness that Mr. Starbuck
presented to substantiate his claim that he was addicted and
that he could not quit was Mr. Starbuck himself.
We brought you the testimony of his family members,
the people who knew him the best in his entire life, his wife,
his stepdaughter, and his brother, David Starbuck.  We read key
passages of their deposition testimony to you on Friday
afternoon.  And they contradicted key parts of the story that
Mr. Starbuck and Mr. Byrd want you to believe.
And the plaintiff did not bring a single witness, not
a single witness, none of his family members, to support any of
the things he wants you to believe in this trial.  Think about
that as we review the evidence.
We also brought you Dr. Ticknor.  He was the only
addiction expert you heard from who actually took the time to
interview Mr. Starbuck before the trial and hear what he had to
say before he came in here and testified to you.
So as you think about the evidence you've heard, 106 please remember that Judge Bennett has told you that you have
the power to decide whether you find each witness to be
believable or whether some of the things they said were
influenced by an interest they have in the outcome of the case.
The Court has instructed you that you can accept or
reject any testimony you hear in this case.  And that is your
job, ladies and gentlemen, and your job alone.
Now, Judge Bennett has instructed you that
Mr. Starbuck has the burden to prove that something that Philip
Morris or R.J. Reynolds said or failed to say had a direct and
substantial impact on his decisions about cigarette smoking.
And after hearing all the evidence in this case, ladies and
gentlemen, you know that William Starbuck wasn't paying
attention to anything that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds were
saying.  I think that's clear at this point.
He told you flat out -- Brian, if we can put this on
the screen.
This was his statement to you.  "I was not waiting
for them to give me information."  That's what Mr. Starbuck
told you right here from the witness stand.  "I was not waiting
for them" -- meaning the tobacco companies -- "to give me
information."
MR. BYRD:  Objection.  Misstates evidence, Your
Honor, that --
THE COURT:  Well, the jury will use their own 107 judgment about what the evidence shows.
MR. GERAGHTY:  Let me just say this right out so it's
clear.  It's your memory, ladies and gentlemen.  You sat here.
You listened very attentively and patiently.  It's your memory
of the evidence that governs ultimately.  I'm simply trying to
summarize for you the evidence that we believe you've seen and
heard over the course of the last two weeks.
Now, Mr. Starbuck and his attorneys showed you a lot
of documents.  But what they failed to show you was that any of
those documents had anything to do with Mr. Starbuck and the
decisions he made about cigarette smoking.
If we could show the next slide, Brian.
This is what Mr. Starbuck told you.  This is what he
told you.  From the top quote, he told you very clearly, he
never relied on any advertisement from a cigarette company in
making a decision to start smoking or to continue smoking.
That was Mr. Starbuck from the witness stand, ladies and
gentlemen.
He then went on and told you that before this lawsuit
was filed, he didn't recall hearing, reading, or seeing any
statements by Philip Morris that misrepresented information
about the health risks of smoking.  And he said the same thing
about R.J. Reynolds and the same thing about every other
tobacco company that you heard about during the course of this
trial.  This is Mr. Starbuck's testimony, uncontradicted by any 108 other evidence in the case.
And, of course, now, you know, ladies and gentlemen,
that that's exactly how Mr. Starbuck chose to live his life.
He told you, "I'm independent.  I'm intelligent.  I am
strong-willed."  From an early age, Mr. Starbuck knew that
cigarette smoking came with serious health risks.  But despite
those risks, he chose to Smoke for many years.  He wasn't
waiting for Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds to tell him, "You
know what?  Smoking is dangerous.  You need to quit."
His wife, his stepdaughter, his own doctors told him
many times over the years, "Smoking is dangerous.  You should
quit."
That's the evidence you heard.  But William Starbuck
enjoyed smoking.  You heard from his own expert, Dr. Cummings,
he loved smoking cigarettes.  And for many years, Mr. Starbuck
simply had no interest in quitting.  That's the evidence you've
heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen.
If we could show the testimony of his wife.  This is
from Eddie Starbuck.  We read passages of her deposition to you
on Friday afternoon.  What did his own wife tell you?  She told
you that her husband, William Starbuck, enjoyed smoking
cigarettes.  She said that she couldn't say whether he truly
wanted to quit smoking before 1994, when he was diagnosed with
lung cancer.
But the final point is the key.  She told you she 109 knew that he wasn't going to quit until he had to.  Until he
had to.  That's from his wife.  Mr. Starbuck didn't have her
come testify.  We read her deposition to you, ladies and
gentlemen.  We read her deposition to you.
MR. BYRD:  Objection, Your Honor.  Misstates facts.
Both sides had designations.
THE COURT:  Both sides did have designations.
MR. GERAGHTY:  Well, okay.
We chose to read the deposition to you, ladies and
gentlemen.  That much is clear.  We chose to read that
deposition to you on Friday afternoon.  It was one of the last
things that you heard before we rested our case.
THE COURT:  And, Mr. Geraghty, let me just clarify.
The statement that he just referred to was a
statement that the defense read into evidence.
MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you, Your Honor.  I appreciate
that.
Now, you've heard testimony from Mr. Starbuck and his
family that he was independent, that he was stubborn, that he
didn't want people telling him what to do.  He wanted to be his
own boss.  And that's how he has lived his life.  And that was
his attitude when it came to cigarette smoking.
If we could put the next slide up, please, Brian.
You heard that when his family encouraged him to
quit, these were the things that Mr. Starbuck told his wife and his stepdaughter.  "Mind your own business.  Leave me alone.  I
don't want to hear it.  I didn't pay attention because I didn't
   110
want to hear it."
He told you that being told to quit pushed him in the
other direction.  It made him less likely to actually try to
quit smoking.  That's what Mr. Starbuck told you.  
But when Mr. Starbuck was finally motivated to quit,
he did quit smoking.  You heard that he quit smoking in January
of 1995, and he hasn't smoked a cigarette in 20 years.  20
years, ladies and gentlemen.
But the important point here is that this all was
Mr. Starbuck's decision.  These are all his decisions, and his
decisions alone.
We have the right to make decisions for ourselves,
even decisions that today, with the benefit of hindsight, we
might say were not in his best interests.  We believe in free
will, ladies and gentlemen.  That is a fundamental principle
upon which our country was founded.  You have the right to make
your own decisions.  But with that right comes the obligation
to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those
decisions.
Now, we're going to walk through the significant
events you've heard about in just a moment.  But before we do
that, let me tell you a little bit about the burden of proof.
You heard Mr. Byrd mention that.  You've seen documents and 111 medical records and you've seen several days now worth of
testimony.  The plaintiff bears the burden to prove each of his
claims by what is referred to as the greater weight of the
evidence.  The greater weight of the evidence.
So what does that mean?
That means to tip the scales in his favor, the
plaintiff has to present you with more persuasive, more
reliable, and more compelling evidence than the mountain of
evidence that we presented to you over the last two weeks, the
mountain of evidence that shows that Mr. Starbuck was always in
control, that Mr. Starbuck knew that cigarette smoking was
dangerous, that Mr. Starbuck was not heavily addicted, and that
his addiction was not a legal cause of his disease.  And we're
going to walk through all of that evidence in just a moment.
And I'll point out to you that the plaintiff has failed to meet
his burden of proof in this case.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the same timeline that
I showed you two weeks ago on Tuesday, same exact timeline.
And we're going to walk through these events.  And I'm going to
show you that during the course of the trial, we've proved to
you everything we told you about Mr. Starbuck during this
trial.
Remember now, everything above this blue-gray bar
here are events that occurred in Mr. Starbuck's life;
everything below this bluish-gray bar are things that happened 112 here in the United States with respect to cigarette smoking and
health.  So let's get started.
You've heard that Mr. Starbuck was born in 1939 in a
small town in New York.  You have heard that he lived in a home
without electricity until he was about 10 or 11 years old, and
his family did not have a television until he was about
sophomore or junior in high school.  He was the oldest of
three children.
And I think there's no debate about this, ladies and
gentlemen.  Mr. Starbuck is intelligent.  He told you that.
You heard he was a good student.  He graduated at the top of
his class.  And he was an avid reader.
Now, Mr. Byrd again told you that Philip Morris and
R.J. Reynolds somehow hid that cigarette smoking was dangerous
and addictive, and that the American public didn't know that
cigarette smoking could be dangerous or addictive for the last
50 years.  Based on the evidence you've heard from Dr. Cummings
and Dr. Burns and all of the experts, you now know that is
simply not the case.
Dr. Cummings told you that it has been common knowledge in
this country, common knowledge that it has been difficult to
quit, hard to quit smoking for more than 100 years.
He told you that as far back as the late 1800s, before
Philip Morris even existed as a company, people were smoking
roll-your-own cigarettes, hand-rolled cigarettes.  He told you 113 they were smoking them, they were inhaling them, and they were
just as dangerous and addictive as manufactured cigarettes.
That's what you heard from Dr. Cummings.
If we could show the next slide, please, Brian.
The State of Florida, as you heard, banned the manufacture
and sale of cigarettes in this state as far back as 1900.
1900.  Dr. Cummings told you that one of the reasons for that
was because they were addictive.  We showed you the Florida
health notes, that's the document at the top, from June 1907,
published by the Florida Department of Health right here in
Jacksonville.
And in 1907, the Florida Department of Health said,
"Today, the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very
worst form of tobacco addiction."  And those are some of the
other documents that we showed you that talked about nicotine
being in cigarettes, that cigarettes are addictive.
Ladies and gentlemen, none of this was a secret.  This was
known before Mr. Starbuck was even born and certainly long
before he ever picked up a cigarette.
Dr. Cummings told you -- and here we are on the
timeline -- that people in this country used terms like "coffin
nails" to refer to cigarettes.  They called them cancer sticks.
They referred to cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends.
Nicotine fiends.  These were terms that were used at the turn
of the century. 114 Mr. Starbuck had heard cigarettes referred to as coffin
nails while in high school.  And later he heard the term
"cancer sticks," and he understood exactly what those terms
meant.
Later on, as we move into the 1930s and 1940s, you heard
that articles in Reader's Digest magazine and other magazines
are talking about the health risks of smoking and the addictive
nature of smoking.  Dr. Cummings told you that Reader's Digest
was the most popular magazine in this country in the 1930s,
'40s, and '50s.  As we move into the 1950s, you heard
scientific studies were published that specifically linked
cigarette smoking with lung cancer.
Dr. Burns told you that these studies were front-page
news.  Front-page news.  He told you so widely published was
this information that by 1954, the year that Mr. Starbuck
started smoking cigarettes, 90 percent of the people in this
country had heard that cigarette smoking could cause lung
cancer.  90 percent in 1954.  That was the information that was
being published leading up to the time that Mr. Starbuck first
starts to smoke.
Let's go above the blue bar here.  We're in 1950.
Mr. Starbuck told you that at the age of 10 or 11, he stole
cigarettes from his aunt, Ruth, and he was caught and punished
by his parents.  But Mr. Starbuck tried to tell you that he was
only punished because he stole and because he was playing with 115 matches.  He somehow tried to suggest to you that his parents
weren't upset that he was smoking cigarettes.  You have to ask
yourself whether you find that to be believable in light of all
of the evidence you've heard in this case.
What else did Mr. Starbuck tell you?  He told you that his
mother was a very serious Baptist lady.  She was strongly
opposed to cigarettes and alcohol.  She believed that your body
is a temple and you don't defile that temple with drugs like
cigarettes and alcohol.  She told him not to smoke and drink.
And she specifically told him not to smoke because smoking is
not good for you.
Those are all the things Mr. Starbuck told you from the
witness stand when he testified.
Now, he also told you that the leaders of his church also
told him that he shouldn't smoke.  That's what Mr. Starbuck was
being told when he was growing up in New York.  But despite
these warnings, Mr. Starbuck said he was curious.  He had
friends who were smoking cigarettes.  And in about 1953 or
1954, one of his friends gives him a cigarette.  And he tries
it.  
Around the same period of time, ladies and gentlemen, this
is when he and his friends are referring to cigarettes as
coffin nails, coffin nails, meaning every cigarette you smoke
is another nail in your coffin.  Another nail in your coffin.
Now, Mr. Starbuck also testified that he hid his smoking 116 from his parents and his neighbors.  But then he tried to
suggest to you that he smoked openly in front of his teachers.
And he said that he even walked with cigarettes rolled up in
the sleeve of his shirt.  That's what Mr. Starbuck tried to
tell you.
But remember what happened when Mr. Davis began to ask him
questions.  He then quickly told you, "Well, we would smoke in
someone's car or we would go around behind a building and
smoke."
The evidence, ladies and gentlemen, is clear.
Mr. Starbuck hid his smoking from his parents, his neighbors,
and his teachers because he knew he shouldn't be smoking.  He
knew smoking was harmful.  And he knew he would be punished if
he were caught again.
In fact, Mr. Starbuck even told you that he never even
openly smoked cigarettes in front of either his mother or his
father after he left his home at the age of 19.  That's what
you heard during the course of this trial.
Now, you heard a lot about advertising from Mr. Starbuck
and his attorneys.  But remember the quote I just told you.
Mr. Starbuck told you very clearly, he never made a decision to
start smoking or to continue smoking because of a cigarette
advertisement.
His own experts, Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, they told you
the most important influence on whether someone begins smoking 117 is whether their parents, friends, and family smoke cigarettes.
Mr. Starbuck told you that he started smoking because of peer
pressure.  A lot of people around him were smoking, including
his father and his friends.  And he was curious.
But you also heard -- and I don't have it here in the
timeline, but it was in about 1957.  You heard that in 1957,
when Mr. Starbuck was 17 or 18 years old, that his father, who
he acknowledged was a big influence in his life, quit smoking.
Mr. Starbuck would have been about 18 years old.
This is important because, by 1957, according to
Dr. Burns, there had been massive publicity about cigarette
smoking and lung cancer.  And this was the height of the
so-called conspiracy of the cigarette companies.  But that
conspiracy certainly didn't affect Mr. Starbuck's father,
because we know he quit smoking for good.
We asked Mr. Starbuck very pointedly about this.  We asked
him about his father quitting.  And Mr. Starbuck claims he
doesn't know why his father quit smoking in 1957.  He never
bothered to ask him.
The Court has instructed you that you can draw inferences
and reach conclusions based on the evidence and what your
common sense and logic tell you.
Ladies and gentlemen, your common sense will tell you that
Mr. Starbuck knew back in 1957 that his father quit smoking
because of the health risks associated with smoking cigarettes. 118 You can reach that conclusion based on the evidence you've
heard.
Now, that brings us to the 1960s.  This is the late '50s,
early '60s.  You heard that Mr. Starbuck moves to Nevada to
work with his uncle.  And then in January of 1960, he joins the
United States Air Force.  During his basic training,
Mr. Starbuck is ordered by his commanding officer to stop
smoking for three days.
Now, at this point in time, Mr. Starbuck told you that he
had been smoking for five or six years.  He was smoking about
one pack of cigarettes per day.  But he told you when he
stopped smoking for three days, he didn't experience any
physical withdrawal, no anxiety, no jitters, no irritability.
If Mr. Starbuck were truly addicted, as he and his experts
claim, you would have expected that he would have experienced
physical withdrawal.  But the evidence and what he told you is
he experienced none.  None.
Now, after basic training, Mr. Starbuck is trained in
radar and electronics.  He spends time in Alaska and Virginia.
You heard about that.
And Dr. Burns told us that he would have received an
annual physical exam from an Air Force doctor.  An Air Force
doctor.  Dr. Burns told us that all of the armed services
initiated a campaign ordering physicians in the military to
take a history from their patients to find out if they were cigarette smoking and to tell them they should quit because
they were increasing their risk of developing serious diseases
   119
like lung cancer.
Now, Dr. Burns told you he hadn't researched exactly when
that program first started.  But we know that Mr. Starbuck was
in active duty from 1960 to '64, and he was in the reserves for
the next two years until 1966.  And you now know from all the
evidence you've heard that this is a period of time when the
public health community is telling the entire country, the
entire country, about the health risks of smoking.
Now, that brings us to 1964.  And let me go to the next
page of the timeline.
In January of 1964, we know that Mr. Starbuck was
discharged from active service in the Air Force.  But then he's
in the reserves.  He begins to work for a company called
General Electric in Virginia.  So let's drop below the bar
here.
That same month, in January of 1964, the United States
Surgeon General issues a landmark report.  That report
concludes that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.  Cigarette
smoking causes lung cancer.
Mr. Starbuck would have been about 24 years old when this
report was issued.  The report was front-page news in
newspapers all across the country, including Virginia and the
military newspapers that Mr. Starbuck would have read. 120 This report was also the lead news story on every
television station.  You heard there were three stations.  Each
station carried a special program devoted to the results of the
Surgeon General's report.  And we showed you a passage of that
broadcast from CBS News with Harry Reasoner.
So every American, including Mr. Starbuck, was told in
1964, 50 years ago, that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
And this was a turning point, ladies and gentlemen.  Dr. Burns
himself told you that from this point forward, cigarette
consumption in this country has steadily declined ever since
1964.
That brings us to 1965, one year later.  Mr. Starbuck
maries his wife, Eddie Starbuck.  In 1966, they move to Florida
and he begins to work for a company called RCA.
That same year, if we drop below the bar here, in 1966,
Congress passes a law that requires a warning label to appear
on every pack of cigarettes.  Beginning in January of 1966,
every pack of cigarettes has a warning that says, "Caution:
Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."  Cigarette
smoking maybe hazardous to your health.
Mr. Starbuck would have been 26 years old when this
warning label first started to appear on packages of
cigarettes.  But Mr. Starbuck told you he saw this warning, he
understood what it meant, but he simply paid no attention to
the warning.  No attention to the warning.  He enjoyed smoking 121
cigarettes.
During the same period of time -- if we move back up above
the bar.  In the same period, he heard cigarettes referred to
as cancer sticks.  Cancer sticks.  And Mr. Starbuck told you he
understood that meant if you smoke cigarettes, you would get
cancer.  You would get cancer.  This is in 1966.
But he told you he also ignored this information.  In
fact, you've now heard that that was Mr. Starbuck's attitude
whenever he was confronted with information that cigarette
smoking is dangerous.  Mr. Starbuck told you he was interested
in current events.  He enjoyed reading newspapers and
magazines.  But he testified that he intentionally avoided
reading articles that talked about the health risks of smoking
because he, quote, didn't want to hear it.  He just didn't want
to hear it.
During the same period of time, we've told you he married
his wife, Eddie, in 1966.  You heard that Eddie Starbuck was
raised as a Mormon, was strongly opposed to cigarette smoking
as both unhealthy and impure.  And almost from the beginning of
their relationship, she encourages him to quit smoking many
times.  Many times.  That's what Mr. Starbuck told you.  She
told him that cigarette smoking was bad for his health, that
cigarette smoking is nasty, and that he needed to quit.  That's
what Mr. Starbuck told you.
But just like all of the information here, Mr. Starbuck ignored what his wife was telling him about the health risks of
   122
smoking.
Now, I want to -- I want to respond to this claim that you
heard from Mr. Byrd that somehow Mr. Starbuck switched from
unfiltered cigarettes to filtered Parliament cigarettes because
he believed the filter made them safer.
Now, during our case in chief on Friday afternoon, we read
to you a short passage from the deposition of Mr. Starbuck,
where he testified before the trial started.  And let me remind
you what Mr. Starbuck said in that passage.
He said he switched to filtered Parliaments for several
reasons.  Number one, he told you he liked the taste.  Number
two, he said that he liked to hang that recessed filter off the
end of his tongue.  He said he enjoyed doing that.  And then he
also said he liked the fact that the recessed filter kept the
tobacco away from his lips.  That's what he told you, ladies
and gentlemen.  And, in fact, that was how Philip Morris
marketed that recessed filter.  It said it kept the tobacco
away from your lips.
But then during the trial when he was being questioned by
Mr. Spragens, Mr. Starbuck told you for the first time, "Well,
you know what, I really switched to Parliaments because I
believed the filter made that a safer cigarette than the ones I
was smoking before."  That's what he told you.
But then Mr. Davis began to cross-examine him.  And very 123 quickly, Mr. Starbuck said, "Well, you know what, the truth is,
it was a long time ago.  I have no idea why I really switched
to the Parliaments.  I have no idea."
Well, what do we know for sure?  What evidence do you have
for sure that lets you know that there is no basis for this
claim that that's the reason why Mr. Starbuck switched?
Well, let's take a look at his verified worksheet.  We
explained to you that this verified worksheet was a document
that Mr. Starbuck filled out in writing under oath before the
trial started.  Mr. Starbuck was asked to identify the brands
of cigarettes he smoked and the period of time that he smoked
each of those brands.
Look at the two highlighted references.  He says he smoked
Parliament filter -- that's the second highlighted reference --
from 1960 to 1975.  Well, if you look right above that,
Mr. Starbuck also says he smoked Pall Mall unfiltered
cigarettes for -- from 1960 to 1970, during the same ten-year
period.  The same ten-year period.
If he smoked Parliament cigarettes because he truly
believed the filter made it safer, then why was he also smoking
an unfiltered cigarette at the same time for the same ten-year
period?  Ask yourselves that, ladies and gentlemen.  Like a lot
of what you've heard, it simply doesn't add up.  It doesn't add
up.
And the bottom line is, whether it's an unfiltered Pall 124 Mall or an unfiltered Lucky Strike or an unfiltered Camel or a
filtered Benson & Hedges or a filtered Parliament, they all
have the same Surgeon General's warning on them.  The exact
same language appeared on every pack of cigarettes, filtered or
unfiltered.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, that brings us to about 1970.
And we're going to drop below this blue bar here.  You've heard
that Congress changes the warning label.  And the warning label
now, as of 1970 -- this is 44 years ago -- says, "Warning:  The
Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is
dangerous to your health."
Mr. Starbuck told you again, he saw the warning, he
understood the warning.  And he simply ignored it because he,
quote, didn't want to hear it.  He didn't want to be hassled
about his cigarette smoking.
One year later, in 1971 -- you heard this from
Dr. Kyriakoudes -- all cigarette advertisements are taken off
of television and radio in this country.  There haven't been
cigarette ads on television or radio since 1971.  And one year
later, in 1972, this warning label was required to be printed
on every single cigarette ad in a newspaper, magazine, or
billboard.  That's the evidence you've heard in this case,
ladies and gentlemen.
Around the same period of time, in about 1971 or 1972,
Mr. Starbuck starts his own business as a glassblower or glass 125 artist.  I told you in my opening statement -- this is 1971 to
1972 here.  I told you in my opening statement that
Mr. Starbuck would deny this, but the evidence shows that
Mr. Starbuck did not smoke cigarettes while he was making glass
objects and figurines.  At the very end of our case, we again
read you very short passages from his brother, David Starbuck,
and his stepdaughter, Toni Powers.  And they told you -- they
both told you that Mr. Starbuck would work for an hour or two
or more at a time, and he wouldn't smoke cigarettes.
Even Dr. Cummings agreed.  Remember Dr. Cummings, ladies
and gentlemen?  He was the very first witness you heard.  So
it's been a while since you saw him.  Dr. Cummings, he
basically disagreed with almost every question I asked him, at
least the first time I asked it.  But even Dr. Cummings
testified that Mr. Starbuck didn't smoke when he made glass
objects and figurines.  He told you that he needed two hands,
one to hold the blowtorch and one to hold the molten glass.
But Mr. Starbuck not only denied what Dr. Cummings told
you, he also claimed that he only tried glassblowing early in
his career.  Well, that's not what Mr. Starbuck said in the
verified worksheet that I just showed you.  That's not what he
put in his handwritten medical questionnaire to Dr. Amgott.
But the bottom line is no matter what sort of glass work that
Mr. Starbuck did, he doesn't want to admit that he did not
smoke at work except when he took breaks.  He knows that contradicts his claim that he could not control his cigarette
   126
smoking.
The testimony of his closest family members, his brother
and his stepdaughter, shows that he controlled his smoking.
And if they would have supported his claim, don't you think
Mr. Byrd and Mr. Starbuck would have brought them here to
testify and tell you that?  But they didn't.  And we read those
passages to you on Friday afternoon.
Now, during the 1970s you heard that Eddie Starbuck
continues to encourage her husband to quit smoking.
Mr. Starbuck's stepdaughter, Toni Powers, begins to encourage
her stepfather to quit smoking at about the age of 9 or 10 in
the early 1970s.  Toni Powers later became a nurse.  When she
was younger she told Mr. Starbuck, "If you keep smoking
cigarettes, you're going to get cancer.  You're going to get
cancer."  That's what she told him in her youth.
Later on, when she becomes a nurse, Toni Powers actually
shows Mr. Starbuck a picture of the dark, blackened, diseased
lungs of a heavy cigarette smoker and compares that to the
healthy pink lungs of a nonsmoker.
And so what did Mr. Starbuck say to Toni Powers and his
wife when they told him these things?  "Leave me alone.  Mind
your own business."  He told them proudly, "I'm going to live
my life the way I want to live it."  He didn't want anybody
telling him what to do.  He didn't want anybody hassling him 127 about his cigarette smoking.
Now, Mr. Byrd suggested to you that somehow all of these
warnings and health messages were being drowned out by
statements made by cigarette companies that questioned whether
there was any connection between cigarette smoking and lung
cancer.  But the evidence you've heard in this case, ladies and
gentlemen, from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns and all of the
witnesses show that's simply not the case.
Dr. Cummings told you that millions of smokers, millions
of Americans, have quit smoking, hearing the same warnings and
health messages that Mr. Starbuck heard.  He told you from
1964, when the first Surgeon General's report was released,
until 1979, 30 million Americans quit smoking.  30 million
Americans.  That's 2 million people every single year.
These people who quit heard the same information as
Mr. Starbuck.  Many of them may have been addicted.  It may
have taken them more than one try.  They would have experienced
the same increase in nicotine receptors, the same brain
changes.  They smoked cigarettes with the same design changes,
the vent holes, the filters.  But 30 million people made the
choice to quit.  And they quit for good.
Even Dr. Burns had to admit this.  Dr. Burns told you he
gave a speech in 1975 in which he said more people in this
country know that cigarette smoking is dangerous to their
health than know the name of the President of the United 128
States.
Six years later in 1981, he said that 95 percent of people
in this country, 95 percent, are thoroughly aware of the health
risks of smoking.  That's what Dr. Burns said.  He said all of
these things many years before he was paid $4 million to
testify against tobacco companies.
But Mr. Starbuck enjoyed smoking cigarettes and had no
real interest in quitting.  All of the experts told you --
Dr. Burns, Dr. Cummings, Dr. Ticknor -- many smokers enjoy
smoking, and many smokers have no interest in quitting.  And,
ladies and gentlemen, I think it goes without saying, it goes
without saying, if you don't want to quit, you're not going to
quit.  Every single expert agreed with that principle.  And
that statement describes Mr. Starbuck's attitude up until the
time he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994.
He told you he was stubborn, he enjoyed smoking
cigarettes, he didn't want to hear anything from anybody about
cigarette smoking.  And when people encouraged him to quit, it
pushed him in the other direction.  It made him less likely to
want to quit.
Now, that brings us to the 1980s.  And I'm going to show
you the last page of the timeline now.  We're going to start
below the little bar here.
This is in 1985.  And you heard that there were a series
of rotating warnings that went on every pack of cigarettes sold 129 in this country.  One of those warnings says very clearly,
"Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may
complicate pregnancy."  This warning right on the label says,
"Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer."  This is in 1985,
ladies and gentlemen.  1985.
One year later, in 1986, you heard that Mr. Starbuck was
diagnosed with throat cancer.  Because of the location of the
cancer, the surgeon had to remove part of Mr. Starbuck's
epiglottis in order to remove the cancer.  He had part of his
epiglottis removed.  You now know that the epiglottis is the
flap in the back of our throats that prevents food, liquid, and
gastric contents from going down into our wind pipe and our
lungs.  You heard when stomach contents go down into our lungs,
the doctors refer to that as aspiration.  Aspiration.
This 1986 throat cancer and surgery to remove
Mr. Starbuck's epiglottis is important for several reasons.
First, even though Mr. Starbuck tried to deny it, his
stepdaughter told you in her deposition that his doctors told
him he needed to quit smoking.
Dr. Cummings read the depositions too.  He told you that's
what the family members said.  And even Dr. Burns said --
Dr. Burns told you there is no question in his mind that the
doctors would have told Mr. Starbuck that he needed to quit
smoking in 1986.  And Dr. Burns also told you that because of
the relationship between alcohol and throat cancer, the doctors 130 also would have told Mr. Starbuck to stop drinking.
Now, in the same period of time, you heard that his wife,
Eddie Starbuck, is very upset and concerned because her husband
has been diagnosed with cancer.  She tells her husband if she
ever catches him smoking a cigarette again, she's going to take
that cigarette out of his mouth and she's going to slap him.
That's the testimony you heard.
But you know that despite what his doctors told him,
despite what his wife and stepdaughter told him, as soon as he
is out of the hospital, Mr. Starbuck chooses to start smoking
again.
He hides it from his wife.  But she eventually sees him.
And she slaps him across the face, just as she said she would.
But Mr. Starbuck keeps smoking cigarettes; he just doesn't do
it around his wife anymore.
So for the next eight or nine years, up until about 1995,
Mr. Starbuck continues to smoke, knowing full well, knowing
full well he's taking a serious risk with his health, knowing
that he's had a brush with cancer.  But he never smoked around
his wife.
I told you, ladies and gentlemen, this case was about
control.  And the evidence demonstrates that Mr. Starbuck was
able to control his smoking and didn't smoke around his wife
for the next eight or nine years.
And as with the cigarette smoking, Mr. Starbuck denied that the doctors told him that he should stop drinking.  And he
   131
admitted during the trial, from the witness stand, that he
drinks as much as he wants.  As much as he wants.
Now, I want to be very clear about why Mr. Starbuck's
drinking is relevant.  I want to be very clear about this,
ladies and gentlemen.
We have never tried to suggest that drinking alcohol
caused Mr. Starbuck's lung cancer or that drinking makes
Mr. Starbuck a bad person.  We would never say that.
We raised it because Mr. Starbuck's decision to continue
to drink alcohol after his doctors told him to stop is yet
another example of what we've told you about him from the
beginning.  Mr. Starbuck is someone who lives his life the way
he wants to live it, no matter what anyone else says or thinks,
including his doctors.
And, ladies and gentlemen, that's okay.  He's entitled to
make that decision.  But, again, that's his decision.  That's
his decision and his decision alone.
Now, you heard that in 1990 -- I don't have the date very
clearly marked here -- but in 1990, Mr. Starbuck has a
recurrence of his cancer.  The cancer has spread to the lymph
nodes in his neck.  He has surgery and radiation.  And the
cancer is successfully removed.  He claims, again, he was told
not to quit smoking or drinking.  But based on the evidence
you've heard, your common sense, your judgment, what all the doctors have told you, you know that Mr. Starbuck was again
told by the doctors, "You need to stop smoking, and you need to
   132
stop drinking."
But once again Mr. Starbuck ignores the advice of his
physicians and he does what he wants to do.
Now, because he lost most of his epiglottis in 1986, you
know that Mr. Starbuck begins to have aspirations, aspirations
where gastric contents go down the wrong pipe and into his
lungs.  As both Dr. Frazier and Dr. Amgott explained to you and
the medical record and evidence show, Mr. Starbuck has repeated
aspirations and repeated bouts of pneumonia beginning in 1986,
all the way up to the point where he's diagnosed with cancer in
1994.
If we could show that slide, please.
These are simply excerpts from the medical record, ladies
and gentlemen.  They are all in evidence.  They are part of a
composite defense Exhibit 647.  We put all of the medical
records in evidence.  What you'll see, I told you, we don't
have records from '86, we don't have records from 1990, but we
have lots of records later in time where Mr. Starbuck tells his
doctors that he's having repeated aspirations and repeated
bouts of pneumonia that date all the way back to when he had
his epiglottectomy.  That's the last one there.  He has a
history of epiglottectomy in 1988 -- I think the doctor got the
date wrong -- which predisposes to aspiration. 133 The aspirations and pneumonias cause scarring in the
lungs, and the evidence you heard is that this type of scarring
is called pulmonary fibrosis.  Pulmonary fibrosis.
Mr. Starbuck also told you sometime after 1986 he began to
see a lung specialist, Dr. Jesup, and that Dr. Jesup treated
him for the lung problems associated with the repeated
aspirations and bouts of pneumonia.  That's the evidence you
heard, all right here.  Beginning in 1986.
Now, this brings us to the early 1990s, and we're almost
up to 1995, which is when Mr. Starbuck quit smoking for good.
So let me just take a step back for a moment.  Mr. Starbuck
told you during the course of this trial that he tried to quit
between 50 to 100 times before 1995, but he just couldn't do
it.  He just couldn't do it.
And as I told you in my opening statement, after hearing
all the evidence you've heard in the last few weeks, you now
have many reasons to question whether Mr. Starbuck ever made a
sincere effort to quit before 1995.
First, remember when Mr. Davis was asking him questions.
Mr. Starbuck admitted that what he meant by those 50 to 100
quit attempts was there were several times where he woke up in
the morning and said to himself, I'm not going to smoke
cigarettes today, but before the end of the day, he would light
up and have a cigarette.  That's what he told you, ladies and
gentlemen.  He didn't quit for a single day.  Not even 24 134
hours.
All of the experts who testified, plaintiff experts and
defense experts alike, said that if you were truly motivated to
quit, you'll make a plan.  You'll pick a date that you're going
to quit.  You remove your lighters, your ashtrays, your
cigarettes, and you put that plan in action.
Mr. Starbuck never did that at any point prior to 1995.
Second, Mr. Starbuck told you he tried to quit using
Nicorette gum and a nicotine patch.  But then he told you a
story, ladies and gentlemen, that he had never told before.
Remember again when Mr. Davis was cross examining him.
Mr. Starbuck admitted that when he was first asked about the
patch and the gum he said he used them in the 1960s and 1970s.
And you now know, ladies and gentlemen, that neither one of
those products were available in the of '60s and '70s.  They
didn't become available until much hater.
Mr. Starbuck also said he doesn't remember ever discussing
his smoking with any of his doctors.  And you know in order to
get these products he would have needed a prescription and he
would have had to have had a discussion with his doctors about
his cigarette smoking.
Well, that's when Mr. Starbuck said, "Well, you know" --
he told you the story that he got the Nicorette gum in 1984
from this mysterious friend named Susi.  He said Susi used the
Nicorette gum to quit smoking and then gave him some of the 135 gum.  That's what Mr. Starbuck told you.
He then told you that almost a decade later in 1992, that
same mysterious friend, Susi, gave him the nicotine patches.
That's what Mr. Starbuck told you.  But the story makes no
sense, ladies and gentlemen.
Mr. Starbuck told you that Susi quit in 1984.  So why
would she be giving Mr. Starbuck nicotine patches in 1992?  It
just didn't add up, ladies and gentlemen.
The evidence you heard is that his wife, Eddie Starbuck,
never saw Mr. Starbuck chewing Nicorette gum or using the
nicotine patch.  Mr. Starbuck's explanation for why he never
told his wife that he was using those products or why she never
saw him use those products makes no sense.
This is what he claimed -- this is what he said to you.
He had he didn't tell her about it because if he had told her
that he was using the patch and the gum, she would have kept on
after me day and night to keep on using them and made sure that
I was using them right.  He said, "She would have been on me
like paint on a door."
Think about that, ladies and gentlemen.  If Mr. Starbuck
really wanted to quit, if he was really motivated to quit,
don't you think it would have been a good thing for him to tell
his wife, so she could be on him.  She could say, "You know
what?  Keep trying, be committed, you can do this.  Use these
prescription medications as prescribed."  That would have been 136 a good thing.  That would have been a good thing.
But of course you know that didn't happen because they
never called Eddie Starbuck to testify.
In her deposition, which we read to you, Eddie Starbuck
was asked whether her husband really wanted to quit smoking
before 1994.  She said, "You know, I can't answer that.  I
don't know."  But she also said, "I know that he never really
wanted to quit -- or never was going to quit until he had to.
Not until he had to."
Ask yourself this, ladies and gentlemen:  If Mr. Starbuck
didn't prove to his own wife that he wanted to quit smoking,
has he proved to you in this courtroom that he really wanted to
quit smoking?  The person who knows him better than anybody in
the world?  That's the evidence you've heard in this case.
So the bottom line is that Mr. Starbuck never made a
sincere committed effort to quit at any point in time before he
was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994.  Mr. Starbuck can tell
you whatever he wants in his testimony, but the facts are what
the facts are.
And those are the facts.
Now that brings us to 1994.  You know that in December of
1994 Mr. Starbuck was diagnosed with lung cancer.  He had
surgery on January 6 of 1995.  The surgery itself was
successful.  There's no dispute about that among the doctors.
All the cancer was removed and Mr. Starbuck has been 137 cancer-free for the last 20 years.  And every single doctor did
say that Mr. Starbuck, after having the lower lobe of his right
lung removed, is cured of lung cancer.
But three days after the surgery on January the 9th,
Mr. Starbuck had another aspiration event, his heart stopped,
and he went into cardiopulmonary arrest.  And ladies and
gentlemen, we told you all that on Friday.  Dr. Frazier told
you all that on Friday.  And Mr. Byrd acknowledged that he was
wrong and Dr. Frazier did tell you all of those things.  We
told you all those thing.
Dr. Frazier told you Mr. Starbuck's heart stopped, he went
into cardiopulmonary arrest, and he had to be resuscitated.
Now, Mr. Starbuck tried to tell you he was placed into that
medically induced coma because he was experiencing extreme
nicotine withdrawal.  But every single one of the doctors,
plaintiff and defense experts alike, told you that was
preposterous.  Preposterous.  Dr. Burns, all the other doctors,
they told you they had never heard of anyone, anyone being put
into a coma due to nicotine withdrawal.  But that's what
Mr. Starbuck tried to tell you happened to him.
Because of the aspiration and the cardiopulmonary arrest,
Mr. Starbuck developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, or
ARDS, which is what we've been calling it here in the
courtroom.  You heard that many people don't recover from an
episode of ARDS but Mr. Starbuck did. 138 You heard the doctors debate what caused Mr. Starbuck's
ARDS episode and the resulting pulmonary fibrosis.  All the
doctors agree it was most likely caused because Mr. Starbuck
aspirated and then had respiratory arrest.  The dispute, ladies
and gentlemen, is whether the surgery somehow triggered the
aspiration and the later events.
We called Dr. Frazier.  He testified here on Friday
morning.  You had a chance to see him.  Through Dr. Frazier we
put all of these medical records into evidence.  We wanted you
to see them and know the sequence of events.  He told you there
are many causes of ARDS and it is rare, very rare for ARDS to
be caused by a lung surgery.
Now, the plaintiff has raised this notion, and you'll see
it in the instruction and in the verdict form, that because
Mr. Starbuck was susceptible to aspirations, that somehow makes
smoking responsible ultimately for his ARDS and his pulmonary
fibrosis.
But ladies and gentlemen, that's not the evidence you
heard, and when you have a chance to look at the instructions
yourself I think you'll see that's not what the judge's
instructions say either.
Mr. Starbuck was susceptible to having ARDS because he had
most of his epiglottis removed in 1986 and he had frequent
episodes of aspiration and pneumonia from that point forward.
That's undisputed in this case.  You know that from the medical 139 records and from what Dr. Frazier told you.  None of
Mr. Starbuck's doctors ever suggested that he was susceptible
to this ARDS event because of the cigarette smoking or his lung
cancer.  Dr. Frazier told you this ARDS event could have
happened at any time, either before or after the surgery in
1995.
Now, Mr. Starbuck stopped smoking cigarettes before he
went into the hospital for his surgery in January of 1995.  But
several months after he leaves the hospital you heard
Mr. Starbuck tell you he was curious.  He wanted to know if he
was addicted to cigarettes.  He wanted to know if he still
wanted to smoke cigarettes.  So he tried one cigarette.  He
took one puff.  It tasted awful and he put it out.
And ladies and gentlemen, I would submit to you that
Mr. Starbuck's reaction to that one cigarette 8 or 9 months
after he had surgery tells you everything you need to know
about who was in control.  Mr. Starbuck was in control.
And you know he hasn't smoked a single cigarette in the
last 20 years.  In the last 20 years.  Mr. Starbuck claims he
was addicted back in 1995.  And, frankly, ladies and gentlemen,
he claims he's still addicted today.  He told you he was still
addicted today.
So ask yourself, if that were really the case, why hasn't
he resumed smoking?
Now, let's move forward, ladies and gentlemen.  We told 140 you and all the doctors agree, Mr. Starbuck is cured of his
cancer.  But there's no question he certainly has health
problems today.  We're not denying that.  But many of the
health problems that he has have nothing to do with his
cigarette smoking or the lung cancer surgery in 1995.  You
heard from Dr. Frazier and, frankly, from the other experts,
cigarette smoking had nothing to do with his ARDS or his
pulmonary fibrosis.
Mr. Starbuck does have other health problems.  He
continues to experience episodes of aspiration that sometimes
cause pneumonia that require him to be hospitalized even to
this day.
He has peripheral neuropathy you heard about that.
Mr. Starbuck told you that is the reason why he needs to use
his scooter.
You heard that he had a bad automobile accident and has a
permanent disability from that accident that dates back to
2005.  And of course you heard that he has diabetes.  So he
does have health problems, no question, ladies and gentlemen.
And that -- this is the story that you've seen and heard ladies
and gentlemen, over the last two weeks.  That's the story.
Now, I told you that this case was about two words,
control and responsibility.  But I think we can add a third
word after what you've seen happen in this courtroom after the
last two weeks, and that word is credibility.  Credibility. We're going to walk through the questions on the verdict form,
but before I do that I want to talk about this issue of
   141
credibility.
The plaintiff bears the burden of proof on each of his
claims in this case.  And that burden of proof requires him to
bring you not just evidence, but reliable, credible,
believable, persuasive evidence.
And, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiff has
failed to do that in this case.  A famous US Senator once said,
"Everyone is entitled to his own opinion but not to his own set
of facts."
Think about that.  The facts are what the facts are.  The
judge instructed you that it is your job to assess the
credibility, the believability of the witnesses and that is
your job and your job alone.
And Brian, if we can put that slide up again.
This is the same slide I showed you at the very beginning
of my presentation.  I won't repeat all this.  But it is your
exclusive right to give the testimony you've heard the weight
that you believe it deserves, and you're allowed to take all of
these things into consideration in deciding whether you want to
believe the testimony you've heard in this case.
We've already talked about many of the things you heard
from Mr. Starbuck when we walked through the timeline, but let
me remind you of what Mr. Starbuck put in his verified 142 worksheet before the trial started in an effort to persuade
you, ladies and gentlemen, that he was addicted and that his
addiction was the legal cause of his disease legal cause).
We showed you this verified worksheet during Dr. Cummings'
testimony.  This is what Mr. Starbuck said in this lawsuit
about his smoking, knowing that he would need to prove to you
that he was addicted and his addiction was the legal cause of
his disease.  
"State to the best of your knowledge the basic facts upon
which you rely to support your contention that you are or were
addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine."  This is what
Mr. Starbuck said under oath.  "William Starbuck smoked
approximately three packs a day for about 43 years."  Three
packs a day for 43 years.  That's what he said a little less
than a year ago in the context of this lawsuit.  That means he
would have been smoking three packs a day back in 1952 or 1953.
That's what he said.  That's not, ladies and gentlemen, what he
said to his doctors.
I'm going to just put this down here so you can see them
both.
You heard what Mr. Starbuck told his doctors.  This is one
of the records from Dr. Amgott.  This is another record from
Dr. Battaglini.  Mr. Starbuck told all of his doctors that he
smoked about one pack per day for 40 years, 42 years 43 years.
This was in his own handwriting.  He wrote, "Smoking history: 143 Started age 15, quit age 55, one pack per day 40 years."  He
told Dr. Battaglini, one to one and a half packs per day for 45
years.  That's what he told his doctors in 2010.
Now let me be clear, ladies and gentlemen.  I'm not trying
to suggest that one or one and a half packs of cigarettes per
day is not enough to cause lung cancer.  I'm not suggesting
that at all.  But when you are claiming you are addicted and
you're claiming that you couldn't stop smoking and that your
addiction is the legal cause -- or a legal cause of your
disease, this is a big discrepancy.
So what was Mr. Starbuck's explanation for the
discrepancy?  He told you he lied to his doctors.  That's what
he told you from this witness stand.  He lied to his doctors
because he was ashamed that he smoked cigarettes and he was
afraid that if he told the truth, his doctors wouldn't treat
him.
But, ladies and gentlemen, think about that, he wasn't
smoking cigarettes in 2010 when he made these statements to his
doctors.  He quit 15 years earlier in 1995.  He's an
intelligent man.  His stepdaughter is a nurse.  He was treated
for cancer in 1986, 1990, and 1995.  No doctor ever refused to
treat Mr. Starbuck because he smoked cigarettes or because of
the amount he smoke.
He had no reason not to tell his doctors the truth.
But Mr. Starbuck told you he lied, so you have to ask 144 yourself when was Mr. Starbuck telling the truth?  Was he
telling the truth on the verified worksheet?  Which he prepared
for this lawsuit and which he's now asked you to award him
$10 million?  Or was he telling the truth when he spoke to his
doctors?  When he had no interest in anything other than
telling his doctors the truth so that they could properly
diagnosis and treat him?
I would suggest, ladies and gentlemen, it won't take you
long to figure that out.
The bottom line is you get to decide which testimony you
choose to believe in this case.  Let's go to the questions on
the verdict form.
THE COURT:  Can we give everybody a stretch break?
MR. GERAGHTY:  Absolutely, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Thank you.  
MR. GERAGHTY:  I'm on the home stretch here but -- 
THE COURT:  I'm sure everybody could use a break.
MR. GERAGHTY:  All right, ladies and gentlemen, I'm
going to power through this.  I know it's been a long morning,
and let me try to go through this.  
You've seen this question before, Question Number 1
on the verdict form, "Has Mr. Starbuck proved by the greater
weight of the evidence that he was addicted to cigarettes
containing nicotine on or before November 21, 1996?  The
plaintiff bears the burden of proof on this issue.  If you 145 answer no, then the case is over."
Let me remind you considering this question, the
Court has not given you a definition or a set of criteria to
use in order to determine whether Mr. Starbuck is addicted.  So
think about the evidence you've heard.  The factual evidence
presented by the plaintiff on his claim that he was heavily
addicted came from Mr. Starbuck and only Mr. Starbuck.
The evidence you heard from his wife, from his
stepdaughter Toni, and from his brother David was presented by
us on Friday afternoon.
We cross-examined both Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns to
bring out the facts about what his family members said in their
depositions when they didn't tell you about those things during
their direct examination.
We then read the passages that we thought you needed
to hear on Friday afternoon.  And as you learned, in their
testimony, each of them contradicted key parts of
Mr. Starbuck's story.
Ladies and gentlemen, these are the people that know
Mr. Starbuck better than anyone.  Better than anyone.  Don't
you think that if they were going to provide testimony that
supports Mr. Starbuck's claim that he was addicted they would
have been here and you would have seen them live and in person?
Of course you would have.  Of course you would have.
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns, the two experts for the 146 plaintiff, they told you if you smoke cigarettes on a
persistent, daily basis you were addicted.  Dr. Cummings went
so far as to say, "You smoke one cigarette per day, you're
addicted."  What kind of standard is that?  What kind of
standard is that?
You get to decide whether you think that testimony
from Dr. Cummings and Burns is sufficient or if something more
should be required in a court of law when the plaintiff is
asking you to award millions of dollars.  Keep the following in
mind, ladies and gentlemen.
Both Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns testify in many cases
just like this.  You heard all about it.  They try to help
plaintiffs like Mr. Starbuck obtain verdicts against these same
two defendants.  And both doctors have been paid a lot of money
to do that.
Combined, they've been paid between 5 and 6 million
dollars.  Those are the experts you heard from the plaintiff.
We brought you Dr. Ticknor, a psychiatrist and addiction
expert.  He is the only expert who actually interviewed
Mr. Starbuck.  You heard he conducted a three-and-a-half-hour
interview of Mr. Starbuck.  Dr. Ticknor provided you with a
real set of medical criteria to determine if Mr. Starbuck was
addicted.  It was the DSM-5.  He have showed you the factors up
on the screen.  He discussed them with Mr. Davis, and Mr. Byrd
asked him questions about that. 147 That criteria asks important questions.  Like are you
addicted if you can control when, where, and how much you
smoke?  Are you truly addicted if you quit for 8 months, you
try one cigarette, it tastes awful, and you have absolutely no
desire to smoke another cigarette?
Question number 1 is where you get to decide, based
on the mountain of evidence that we've now shown you over the
last few weeks, whether Mr. Starbuck was addicted and whether
he simply did what he enjoyed doing, what his own expert,
Dr. Cummings, told you he loved to do.  Loved to do.  So let's
focus on Mr. Starbuck's testimony.
He repeatedly claimed that he was addicted, that he
tried to quit 50 to a hundred times, but on the other hand he
couldn't describe for you one sincere effort to quit that lasts
more than 24 hours.
So when you evaluate Mr. Starbuck's testimony, that
he was addicted, bear in mind it's the plaintiff who was
telling you he's addicted, the same person who's asking you to
award him $10 million in damages.  He can't remember or won't
acknowledge things that your logic, judgment, and common sense
tell you must be.
And almost everything he told you about his so-called
addiction was contradicted by three of the people who know him
best in the whole world.
Ask yourself if that is sufficient in a court of law, 148 or do you believe actual objective evidence, tangible evidence
from a source that does not have an interest in the outcome of
the case is required.
I think the answer should be obvious.  Mr. Starbuck
has not carried his burden to prove to you by the greater
weight of the evidence that he was addicted, and your answer to
this question should be no.  Should be no.
Let's move on to Question Number 2.
Question Number 2 says, "Has Mr. Starbuck proved by
the greater weight of the evidence that his addiction was a
legal cause of his lung cancer as explained in Instruction
Number 6?"  
If you answer no to this question, ladies and
gentlemen, your verdict is for the defendants and the case is
over.  This question shows that the plaintiff has to prove more
than just that he was addicted.  The plaintiff has to prove
more than that.  He must prove by the greater weight of the
evidence that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung
cancer.
Now, the Court has given you instruction on the
concept of legal cause and, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, it
is a difficult instruction to follow, even if you're lawyer.
So let me see if I can give you an analogy to help
simplify things and help you distinguish between the concept of
medical cause and legal cause. 149 Imagine someone walks across the street and they get
hit by a bus.  The bus is the medical cause of why they were
injured.  But in order to know legal cause, you would need to
know more than that.  You would need to know things like well,
did the person cross the street when the light was green or
red?  Was the person paying attention when they crossed the
street?  Or were they texting?  Were they listening to their
iPod with earbuds in?  Did the person know that the bus came
down that street every time at the same day and yet still walk
across the street.
You need to know all of those things to know legal
cause.  Legal cause.
And in a case like this, ladies and gentlemen, the
issue of legal cause really boils down to the issue of
quitting, quitting smoking.  If you believe that Mr. Starbuck
could have quit smoking anytime, anytime he was truly motivated
to do so, then addiction is not the legal cause of his lung
cancer.
Rather it's Mr. Starbuck's decision to smoke
cigarettes for years in the face of many warnings, and his
decision not to make a motivated committed effort to quit until
after he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994.  That is the
one and only legal cause.
And ladies and gentlemen, I would submit to you that
that's the evidence you've heard in this case. 150 To answer this question you don't have to look any
further than the testimony from the plaintiff's own experts,
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns.  What did they tell you?  They told
you anyone can quit smoking.  Anyone can quit smoking.  Despite
everything you've heard during the course of this trial about
cigarettes, nicotine, the increase in nicotine receptors in the
brain, permanent brain changes, filtered, menthols, pH, all of
those things, after all of that, what did Dr. Cummings and
Dr. Burns tell you?
Brian, can you put the slide up there?
This is what they told you.  60 million Americans
have quit smoking in this country.  60 million.  Dr. Cummings
and Burns admitted to you that most would be considered heavily
addicted according to the same standards that they discussed
with you, ladies and gentlemen.
They told you that most of those people experienced
the same brain changes, the same increase in receptors that you
heard about during this trial.
And what else did they tell you?  Most of those
people quit cold turkey, without any assistance whatsoever.
This is from the plaintiffs' own experts.
They say this despite everything they told you during
their direct examination.
The nicotine in cigarettes, ladies and gentlemen,
didn't prevent those 60 million Americans from understanding 151 that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and from exercising
their free will and making a choice to quit.  And during the
course of the last few weeks, you haven't heard any evidence
that Mr. Starbuck was different.
In fact, you heard he's independent.  He's
intelligent.  He's strong willed.  Mr. Starbuck was not some
tortured smoker who was desperately trying to quit who hated
smoking cigarettes but just couldn't do it.
The truth is, that for most of his life, Mr. Starbuck
loved smoking cigarettes, and he simply had no interest in
quitting until 1994.  And you know that because that's what
Mr. Starbuck himself told you.  When people encouraged him to
quit, you already know, what did he say?  "Mind your own
business.  Leave me alone own.  I'm going to live my life the
way I want to live it."  This was how he chose to live his
life.  And we know that because that's was wife told us, the
person who knows him better than anybody.  I can't tell you she
said whether he really wanted to quit before 1994, but what she
did know was "I knew -- I knew he wasn't going to do it until
he had to."  Until he had to.
Mr. Starbuck's attorneys presented a lot of evidence
about nicotine, but the evidence shows that nicotine didn't
prevent Mr. Starbuck from appreciating that smoking is
dangerous and from exercising his free will.
Mr. Starbuck claims he was addicted, but his 152 addiction didn't force him to smoke year after year, decade
after decade.  He smoked because it's what he wanted to do.
It's what he wanted to do.
And that, ladies and gentlemen, is what this second
question is all about.  You've heard all the evidence and you
now know Mr. Starbuck was in control.  Not Philip Morris, not
R.J. Reynolds, not the nicotine and cigarettes.  The answer to
this question should be no.
Now, just a few more questions on the verdict form,
and I will put it down and you won't hear from me any further.
Now, if you decide to answer "yes" to both Question 1
and Question 2, which I don't think you will based on the
evidence you've heard, that would be a verdict for the
plaintiff, and you are deciding that Mr. Starbuck may be
entitled to receive some amount of money.  So Question 1 and 2
are the questions that determine the verdict for the defense
versus the verdict for Mr. Starbuck.
Now, I don't think you will get this far on the
verdict form, but I want to respond to some of the other
questions because Mr. Starbuck and Mr. Byrd spent so much time
on those things.
The next series of questions on the verdict form,
they'll be in Section II of the verdict form, they ask you to
determine who is responsible for Mr. Starbuck's cancer and
damages. 153 And I think Mr. Byrd said the answer to the three
questions is yes.  And based on that evidence, I don't
necessarily disagree.
The fourth question in the section is Question Number
3B, and I believe this will appears on page 3.  Let me
double-check.  It is Question 3B.  It's called "Allocation of
fault."  It appears at the top of page 3.
That question asks you, "What are the percentages of
the total fault for Mr. Starbuck's damages caused by each of
the parties to the action?"
Then there's a line for Mr. Starbuck, a line for R.J.
Reynolds, and a line for Philip Morris.  Again, I don't think
you get this far.  But if you do, it's your job to decide what
it means to take personal responsibility for the consequences
of your actions.
Mr. Byrd told you that Mr. Starbuck accepts some
responsibility, but I thought I heard 13, 14, maybe 20 percent.
Mr. Starbuck admits -- excuse me Mr. Byrd admits that
Mr. Starbuck may be responsible, but he's not willing to say
that he's 100 percent responsible for the decisions that he
made.
MR. BYRD:  Objection.  Commenting on counsel's
argumentative.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. GERAGHTY:  So what does it mean to say we're 154 taking responsibility for the consequences of our decision.
Well, let me give you a example.  I'm sure this has never
happened to any of you, but we have all probably drank alcohol
and we all may have had an occasion where maybe one day you
drank a little too much and the next day you wake up and you
have a hangover, your head hurts, your heart is pounding, can't
see straight, you feel terrible.  You stumble into the
bathroom, you wipe the cobwebs from your eyes and you look in
the mirror, and how many people say, "I'm only 20 percent
responsible for that hangover"?
No one says that, ladies and gentlemen.  No one says
that.
Because we all know that we are in control and
ultimately responsible for our own behavior.  Was there anyone
else responsible for the decisions that Mr. Starbuck made?  The
answer is absolutely not.  And that's the question you need to
ask yourself if you get this far on the verdict form.
The facts show that Mr. Starbuck got up every single
day, he made his own decisions and no one made them for him.
That's the way you know he has lived his life.
And he told you that proudly from the witness stand
during the course of this trial.
Now, again, ladies and gentlemen I don't think you're
going to get that far, but I want to talk about just a few more
questions on the verdict form. 155 These are questions -- this is under section 3,
Mr. Starbuck's fraud claims, and I just put the two questions
that I'm going to focus on here together, all right.
First question says, "Has Mr. Starbuck proved the
remaining elements of his fraudulent concealment claim against
either or both RJR and PM USA?"  And then the court references
you back to Instruction Number 10.  
The next question, Question 2A says, "Has
Mr. Starbuck proved the remaining elements of his conspiracy,
the fraudulently conceal claim, as that claimed is explained in
Instruction Number 10?"
I put these together because the questions go
together.  What these questions are basically asking you, and I
think Mr. Byrd said the same thing is, "Did Mr. Starbuck rely
to his detriment on anything a cigarette company said or failed
to say about the health risks or addictive nature of smoking?"  
That's basically what you're going to see when you go
back to Instruction Number 10 and read that.  Let me make two
quick points about these questions.
First, if you answer yes to either one of these
questions, 1A or 2A, if you answer yes, then that allocation of
responsibility question we just talked about goes out the
window and Mr. Starbuck gets to keep 100 percent of any damages
that you might decide to award.
That prior question goes out the window. 156 Second, these questions are very similar so let me
see if I can very quickly kind of explain to you what the
difference is.  Question Number 1A is asking you specifically
about RJR and Philip Morris USA, statements made by Philip
Morris and RJR.  This question is a little broader and it's
referring to statements by any cigarette company or tobacco
company.  You've heard other companies like the Tobacco
Industry Research Committee or the Tobacco Institute, so that's
the real difference between the two.
In answering these questions, ask yourself if William
Starbuck, based on the evidence you've heard, ever made any
decision about cigarette smoking because of a statement made by
a cigarette company.
You heard Mr. Starbuck testify.
If we could put the slide back up there again.
This was Mr. Starbuck's testimony.  We asked him, "You
never relied on any advertisement from a cigarette company in
making a decision to start smoking or to continue smoking?"
His answer was, "Correct."
We then asked him, "Before filing this lawsuit, you don't
recall hearing, reading, or seeing any statement by Philip
Morris USA that you claim misrepresented anything to you?"  His
answer was "no."
And he was asked the same questions about R.J. Reynolds,
the Tobacco Institute, the Tobacco Industry -- Tobacco Industry Research Committee, and he gave the same answers.
   157
He gave the same answers.
You can take that down, Brian.
The evidence is undisputed in this case.  Mr. Starbuck
told you he never read, heard, or saw any statement by Philip
Morris or any cigarette company that he claims millions
represented information about cigarette smoking and health.
That's his testimony.  It's uncontradicted in this case.
Doctors Cummings and Dr. Burns and Dr. Kyriakoudes spent
days and days going through statements made by tobacco
companies.  Most of which were from internal company documents.
Ladies and gentlemen, we're not running from those
documents.  But the evidence you've heard from Mr. Starbuck
demonstrates that none of that information had any influence or
would have had any influence on Mr. Starbuck and the decisions
he made.
How do we know that?  Well, we know that Mr. Starbuck knew
that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer many years before he
was diagnosed in 1994.  You heard it from the Surgeon General
in 1964.  He heard it from his wife.  He heard it from his
stepdaughter.  It was on the cigarette pack itself.  He heard
it repeatedly from his own doctors.
And what did he say?  "I didn't want to hear about it."
This is what he told you about the tobacco companies.  "I
wasn't waiting for them to give me information."  I wasn't 158 waiting for them to give me information.
For many years, Mr. Starbuck didn't listen to what anyone
told him about cigarette smoking -- not his wife, not his
stepdaughter, not his doctors -- so what make any of us in this
courtroom believe that he would have paid attention to anything
that cigarette companies would have said to him?  That's not
the man you've heard about over the last two weeks.
And that's why -- that's why, ladies and gentlemen, that
you should answer these questions no.  Your answer to Question
1A should be no.  Your answer to Question 2A should be no.
Mr. Starbuck made his own decisions in life.  He told you
that.  He is independent.  Intelligent and strong willed.  He
smoked for many years because he loved to smoke and he quit
smoking when he decided it was time to quit.
No one else, certainly not Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds,
made those decisions for him.
Now, I just want to speak briefly about the damages issues
then I'm going to wrap up and sit down.
The next issue is compensatory damages.  And I don't think
you're going to get to this question, but again, Mr. Byrd
talked about it.  That question asks you to determine the
amount of money that you feel should compensate Mr. Starbuck
for his lung cancer.  And I want to make sure everyone
understands this.  There is no claim in this case for medical
expenses.  There is no claim for lost wages or earnings.  You 159 heard some references to the costs of some of the equipment
that Mr. Starbuck needs because of his physical condition.
There isn't any claim for that in this case.
And I would suggest the reason for that is because from a
plaintiffs' perspective --
MR. BYRD:  Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY:  The only claim for damages in this
case is for the lung cancer, Mr. Starbuck's lung cancer, and
the pain and suffering associated with that.  And in asking you
to award a certain amount of damage, Mr. Byrd hasn't given you
any ability to evaluate that in a rational manner.
Now, when you get to this part of the verdict form,
you'll see -- this is going to be section -- I believe Roman
numeral IV, it starts on page 4, the first question,
Question 1A, actually asks you all about this ARDS episode.  So
let me very briefly talk about it.  You heard from Dr. Frazier
that the 1995 lung cancer surgery did not cause Mr. Starbuck's
ARDS and subsequent pulmonary fibrosis.  He told you that.  He
told you that.
The plaintiff has all sorts of theories about this,
but you heard no reliable evidence that the lung cancer or the
surgery caused Mr. Starbuck to develop ARDS.  And I think when
you look at the instructions the judge has given you and read
this question, you will see that he hasn't proved -- the 160 question asked you whether he proved that his bodily injury
legally caused by defendant resulted in an aggravation of an
existing disease or physical defect or activation of a latent
disease or physical defect.  It's a mouthful, no question about
it.
But the bottom line is you know that he had the ARDS
episode because he aspirated and then he had cardiopulmonary
arrest.  And you know he was aspirating and he had bouts of
aspiration going back to 1986, and you know he continued to
have bouts of aspiration long after 1995.
Now, let me talk about the amount that was requested
by plaintiffs' counsel.  You heard Mr. Byrd ask you to award
$10 million to Mr. Starbuck.  I'm not even sure what to say
about that number.  What I can tell you is based on the
evidence you've heard in this case, this isn't a case in which
millions of dollars or hundreds of thousands of dollars are
warranted based on the evidence you've heard.
I ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to use your common
sense and good judgment.  Recall Mr. Starbuck's testimony under
oath in this courtroom.  Remember the things he refused to
acknowledge to you under oath.  Remember that his testimony was
contradicted many, many times, not only by his former
testimony, by his own medical records, by the testimony of his
family members.  Think about how many times Mr. Starbuck told
you "I don't remember, it was too long ago." 161 But when it comes to the aspects of this case in
which he is asking you to award him $10 million, you better
believe he tells it to you with crystal clarity.  Crystal
clarity.
We all make our own lifestyle choices.  No debate
about that, ladies and gentlemen.  Ultimately we are
responsible for the consequences of those decisions.
The final issue is punitive damages, and you are
being asked to decide today whether or not punitive damages
should be awarded in this case.  You are not deciding the
amount.  If you were to say yes to this question, the punitive
damages should be awarded, there will be another phase of the
trial, there will be additional evidence and argument from the
lawyers, and you will have a second round of deliberations.
Any punitive damages that you would decide to award would all
go to Mr. Starbuck and only to Mr. Starbuck.
The purpose of punitive damages is to punish and
deter, not to compensate.  If you decide that Mr. Starbuck is
entitled to recover money damages, you can compensate him fully
through an award of compensatory damages.  Punitive damages are
an additional amount above and beyond compensatory damages.
The Court also instructed you that the plaintiff has a higher
burden of proof on this particular question.
This is Question Number 2A under the damages section.
It's the next to last question on page 5. 162 The burden of proof is clear and convincing evidence.
When you look at the instructions you'll see what clear and
convincing evidence means, but basically you have to be really,
really, really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate.
Let me make one last point.  Punitive damages are
only warranted based on conduct that you heard during this
trial that specifically harmed Mr. Starbuck.
This is Mr. Starbuck's case.
MR. BYRD:  Objection, Your Honor, that misstates the
law entirely.
THE COURT:  Sustained.  That's not what the jury
instructions say.
MR. GERAGHTY:  This is Mr. Starbuck's case.  It is
not a class action anymore.  It's not about other people.  As
you heard, this case is about whether the conduct you heard
specifically harmed Mr. Starbuck.  Specifically harmed
Mr. Starbuck.
And based on the evidence you've heard in this case,
there is no basis to award punitive damages.  You know, based
on what you've heard over the last two weeks, that Philip
Morris and R.J. Reynolds had nothing to do with Mr. Starbuck's
decisions about cigarette smoking.
Mr. Starbuck lived his life -- has lived his life the
way he wants to live it.  There should be no question that
punitive damages are inappropriate.  So the answer to this question, if you get this far, should be "no."  It should be
   163
"no."
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to sit down in a
moment.  And after Ms. Baker has a chance to speak to you,
Mr. Byrd will have one more opportunity to speak to you.  And
that's because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof in this
case.
And as you listen to what Mr. Byrd says -- he's
probably going to talk a lot about Philip Morris and R.J.
Reynolds and the cigarette companies -- ask yourself, what does
any of this have to do with Mr. Starbuck?  What does it have to
do with Mr. Starbuck?  A man who you now know has lived his
life the way he wants to live it.  A man who didn't listen to
anyone -- what anyone had to say.
Now, during our presentation, during, I believe it
was, the cross-examination of Dr. David Burns, we showed you a
video.  It was a video from the CBS News report from the 1964
Surgeon General's Report.  It was Harry Reasoner.  It was
January the 12th of 1964.  We showed you that clip during
Dr. Burns' testimony.
And Harry Reasoner looked out at the American public
50 years ago, and he said, "Ladies and gentlemen, in this kind
of a country, no one is going to forbid you from smoking
cigarettes, but no one is going to tell you they're safe.  The
decision, and the health that may depend on it, is up to you."   164 It's up to you.  Harry Reasoner said that 50 years
ago.  It was true then, and it's true today.  It's true today.
We enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this
country.  We have the right to make decisions that are not
always in our best interests.  And with that freedom comes the
obligation to accept personal responsibility for the
consequences, the full consequences, of those decisions.  And
frankly, ladies and gentlemen, at the end of the day, that's
what this case is all about.
Are we going to hold Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds
responsible, liable, for the decisions of an intelligent,
independent, strong-willed man who told you he's lived his life
exactly the way he wants to live it?
Based on the evidence you've heard over the last two
weeks, the answer is clear.  The evidence in this case supports
one and only one true verdict.  And that, ladies and gentlemen,
is a verdict in favor of Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.
I want to thank you so much for being attentive and
patient during my presentation here this morning and for all of
your patience over the last two weeks.  On behalf of myself and
Mr. Davis, thank you very much.


MS. BAKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it please the
Court, Mr. Starbuck, and counsel.
During opening statement, I talked to you about the
stubborn facts of this case.  And now that you've heard all the
evidence, there are really three facts, three stubborn facts,
which give you almost all the information you need to decide
the issues in this case.  And those facts don't come from
plaintiffs' experts.  And they don't come from the documents
you saw flashing up on the screen.  The facts come from
Mr. Starbuck himself.  He's the one who told you these facts
when he took the stand.
Fact No. 1, Mr. Starbuck has not smoked in nearly 20
years.
No. 2, Mr. Starbuck ignored the warnings from family,
friends, and doctors, on warning labels, and in newspapers and
magazines.
And Fact No. 3, Mr. Starbuck didn't rely on an 167 advertisement or any statement from a tobacco company in
starting or continuing to smoke.
Now, at the beginning, I also told you this case was
about choices, Mr. Starbuck's choices.  And by now, you know
that this case isn't about other smokers.  It's not about a
class of smokers.  It's not about whether cigarettes are or
should be legal.  That's not what this case is about.  It's
Mr. Starbuck's case.  And so that's why we're talking about
Mr. Starbuck's choices.
So why did you have to listen to days of testimony,
days and days of testimony that had nothing to do with
Mr. Starbuck's choices?  You had to listen to that testimony
because Mr. Byrd wanted you to get angry, he wanted you to get
angry at Philip Morris and Reynolds.
MR. BYRD:  Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MS. BAKER:  Pure and simple.  He wanted you to get
angry at the defendants and not think about how, if at all,
anything they said or didn't say, did or didn't do, had any
impact on Mr. Starbuck.
But as my father always told me, keep your eye on the
ball.  Focus on what matters.
And in this case, what matters are the facts.
Mr. Starbuck's stubborn facts.  Now, Mr. Geraghty already
thoroughly walked you through the evidence and the verdict 168 form, and I'm not going to rehash that.  But let me take just a
moment to focus on these three stubborn facts and how they'll
help you answer some of the questions on the verdict form.
Fact No. 1, Mr. Starbuck hasn't smoked in nearly 20
year.
Now, if you get to Question 2 in Section I of the
verdict form -- and Mr. Geraghty just spent a lot of time
talking to you about that -- but if you get to that question,
you'll have to decide whether addiction, not smoking, but
whether addiction was the legal cause of Mr. Starbuck's lung
cancer, whether it directly, continuously, and substantially
caused his lung cancer.
But based on what Mr. Starbuck himself told us when
he took the stand, based on what he told us, despite calling
himself an addict, addiction can't be the legal cause.
Mr. Starbuck's choices, his choice to smoke and continue
smoking for as long as he did, those were the legal cause of
his lung cancer.
Now, this morning, Mr. Byrd told you that addiction
doesn't have to be the only legal cause.  But look at
Instruction 5 carefully.  It requires that addiction be the
substantial cause.  That but for an addiction, Mr. Starbuck
would not have gotten lung cancer.
An addiction can't be the substantial cause here,
where Mr. Starbuck hasn't smoked for almost 20 years.  It's that stubborn fact again.  Remember that I asked Mr. Starbuck
about that, and I asked Dr. Cummings, and I asked Dr. Burns
   169
too.
Was an addiction so substantial that it forced
Mr. Starbuck, beyond his will, to go out and buy cigarettes and
smoke them at any point over the last 20 years?  Has an
addiction been so substantial that it forced him, beyond his
control, beyond his control, to smoke at any point since he
smoked that last cigarette nearly 20 years ago?  You know the
answer to those questions.  The answer is no.
Mr. Starbuck chooses to be a nonsmoker.  You heard
Dr. Burns tell you that very early in his testimony.
Mr. Starbuck and his decisions, his choices, those choices and
those decisions stand in between addiction and lung cancer.
Addiction can't be the direct, continuous, substantial cause of
his lung cancer.  His choices stand in-between addiction and
lung cancer.  And they always did.
So if you get to Question 2 -- if you get to
Question 2 in Section I of your verdict form, your answer must
be "no."
But if you get past this question -- and Mr. Geraghty
talked to you about that.  If you get past this question -- and
I agree with Mr. Geraghty that you should not get past
Questions 1 or 2 in Section I, but if you do, let me spend just
a moment on Questions 1A and 2A in Section III of your verdict 170
form.
And that gets us to the stubborn -- stubborn fact
number two.  Mr. Starbuck ignored the warnings from family,
friends, and doctors, on warning labels, and in newspapers and
magazines.
Mr. Starbuck's testimony was that he was independent.
You've heard a lot about that.  And I talked to you about that
in opening statement.  He's independent.  He's stubborn.  And
he didn't particularly care for people trying to tell him what
to do.  That was true in life, and it was true when it came to
his smoking.
He told you he wasn't going to be hassled about his
smoking.  And so he ignored the warnings, warnings from his
mother, warnings all around him.  Warnings from his mother,
warnings from his wife, Eddie; his stepdaughter, Toni.  Toni,
the one who warned him that if he kept smoking, he was going to
get cancer.  Warnings from his doctors.  And warnings on every
pack of cigarettes since 1966.
And when it came to the stories about the dangers or
addictive nature of smoking in newspapers and magazines, what
did Mr. Starbuck tell you?  What did he tell you?  He told you
that despite being an avid reader, he ignored those stories.
He didn't read the articles.  He didn't pay them any attention.
But you can't have it both ways, ladies and
gentlemen.  You can't say that you ignored the warnings all around you because you claimed to be an addict and then say you
had no idea -- no idea that smoking had health risks and could
cause cancer or that it was addictive.  You can't have it both
   171
ways.
Now, I'm not criticizing Mr. Starbuck.  I told you
that in opening statement.  And that is true today.
He had every right -- every right to live his life in
the way that he wanted to live it and make whatever choices he
wanted to make.
He had that right.  But you can't dig your heels in
when your loved ones warn you.  You can't dig your heels in and
put your blinders on and tell your family and your friends and
doctors to mind their own business, and then say you didn't
understand or you didn't know.
And that takes me to my third and final stubborn
fact.  Mr. Starbuck didn't rely on an advertisement or any
statement from a tobacco company in starting or continuing to
smoke.
Now, I told you in opening statement that you were
going to see a lot of ads.  And you did.  You even saw some ads
when Mr. Starbuck testified.  But there is no evidence -- no
evidence that he started smoking because of advertising or that
he continued smoking because of advertising.  And this isn't a
question of whether Mr. Starbuck remembers ads or a specific ad
or a slogan.  That's not the question.  This is about whether 172 ads mattered to him.  And they didn't.
He himself told us that when he took the stand.  He
didn't tell us that in direct examination, but when Mr. Davis
stood up and cross-examined him, that's what he told you.  He
told us that he didn't rely on ads in making a decision to
start or continue smoking.  And that's really all you needed to
hear about ads.
But that didn't stop Mr. Byrd from calling
Dr. Kyriakoudes to testify.  We all remember Dr. Kyriakoudes.
He was the last live witness that plaintiff called.  And he was
the expert who admitted that he didn't know the first thing
about Mr. Starbuck.  He had no opinions about Mr. Starbuck
whatsoever.
And so despite all that time, despite
Dr. Kyriakoudes' testimony and all the time spent on ads at
trial, Mr. Starbuck himself put that issue to rest over a week
ago, when he testified and said he didn't rely on ads.
Now, you also saw lots of documents from Philip
Morris and Reynolds, made by people that are no longer at
either company, 30, 40, 50 sometimes more --
MR. BYRD:  Objection, Your Honor.  There's no
evidence in the record at all about whether these people are
with the company or not.  It's a statement --
MS. BAKER:  It's an inference --
THE COURT:  The jury should trust their own judgment 173 about what evidence is in the record.
MS. BAKER:  Those statements were made 30, 40, 50 --
50 or more years ago.  And I'm not going to defend all of those
statements, but let me say this:  Mr. Starbuck told you from
that witness stand, he told you when he took the stand that he
didn't rely on any of those statements by tobacco companies in
starting or continuing to smoke.  He told you that.  He told
you that he wasn't waiting to hear something from a tobacco
company when making decisions about his smoking.  And we know
that he wasn't, because he was already being warned by those
that loved him and knew him best.  And he was telling them to
mind their own business.  He had all the information he needed.
He had the information he needed; he just chose to ignore it.
Mr. Starbuck also admitted that he would not have
changed -- he would not have changed his smoking habits even if
a tobacco company had said that smoking because caused lung
cancer.  He would not have changed his habits even if a tobacco
company told him that smoking caused lung cancer.
Ladies and gentlemen, there may be a smoker out there
who would have changed his habits, but we know that was not
Mr. Starbuck.  He did what he wanted, and he did it when he
wanted.  He made his own choices.  And no one, not his family,
not his friends, not his mother, not his doctors, and certainly
not a tobacco company, were going to tell him any differently.
So these questions -- these questions on the verdict 174 form come down to this:  Did Mr. Starbuck rely on something
that Philip Morris or Reynolds did or didn't do, said or didn't
say?  And you need look no further than Mr. Starbuck's own
testimony in answering "no" to both Question 1A and 2A.
Now, I'm very close to wrapping up.  But before I do,
I want to briefly address two final issues.
Like Mr. Geraghty, I don't believe that you should
get to this point on the verdict form.  But if you do, this is
my only chance to speak to you.  So if you decide to return a
verdict for Mr. Starbuck, you'll have to decide the amount of
damages.  And this is difficult for me, because, obviously, I
don't believe that Mr. Starbuck should be compensated for his
choices.  But we all feel compassion and we all wish
Mr. Starbuck well.  Compassion and good wishes, however, are
not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment.
Mr. Byrd this morning asked you for $10 million for
Mr. Starbuck's choices.  But the judge instructed you that any
award you make should be fair and just in light of the
evidence.  So if you choose to make an award -- and I don't
believe that you should -- but if you choose to do so and
compensate Mr. Starbuck for only the choices that he could
make, please do so based only on the evidence you heard using
your common sense and good judgment.
And if you get all the way through the verdict form,
you'll have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. And, again, just like Mr. Geraghty, I don't believe that you
should get that far on the verdict form.  But if you do, you
will have already fully compensated Mr. Starbuck for his lung
   175
cancer.
Punitive damages are not about compensation; they're
not about making someone whole.  They're about more money.  And
that money can only go to Mr. Starbuck.  So if you get that
far, consider that even though Drs. Cummings and Burns talked
about previously secret documents, those documents are secrets
no more.
There's public website with tens of millions of
documents available.  Anyone, not just plaintiffs' experts,
anyone can go to that website and look at those documents.  And
if the companies' position on smoking and health and addiction
throughout the years bothered you, consider that those
positions changed over a decade ago, when they admitted that
smoking caused cancer and disease and was addictive.
Plaintiff has not met his clear and convincing burden
on this question.  So if you get to Question 2A in Section IV,
your answer should be "no" to both Reynolds and Philip Morris.
Now, this is the last chance -- just like
Mr. Geraghty described, this is the last chance that I'll get
to speak with you.  Because Mr. Starbuck bears the burden in
this case, his lawyers get an opportunity to respond to us.
And because we can't respond, I would ask that one of 176 you be our advocate in the jury room when you deliberate.
You've seen how we've responded throughout this trial.  And you
know the stubborn facts.  You know what the evidence has shown.
I ask that you keep Mr. Starbuck's choices in mind and return a
verdict in defendants' favor.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for your time
and your attention.  You've been extraordinarily patient
throughout this trial.  On behalf of Mr. Isasi and our client,
I thank you for your service.  And it's been a real honor and
privilege to try this case in front of you.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Your Honor.
