MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning, everyone.
THE JURY: Good morning.
MR. REILLY: You know what? I began my openin statement by thanking you for your service, and I'm going to end my closing argument by thanking you for your service.
At the end of my opening statement I told you guys that you were going to see days of videos. Days of videos of people who were never going to say the words Lucy Mae Starr, who were going to talk about things that no one was going to connect to Lucy Mae Starr. This is only one person's case, right? This is just about one
smoker, one smoker only. And who is that? Lucy Mae Starr, right?
You guys made it through that. And then you had videotapes of people who did know Lucy Mae Starr, and you even had a deposition that Mr. Bassett and I read to you. I'm sure that wasn't easy to work through, but you made it through all of that.
So now you've heard Judge Taylor's instructions, and as I told you in my opening statement, they were going to be filled with lots of legal terms -- and they are -- and you're going to work your way through that.
What you guys have done is exactly what we hope people will do as jurors in civil litigation like this; and, that is, you've been here every day, you've paid close attention, and that's exactly what we hope you will do. So on behalf of -- frankly, I'll say on behalf of everybody: Thank you very much.
Okay. Now, what do you have to do now? Today yoi have to take -- you've heard all the evidence in this courtroom, and it's up to you guys now to figure out what you think was relevant that you heard here and put it together with the law that Judge Taylor is going to give you -- he has given you -- and he's going to hand you a copy of the instructions and the verdict form -put all that together, follow the law, take the verdict
form, and answer -- unanimously answer the questions oi the verdict form as you see fit to answer them. And that's what you are duty bound to do, and I know you will do it.
Okay. Now, I told you in my opening statement that virtually all of the evidence in this case was set.
Set because it was all on videotape, right? And it was.
It was.
And I said I have confidence that when I bring out the demonstratives, the boards that I showed you, like the timeline of Mrs. Starr's life, that I would be able to use that same timeline when it came time to give you my closing argument because we knew what all the evidence was going to be. We knew how Mrs. Starr livei her life, right? We knew that.
And so sure enough, I'm going to use the same -many of the same demonstratives. Hopefully I'll use them a little quicker, but I'm going to use the same demonstratives, many of them that I used in my opening statement, and I'm going to supplement them with other demonstratives that help identify the evidence that came in during the course of the trial of the case. Okay?
All right. Now, what did this case turn out to be about? Well, I used this demonstrative in my opening statement. The first one I showed you when I said:
What's this case really about? This case is really about who was in control of one smoker's life, and that's Lucy Starr. Lucy Mae Starr.
Who was in control of Lucy Mae Starr's lifestyle decisions -- lifestyle decisions, including, of course, how she was going to deal with cigarettes: Was she going to begin smoking, continue to smoke, quit smoking or continue to smoke for however long she wanted in her life?
Did Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds have some role -- some role in her decisions about how she lived her life? Some significant, some legal role? We'll talk about that more in a minute.
And I said when you knew the answers to those questions, then you would be able to determine who, if anybody, had responsibility in Mrs. Starr's life, for how she lived it, other than Mrs. Starr.
All right. And, you know, I said that -Mr. Anderson is sitting over here. In his opening statement -- you remember I had a timeline, he had a timeline; you remember that? You may not remember th far back, but he did. And he had a timeline that had three layers to it. There was a layer up here that was about Mrs. Starr. There was a layer in the middle of about what was eoine on in the United States about
smoking and health. There was another layer that talked about the tobacco industry and what it was doing, right?
And when I gave you my opening statement, he said: Oh, you can't tell. It's an incomplete story if you don't have all three layers. Right?
And I got up and I said: You know what? Let's see whether they connect the dots between Mrs. Starr an anything that cigarette companies were saying or failing to say about the health risks of smoking.
Now, you listened to Mr. Patacca give his entire opening statement -- closing argument. Sorry; his closing argument. How often did he refer -- first of all, did he use that timeline? Heck no. Second of all, how often in his closing argument did he refer to Lucy Starr? Hardly at all.
And where did he make a connection between anything that Lucy Starr lived and Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds? Nowhere. Nowhere.
When I -- when I gave you my opening statement, I said -- I suggested to you -- because that's all I can do is suggest to folks -- what you might look for as the evidence came in the case. Right? Because this is about Lucy Starr, I suggested to you that you might be interested in who was in control of her lifestyle choices. Listen for evidence that -- is she someone who
chose to smoke against everybody's advice? Everybody' advice when she first started smoking from the very beginning? Did she continue to smoke because she enjoyed it?
Now, Mr. Patacca said -- he basically said, Sure, she enjoyed smoking. There is no question, Ladies and Gentlemen. She loved smoking. There was testimony i this courtroom -- I'm going to show it to you in a minute -- there's no question that Lucy Starr loved to smoke. No question. And he's acknowledged it in his closing argument.
Was she compelled to smoke due to addiction? Compelled to smoke. You see, that's why it's important to actually go through the instructions with you, because the plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case, and they have to prove more than -- and we'll talk about whether she was or wasn't addicted in a little bit -- but they have to prove more than -- if you conclude, and it's all up to you whether she was addicted -- they have to prove that it was not something that was part of why she smoked. They have to prove that it was what we call a but-for reason why she smoked. And I'll show you that in a little bit.
Did Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds control her decisions? I suggest that you look for evidence about
all of that.
I suggest that you see if anybody -- see if anybody else was in the mirror every day when Mrs. Star woke up and decided how she was going to live the day, just like all folks do. Just like all folks do.
Was Mrs. Starr someone who could have quit? I'll go over that in just a minute. That's not in dispute.
Did smoking become a pleasurable part of the very fabric of her life? Think about how Mrs. Starr lived her life. Think about her employments. Think about -think about what she did for a living. Think about what she did for pleasure.
Was she intelligent? Was she informed?
Did she have specific experiences demonstrating the health risks of smoking?
You know, Mr. Patacca didn't even mention the things that went on in Mrs. Starr's life. He complained about what it was that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds didn't say to the American public about the health risks of smoking in the '70s, '80s, and '90s. You have to watch that kind of stuff, because whatever he complains about, look at what's going on in Lucy Starr's life.
Look at it. And I'm going to walk through the timeline. Undisputed evidence in this case.
Mr. Patacca talked about advertising. She could
name the jingle for LSMFT. She could name the jingle for Winston: Winston taste good (snap snap) like a cigarette should. Was there anybody that came here and said that drove Mrs. Starr to do a doggone thing? Anything? One thing?
Well, Marlboro country. She thought the Marlboro man was handsome. Did anybody come here and say tha she smoked against her will because she liked the Marlboro man? Come on. Come on.
I said that those words control and responsibility wouldn't appear on the verdict form, and they don't.
They don't. So what I'd like to do now is just walk through the verdict form with you and show you the actual questions you're going to be asked and suggest to you -- cover what I think the evidence was.
Of course, you guys remember what the evidence wa: because you're the -- you're the judges of the evidence in this case, but here's the first question: Was Lucy Mae Starr addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her death?
You know, that's actually two questions at once, isn't it?
The first question is: Was Lucy Mae Starr addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And I think instead of a comma, we can put a period rieht there
because you have to answer that question first.
If you conclude that Lucy Mae Starr wasn't addicted, then just do what it says for you to do. If your answer to question 1 was no, and you would answe the question no, then you proceed no further except to sign and date this verdict form and return it to the courtroom.
So what's the second half of the question? What's the second question? If so, was her addiction a legal cause of her death? And we'll cover that in just a minute.
But let's look at the evidence about whether she was addicted or not.
Judge Taylor is not going to -- doesn't give you an instruction on how to determine whether or not Lucy Mae Starr was addicted or not. There is no instruction to that effect. So you guys have to decide for yourselves: What's our standard? What's our test for determining if she was addicted? You guys have to decide whether she did or didn't meet it, whatever you decide is the standard.
Now, did we have testimony on this issue? Sure.
We have two people that came in here and testified abou Mrs. Starr specifically. And who were they? They brought Dr. Tonia Werner; we brought Dr. Jonathan
Rosman. Both of them were psychiatrists.
Both of them reviewed the same material: All the depositions and all the medical records in this case. And they both utilized this book, The Diagnostic and Statistic Manual of Mental Disorders, and the section, in particular, on substance dependence, to make their determinations.
Now, before they got to that, they agreed on a number of points, some very important points in this case.
Put this up here.
They agreed right out of the box that not all smokers are addicted, not even all smokers of lots of cigarettes over a period of time. No debate about it. They both agreed that just because somebody smokes a pack a day, two packs a day for 20, 30 years, that doesn't tell you whether or not somebody's addicted. You have to know more.
So just because Mrs. Starr smoked -- and there's no question she smoked lots of cigarettes over a long period of time -- that doesn't answer the question.
People smoke for enjoyment. Well, you heard Mr. Patacca basically admit that here in his closing argument, and there is no debate about it. People smok because it's a pleasurable thing to do.
Here's a huge one: All smokers can quit. All smokers can quit. In fact, both Dr. Werner and Dr. Rosman both agreed Mrs. Starr could have quit.
Nicotine provides pleasure to smokers, addicted or not. There's no question that nicotine -- he showed you a -- Mr. Patacca showed you a little section out of an old document from Brown & Williamson or somebody. 1 it said: Nicotine satisfaction. There is no question, Ladies and Gentlemen, that nicotine provides pleasure, but that doesn't mean that everybody that smokes cigarettes that contain nicotine are addicted.
Smokers don't have to be addicted to enjoy smoking. They all agreed. Both of these experts agreed on every point I'm telling you about.
Mrs. Starr only made two serious quit attempts in her 40-plus-year smoking history. And you know what? To say two, you have to give credence to the story that Mr. La Pointe gave you about how six months after Mrs. Starr and he met in the mid-'80s, that he went out and bought a box of nicotine patches over the counter. Remember that? And he said: Oh, we wore them for ten days and then we took them off.
But Dr. Rosman said, and Dr. Werner agreed, you couldn't buy nicotine patches in the '80s. They weren't available until September of '91 by prescription. And
Dr. Rosman told you: You know what? You couldn't bu them over the counter until the year after Mrs. Starr died.
So what do you do with -- with that, quote, serious quit attempt? What do you do with that? And Dr. Rosman said, You know what? I can't make up the facts. I can't make them up.
So I don't know what to do with that. I'll leave that -- he put that in your lap. He said: I will leave that to the discretion of the jury.
Each of those two experts agreed that Mrs. Starr enjoyed smoking for various reasons. For various reasons.
What did she enjoy about it? Taste. She enjoyed the sociability, smoking with her friends. She enjoyed smoking with her coffee in the morning. She enjoyed smoking with beer in the afternoon. Remember Mr. Chamberlain said: We would have cigarettes and be at six o'clock when we went fishing -- 6:00 a.m. early fishing.
Did Mrs. Starr enjoy smoking? Sure. Sure. It went along with the fabric of her life.
Did she enjoy smoking with her customers and friends in the bars that she owned? Sure. Sure, absolutely. No question about it.
All right. So now, what's the answer to question 1? Well, Dr. Rosman and Dr. Werner both usei this -- remember there was a seven-prong test that they used. I'm not going to put it up. It will take too long to go through it all.
Dr. Werner said: Oh, absolutely. Dr. Werner was the psychiatrist who really doesn't have any board certification in addiction, either psychiatry or medicine. She's the one who sent out those solicitation letters to all the lawyers who are members of the Florida Bar saying: Hey, hire me, and I promise to exceed your expectations when I come and testify.
She's the one who said -- I asked her a trick question when I said: Doctor, isn't it true that you, whenever you come testify in cases like this, that you always find the smoker addicted?
She said: Well, that's a trick question.
I don't think there was anything really tricky about that.
Dr. Rosman is board certified in addiction psychiatry. He's been recognized by his peers as being -- having expertise in this area.
Okay. Dr. Werner went through the seven criteria, and she said she meets all of them save one. But think back. How much detail did Mrs. -- did Dr. Werner have
about the specifics of Mrs. Starr's smoking life?
The next question is: Yes. Dr. Rosman said she may have been; she may not have been. It's very difficult to know because there's so much conflicting information in the stories of the people who -- who's depositions were taken in this case, plus there is conflict with what I know is truth about, for example, the Bud La Pointe quit attempt in the mid-'80s.
So, okay. You guys decide whether or not you think Mrs. Starr was addicted or not.
If you think she was not, then stop right there, answer the question no, and you proceed no further.
All right. Now, on the possibility that you think that she was addicted, you have to answer the second, and it's much more difficult. It's a much greater burden for plaintiff to prove in this case. And what is that?
Well, here's the actual instruction, because Judge Taylor does give you an instruction on how to tel whether or not, if she was addicted, her addiction was -- here's the operative phrase -- a legal cause of her death.
And, yes, I told you in my opening statement that legal cause is a complicated concept. Mr. Patacca said it's not, but, frankly, look at all this language. All
these legal terms. Let's just read it.
Addiction is a legal cause of death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributes substantially producing the death so that it can be reasonably said that, but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred.
Just rolls off your tongue, doesn't it? Not really. It's complicated, but let me point out to you what this is really about.
For addiction to be a legal cause of death, it has to either directly, in natural and continuous sequence, it has to produce this death. Or if it's going to contribute with something else, it has to contribute substantially to cause the death.
Now, we actually define how substantial that has to be. How substantial is that? It's so substantial that, but for the addiction to cigarettes, she wouldn't have gotten lung cancer and died. That's how substantial it has to be.
Now, what does that mean? What does that mean? Frankly, what that means is that the addiction has to have been so strong that Mrs. Starr, were it not for addiction, would have stopped smoking, given up all th pleasure that she derived from smoking -- that they
acknowledge that she received -- quit smoking, and qui for good in time to avoid getting her lung cancer.
That's the burden that they have. The addiction was so powerful she, frankly, couldn't stop.
Now, what was the evidence? What was the uncontroverted evidence in this case, in this courtroom about whether or not Mrs. Starr could stop?
Well, here's the exact quote from their addiction expert, Dr. Werner. I asked her specifically: But you believe Mrs. Starr could have quit like everybody else?
And the answer was: I believe that -- I -- I don't believe that there's anybody who can't quit smoking. It just takes a lot for some people and for some people it's much more difficult.
That's a yes there, Ladies and Gentlemen. That's a yes.
Dr. Rosman was a little more explicit, a little more complete.
I asked him: All right. Let me ask you.
Regardless of whether she was or was not addicted, wa Mrs. Starr always able to quit smoking if she had been sufficiently motivated to quit, and quit for good, quit forever?
I believe so, yes.
That's true whether she was addicted or not?
Yes.
And would that have been true in the '40s when she began smoking?
Well, sure. It would have been any time that she was sufficiently motivated to quit.
So regardless of which decade, '40s, '50s, '60s,
'70s, '80s, '90s, it would have been true any time?
Yes.
Undisputed, Ladies and Gentlemen. But there's more. But there's more.
There is the admission that Mrs. Blundell has made in this case. And what is that? Plaintiff has admitted that Mrs. Blundell has admitted that Lucy Mae Starr -and talks in terms of negligent acts or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of her efforts to quit smoking were a partial legal cause in combination with the acts and omissions from the defendants of her death.
Well, what does that all mean? That means that they've admitted that she could quit and quit in time to avoid getting her lung cancer. That's what all that means.
So both experts agreed that she could have quit, and Mrs. Blundell has admitted that she could have quit Quit in time to avoid getting her lung cancer.
Can she possibly satisfy this requirement of being a but-for cause of death in this case? And the answer is, indisputably, no.
That was their burden. I don't have -- the defendants don't have a burden of proof in this case, only the plaintiff does.
All right. If you're convinced by the indisputable -- undisputed evidence in this case that, whether she was addicted or not, even if she was addicted, her addiction wasn't the legal cause of her death, then you answer this question no and you proceed no further and date this verdict form and return it to the courtroom.
That's your job.
Did Mrs. Starr enjoy smoking? You bet. Who said so? Who said so? Everybody. Everybody that addressed the subject said so.
Here's Wilbur Sargent. This is a direct quote.
See these little lines? This is right out of the transcript that the court reporter creates.
Do you believe she enjoyed smoking in general?
I believe the way she smoked she enjoyed it.
Her own daughter, sister of the plaintiff.
I said: Do you know if your mom had a favorite cigarette of the day, the one that she enjoyed the most?
No. She enjoyed them all.
Do you know if your mom ever used smoking as a method to relax herself?
Yes.
Here's her friend and former business partner,
Vincent Chamberlain: I think Lucy loved to smoke, and don't think it interfered with her life.
Question: When you say you think Lucy loved to smoke, is that based on your observation of her?
Yes.
And here was their Dr. Werner, their expert. I asked her: But of everybody in the depositions that you read, everybody who addressed the subject said Mrs. Starr enjoyed smoking, didn't they?
The answer was: Yes. That was their perception, that she enjoyed it. Yes.
What did she enjoy about it? During the course of the testimony from a variety of sources, you learn that she learned to -- she liked learning to inhale. She loved the flavor, the taste. We heard taste multiple times. She liked trying different brands. She liked the calming effect.
Remember daughter Debbie said that she had a whole collection of lighters? It was -- she enjoyed having the accessories of smoking.
She liked -- she enjoyed smoking with her coffee and ice water in the morning, smoking and drinking beer
at the bar, or going fishing.
And Dr. Rosman summed it up by saying: You know what? Her whole environment was one of enjoying smoking.
We have pictures of her -- which I'll show you in a little while -- of her smoking, drinking in her bars, playing pool. And you've seen her videotape at the end of her life. You will see that again this afternoon -or this morning. Sorry.
Is there any question that Mrs. Starr enjoyed smoking? There is none.
All right. So that leaves us with what your answer to this first question is going to be, and if you answer no, then you go no further and that ends your work. Okay.
Now, on the possibility that you think that's not right, you think that the answer to this is yes in spite of all that evidence, then you have to go on. And you have to go on to this next series of questions.
I'm going to cover the whole verdict form, because I have no idea where you guys are going to end up; all right?
But here in the next three Questions -- I hope
that's not too small for everybody. Okay.
Question 2 says: State whether Lucy Starr's -Lucy Mae Starr's smoking of each defendant's cigarette; containing nicotine was a legal cause of her death.
Now, that's not the same as a medical cause.
We've already agreed that smoking -- smoking cigarette by Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds caused her to get lung cancer and die, but you have to decide whether tha was a legal cause, and we'll talk about that in a minute.
State for each defendant whether the concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects of an addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a legal cause of Lucy Mae Starr's death.
Again, legal cause. Legal cause. And then it says: State for each defendant whether the agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking and the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of Mrs. Starr's death.
Now, why are these things worded this way? They're worded because of the findings by another jury in the Engle case, but they don't create any liability on the part of Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds in this case. That's only for you to decide.
But in each one of these questions, there's a requirement that you determine that something Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds said or did or failed to say or to do was a legal cause of Mrs. Starr developing her lung cancer and dying. That that's why she either began to smoke or continued to smoke, because of something that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds either said or did or failed to say or do.
They have to show -- and this is -- you were told that legal cause is easy. You get three instructions on legal cause just for those three questions. You get a -- you get a different legal cause instruction for every one of those questions. And they are very densely worded. But let me just sum them all up.
You're going to have these -- I won't take the time to go through each one right now, but they basically talk in terms of -- where is this word reliance. Relied -- there it is -- that requirement of Lucy Mae Starr relying on statements by Philip Morris o R. J. Reynolds to make decisions regarding her smoking That's the key to each one of those questions, really.
So here's a little diagram -- I showed you this in my opening statement -- to help you understand this concept of legal cause.
In order for something that Philip Morris or R. J.
Reynolds did to be a legal cause of Mrs. Starr getting lung cancer and dying, there has to be a direct connection, you know? Here it is. She has to have relied on tomorrow statement. Well, in order to rely on a statement, you've got to hear it, right? There has to be a direct connection.
Was there any evidence in this case that Mrs. Starr saw or read some statement by Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds? None. Not one.
Was there any evidence in this case that Mrs. Starr acted in any way, in any way, in connection with anything that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds either said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking or the addictive nature of smoking? Nothing. Not one shred of evidence in this case.
But it wouldn't have been enough for Mrs. Starr to have just seen or heard it. It would have had to have a substantial impact on her; in other words, it would have had to have been the reason -- a substantial reason, a but-for reason why she began to smoke or continued to smoke or didn't quit smoking. That's the burden that they have in this case.
That's a huge burden, especially when you can't show even any contact. Yeah, she saw ads. You want t know the real contact? Yes, she saw ads. There's no
question she saw ads. But did anybody come in here and testify that Mrs. Starr did anything -- she either began smoking or continued to smoke because of an ad? Again her will, she -- there is no evidence to that effect in this case.
Is there a direct connection between Mrs. Starr and Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds? Yeah, there is. You know what it is. Starting in 1975 or '6, when she buys the bar and she has a cigarette machine, there's a direct connection between Mrs. Starr and Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds. And what is it? She's selling -we were told that those cigarette machines were stocked with the most popular cigarettes of the day. That means they had to contain some Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds cigarettes, right?
So what's the connection? The connection is she's selling Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds cigarettes.
That's the connection.
All right? I think -- and I'm going to do this, hopefully, a lot more quickly than I did in my opening statement.
I think it would be helpful in answering these questions if we walk quickly through the timeline of Mrs. Starr's life so you can see whether there is any question between Mrs. Starr and Philip Morris and R. J.
Reynolds, and to see what levels of awareness Mrs. Starr had every step along the way regarding the decision she was making to smoke.
We know that she is born into a family of smokers, right? Her parents smoked. Most of her siblings smoked. But we have no idea why she began smoking. N one came here and testified why Mrs. Starr began smoking. Nobody.
So the plaintiff has the burden of proving that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds had some substantial effect on her beginning smoking, but there is no evidence to that effect. None.
All right. I'm not going to talk to you about what's going on in America regarding smoking and health and that sort of thing. Mr. Bassett is going to talk to
you about that.
What we do know is that from the earliest time that we know about her smoking, we know she's being tol don't smoke. Don't smoke. She's being told by her mother. She's being told she's going to -- I think the language was that she would get her hind end beat. And that she did, by her mother, because she was caught smoking. And she'd steal cigarettes from her mother's pack, run down to the recreation center where she'd hide smoking down there as well. Hide smoking down there as
well.
Wilbur Sargent says she was told a million times smoking was bad for her, but she smoked anyway.
As a matter of fact -- this is Wilbur Sergeant's testimony -- he was asked: Do you believe there was anything you could have done or said that would have changed Lucy's mind about cigarette smoking?
I don't think so.
Why not?
This is Lucy Mae Starr. She just didn't want to hear it. That's the type of person she was. She didn't want to hear what you have to said about anything that she'd done.
That's all right. You know what? This is not a criticism of the decisions that Lucy Mae Starr made. This is her life; her life to live. But it's also her body, right? Her body.
Okay. Let's quickly go to the '50s. Lucy Starr making adult decisions about how she's going to live he life. Even though she's 14 years old, she decides she's going to get married. Against her mother's wishes, she marries Larry Starr, a smoker. They enjoy smoking together. Adult decision: Having her first child in '51. Adult decision: Second child in '53.
I'm not going to go through all of this, but here
is an important thing to think about. In your instructions, you're going to see that the conspiracy that they're talking about doesn't even begin until December of '53 or Jan of '54 thereabouts. Well, how long has Lucy Starr been smoking before that even begins?
Well, if she's -- we don't know exactly how old she was when she started smoking, but if she was 10, 11, 12, 13, she's been smoking for either five, six, seven years before this conspiracy even begins. So did the conspiracy have something to do with Mrs. Starr beginning smoking?
That's why there -- you know, that's why it's important to not just be critical of Philip Morris or critical of R. J. Reynolds. You've got to make -that's why the law requires that you've got to make a connection. You've got to make a connection. And there can't be one. Its impossible for there to be one.
All right. Do we know what Mrs. Starr knew about the health risks of smoking in the '50s? No, because nobody talked to her about it. Is there any evidence in this case? They have the burden of proof. Is there any evidence that she was influenced in any way by somethin that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds said or failed to say? There's the witness stand. Here's the video.
There was none. None at all.
And was there evidence that if Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds had said in 1964, We agree with the Surgeon General, that Mrs. Starr would have all of a sudden quit smoking? Now, come on. Was there any evidence like that in this case?
In fact, you know that in 1961, Theresa came home as a 5th grader and told her mother, I saw this lung at school. Right? I saw this lung at school. Did her mother say, Oh, my gosh. I don't believe it? Did her mother say, That can't be true? No. There's no evidence like that.
1963. Actions speak louder than words. You know what happened. This is Lucy Mae Starr's story. You haven't heard it in the closing argument yet.
1963 is when the plaintiff in this case got caught smoking. And what happens? Her mother takes her dow to the store, buys a cigar, sits her down, and makes her smoke it -- makes her smoke it until she gets sick -- to convince her daughter never to smoke. Is there any way that Mrs. Starr doesn't understand that smoking comes with a health risk when she acts like that?
Debbie Starr, the plaintiff's sister, said: You know what? We saw the Surgeon General's report in '64. The packs got their first warning in '66. Debbie
recalls her parents saying everything is bad for their health, and they were laughing. You know, you get to do that if you want to. It's not a criticism of you, but you have to decide for yourself how you're going to live, right? You've got to decide for yourself.
Mr. Patacca said, Well, but she was watching some controversy and said that's a bunch of malarky, and he drew all these conclusions from that. Yet nobody said what she was watching on TV. What show was on, what wa being discussed, or what position she thought was malarky. Whatever it was.
But what else did her sister say in her deposition that you saw? Debbie said that: By the time the late '60s or early '70s rolled around, my mother knew -- this is in connection with the Airpax quit. You remember the Airpax where she worked, and she said all the ladies decided to quit one day for a couple of hours? Not a serious quit. But Debbie was asked: Do you know why she wanted to quit?
It's not good for you. Okay.
Plus they showed -- I think that was in the later '60s or early '70s that they showed that smoking cigarettes can cause cancer. That's where her mother was. You know, you've got to go with what's actually going on in Mrs. Starr's life, right? This is
undisputed question.
As it falls in my lap.
'70s. Does Mrs. Starr know that smoking comes with a health risk? Absolutely.
You remember, Debbie said: Our dad, Larry, had a major heart attack.
Is it 1970 or early '70s, I forget which, but a major heart attack. And Mrs. Starr attributes it to his smoking. She tells him he's got to quit, but Mrs. Starr makes no effort to quit. She doesn't want to quit.
Is there any way that Mrs. Starr doesn't know, in light of this incredibly impactful experience -- how -how much more impactful do you need? That's the sam year that the warnings change on the pack that say the Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
You know, the idea that if Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds had said: Yeah, we agree. Put it on a pack of cigarettes. Yeah, we agree -- that somehow Mrs. Starr would have acted differently. Is that a little silly at this point? Truly?
The advertising he talks about on television -gone as of Jan of '71. '72, that warning goes on the pack. They meet the Chamberlains in '73. They buy the pub in '76. That's the same year -- or maybe it's '75.
'76 is when Mr. Starr -- I'm sorry -- Mr. Chamberlain develops his heart condition, comes back to the bar, an tells everybody: The doctor told me to quit. I quit, and my chest feels so much better. Right?
Mrs. Blundell said: My mother didn't really want to buy the bar. She wasn't enthusiastic about it.
But she was. Here's the Chamberlains talking about it: What was -- what was Lucy's response to the proposal from Mark and Flo about selling the bar?
She said: As I remember, she jumped all over it with both feet. She was very happy about it. She said, I can get the $5,000 from my mother.
It was actually said that Lucy jumped in with both feet, and she was excited about the possibility of opening the bar?
Yes.
And her's his wife. She was there for the negotiations: Was Lucy excited about opening the pub
Very, uh-huh.
All right.
You know, from the testimony in this case, that when she's operating the bar, people hear her talk abou cancer sticks and coffin nails and nicotine fits. It's all in the evidence and it's undisputed.
What does Mrs. Starr say to people when they tell
her she ought to think about quitting? You heard this from the plaintiffs own sister: KMA. You know what that stands for. And then mind your own business. Sh lights another cigarette. And she tells Bud La Pointe, when he suggests that she quit with him, no thanks.
Mr. Patacca talked about lower tar light cigarettes, you remember that?
The only testimony in this case -- he said there was some sort of fraud about that. The only testimony in this case about Mrs. Starr smoking light cigarettes and why she smoked them is right here.
Here is the plaintiff's sister: Do you know why your mother tried the Marlboro Lights?
Flavor.
Flavor? Did she ever tell you she liked the flavor of Marlboro Lights?
She didn't have to.
Okay. You just knew that?
Yes.
Here's Bud La Pointe, her closest companion for the last ten years of her life: Okay. Did she ever say she enjoyed Marlboro cigarettes?
Yeah. She did like them.
Okay. Did she say what she liked about them?
The flavor.
How about the Marlboro Lights? Did she ever say she enjoyed them?
She liked those better. They were not as harsh.
There's nothing in here about she thought she was smoking a safer cigarette or something like that.
Flavor less harsh. There it is. That's the whole story.
Virginia Slims. That was interesting because here was Debbie Mae's testimony about Virginia Slims: Is i fair to say that you -- and that you never talked to Lucy about cigarette brands?
That's fair. The only thing she said was she didn't like my Virginia Slims, and that's what I smoked at the time.
So she told you one time that she didn't like Virginia Slims?
Yeah.
Okay. You know about the bar bet with -- with Barney and Ernie.
Does Mrs. Starr really want to quit? Is she being compelled against her will to continue to smoke by addiction? Or is she making bar bets about stopping?
Let's go to the '80s.
Can she quit when she wants to? Sure. Here's Lance Proctor who says she quits for two or three
months.
We asked the doctors about that. We said: What does that tell us?
They said: Well, nicotine is out of your system in hours, 24 to 48 hours. After that, if you're going to have withdrawal symptoms -- some do; some don't -you're going to have withdrawal symptoms, you're going to have them for -- they're going to be most severe, most difficult for the next several days. They're going to taper over the next two or three weeks. So it isn't going to be nicotine that's bringing her back smoking at the end of the two to three months that she quit smoking according to Lance Proctor.
I don't really need to talk about this any more.
You know that here in '84 she sells the Four Way Pub. Shortly after that she buys the Orange City Junction. She renovates it, renames it, and operates it just the same.
In that -- in those two bars, she sells beer, she sells wine, she sells cigarettes, right? That's how she makes money.
What does she advertise? When you look in these pictures -- here are pictures of her -- does she enjoy owning and operating these bars? Absolutely. Is there any question about it? Absolutely. Does she enjoy
smoking with customers in the bar and drinking beer? Sure. Does she enjoy smoking and drinking beers and playing pool? Sure. Here are her daughters. There she is.
This is -- when I say the fabric of her life, this is the fabric of her life. This is how people decide how they're going to live, right?
Everybody makes these decisions for themselves.
People were specifically asked: Did Mrs. Starr ever say that she was influenced by anything that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds said? Did she even hear about it?
Do you know in your mom ever heard of the Tobacc Industry Research Committee?
I don't know what she thought.
This is Debbie Starr-Allen.
Are you aware of your mom ever hearing about the Council For Tobacco Research?
No, I'm not aware of it.
Okay. Are you aware of your mom every hearing of the Tobacco Institute.
No.
Do you know if your mom every spoke directly with an employee of any tobacco company?
No.
You're not aware of that?
No. I'm not aware of it.
I'm sorry the print is so small. I'm sorry. I am standing in front of it.
Okay. Are you aware of your mom ever receiving any written material directly from a tobacco?
No, I'm not aware.
Other than advertisements, are you aware of your mom ever hearing any verbal statements from any one o these tobacco companies?
No, I'm not aware.
Are you aware of your mom ever hearing something called a Frank Statement?
He didn't put it up the first time. She never said she saw it: No, I don't remember that.
Here is Bud La Pointe, her companion for the last ten years: Did Mrs. Starr ever say to you that she relied upon any oral or written statement by a tobacco company to continue smoking or to continue to smoke?
I'm sorry if I'm going too fast.
No.
Did Mrs. Starr ever assert the tobacco companies misrepresented anything to her?
No.
Did Mrs. Starr ever assert to you that a tobacco
company concealed anything from her?
No. No. No.
It's undisputed in this case.
Here is the '90s.
You know she sells the pub, the Orange City Junction, and takes various jobs -- sorry.
You know she's diagnosed with -- oh, by the way, there's a medical record that says that she had the patch in September of '91. But what she learned -because she had a cold. She went to the doctor, she go an antibiotic, some Keflex, and as soon as her cold was over, what did she do?
There was Debbie Starr Allen telling you what she
did.
Do you know what prompted your mother to try th< water filters?
She wanted to quit smoking. It was not good for you.
Okay.
When she had a cold, it would hurt her lungs.
Uh-huh.
That's when she always wanted to quit; when she had a cold.
So getting sick is what prompted it?
Yes. She didn't get sick too often.
When she got better, would she decide she didn't want to quit then?
Yes.
These are the decisions you get to make, right?
These are the decisions you get to make.
Here's the last one. This is Bud La Pointe. It was asked of him: From the time she was diagnosed unt the time she passed away, do I understand she never -you never heard her blame the tobacco companies for he illness?
No.
All right. So with all of that, is there any evidence in this case that Lucy Mae Starr relied on statements by Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds? The answers to all these questions are no. And if you answer them all no, then even if you've answered the earlier question yes, the answer here -- your direction is that you stop, sign the verdict form, and that's your -- that's the end of your responsibilities here.
Now, I said I was going to walk through the entire verdict form, and I am. If somehow, in spite of all of that, you answer any of those question yes, then you have to go to this question, which is: Please state for each party the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of Lucy Mae Starr's death that you charge to R. J.
Reynolds, Philip Morris, and Lucy Mae Starr.
Now, you have to ask yourself -- this is -- this is the man-in-the-mirror question. When Mrs. Starr gets up in the morning and she looks in the mirror and she's deciding how she's going to live her life. Am I going to drink beer? Am I going to smoke cigarettes? How am I going to live my life? What's my job going to be? What's my profession going to be? What's my employme: going to be? What am I going to do for a living?
Is there really and truly anybody else in the mirror? You get to use your own common sense; you get to use your own experience to answer this question.
Is there anything other than 100 percent of responsibility on the person who wakes up and looks in the mirror? This is the question of whether or not Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds are really in the picture, in the mirror in the morning.
I leave this to your sound discretion as well, because if you get here -- I don't think you're going to get here, but if you get here, you have to assign percentages of responsibility. And, again, down here, if you get here, you've got to assign a dollar amount.
Mr. Patacca said a million dollars. Well, you have to figure out a number -- if you get here. And, again, I leave that up to your -- I should tell you that
there's no claim here for medical expenses or funeral bills or anything of that nature. That's not happening. Okay.
The last question that you're asked, if you get here, only if you've answered question 3 or 4 -- 3 or 4 yes, you have to answer this question:
Under the circumstances of this case, state whether, by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages are warranted against each defendant, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds.
In a nutshell, Ladies and Gentlemen, there are two key factors here -- three key factors. First, you would have had to have determined that those questions shoul have been answered yes, which there is absolutely no evidence to support questions 3 and 4. None. None in this case. Those are whether she relied to her detriment on something that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking.
See, this question would require that you punish -- you seek to punish for something that the defendants did that harmed the plaintiff, Mrs. Starr. You may only punish a defendant only for those harms suffered by the plaintiff as a result of her death which were caused by the defendants' punishable conduct.
So it has to be something, again, that Mrs. Starr actually experienced, that's the requirement. And there is nothing here.
And the burden on the plaintiff is far greater here than it was just to -- just to make this determination on questions 3 and 4. Now you've got to know it by clear and convincing evidence. Not just by the greater weight of the evidence; it has to be by clear and convincing evidence.
And what does that require? It's got to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue.
Well, since there there's no evidence, there certainly can't be any precise, explicit, lacking-in-confusion evidence.
Okay. This is a case in which Mrs. Blundell is asking to be compensated for her mother's decisions about smoking. Her mother's decision to begin smokin to continue smoking, and to decide to what extent she's going to expend an effort to quit or not quit. And this is a case in which she never asked her mother to quit smoking.
The answer to this last question -- let me get back to it -- is no.
Okay. I think I've got through all my boards.
Let me just double-check. I did.
Ladies and Gentlemen, you have been very attentive during my closing argument. I greatly appreciate it.
I'm done. I'm sure we're going to take a lunch break -probably.
THE COURT: Are you asking?
MR. REILLY: But after I sit down, Mr. Bassett is going to have an opportunity to talk to you. The plaintiff gets up again because they have the burden of proof. So he gets to look at everything that I've just done. He gets to call upon whatever testimony he think connects Mrs. Starr to Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds. That's his opportunity. So but I -- I really appreciate your effort in this case, and I look for to your -- your verdict in this case at the end of your deliberations.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you, Mr. Reilly.
And as Mr. Reilly suggested, due to the hour, before Mr. Bassett has an opportunity to speak to you about the issues in this case, we will indeed take a lunch recess. Again, I want to caution -MR. REILLY: Your Honor, I forgot. I'm sorry. I forgot one thing.
THE COURT: I guess we're not going to lunch.
MR. REILLY: I forgot one thing in my efforts to destroy the entire place.
I think it would be remiss on my part if I didn't let you hear from the plaintiff one more time -- I'm sorry -- the smoker in this case one more time about he feelings about smoking. Truly. Because we have it, because she lets you know in this video two things: Sh lets you know -- she lets you know who's in control of her life. She lets you know what she's going to do regardless of what other people want her to do. She lets you know whether shes in control of whether she smoke or not..
(A video clip was played as follows:)
Say Howdy.
Howdy.
Ma, you want to go downstairs with me and burn one?
Yeah.
Is that where you're going?
Yes. Oh, they won't let me go. That's the only problem.
Your burning days are over.
No, it ain't. I want one, too.
No.
I'm going to get me one today; you watch and see. You ain't going to get one from me.
Have you got, um, a tobacco patch on or anything? Yeah.
Oh, you do? They gave you a nicotine patch?
You got it on? You ain't smoking.
You ought to see how fast it comes off.
That doesn't get it out of your system.
Enough of it. I could have a puff.
(The video clip was ended.)
THE COURT: Mr. Reilly.
MR. REILLY: There is just this one little additional section. Just one second.
(A video clip was played as follows:)
Yeah, I know. We also record your sound.
Oh, wow. I sure would like to have a cigarette.
I'll have a mint instead.
Yeah.
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. REILLY: Thank you Your Honor. I apologizi for -THE COURT: All right. Members of the jury, at this time we will recess for lunch. Again, I caution you. If two or three of you happen to have lunch together, you haven't reached that point yet where you
can start discussing this case in your deliberations, so refrain from speaking of the case. Talk about the wonderful weekend; the great weather we're having. A we'll recess and we'll reconvene at 1:15 to conclude the trial. Court is in recess until 1:15.



MR. BASSETT: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon, everyone.
THE JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. BASSETT: May it please the court?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. BASSETT: Counsel.
MR. PATACCA: Yes, sir.
MR. BASSETT: Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, as I've done throughout the trial, I'm going last. I --
this is my opportunity to give you my closing argument on behalf of R. J. Reynolds. I have tried to listen closely to what Mr. Reilly's had to say. I agree with everything Mr. Reilly said in his closing about the issues that -- that you're facing about the evidence that's presented during the course of the trial. I'm not here to repeat what Mr. Reilly said. I am going to present and talk to you about some additional evidence and expand a little bit on some of the issues, but it's certainly not my intent to try to repeat what Mr. Reilly did.
However, this is my only opportunity to give a closing argument on behalf of R. J. Reynolds, and it's my obligation to make sure I give a complete closing, incorporating what Mr. Reilly spoke about and what I need to speak about on behalf of R. J. Reynolds.
So please bear with me during the process. I join everybody else in thanking you for your service. I am certain that when you first got chosen four weeks ago -first off, few of us actually serve on a jury as part of our civic duties today, but I'm certain that none of you thought that you would be here for almost four weeks when you came to the courtroom four weeks ago to be chosen as jurors.
So let's get started. I started my opening with
this slide right here, what the case is about, a case about -- case brought by Ms. Blundell for money concerning Lucy Mae Starr. And as you heard from Mr. Patacca this morning, a lot of evidence about generic discussions, and a lot of the first two weeks of trial were spent about testimony from witnesses of R. J. Reynolds and Philip Morris. You didn't hear anything about Lucy Mae Starr, but every question that you're asked to answer during this trial involves Lucy Mae Starr. This is not a generic case. And it doesn't -- it can't involve generic evidence. All that evidence has to go back to Lucy Mae Starr.
I raise that because of all of the generic evidence you've heard during the course of the trial and all of the generic evidence you heard from Mr. Patacca this morning. And I suspect when he gets up and gives his rebuttal, you'll hear more about the generic evidence that was presented in the case.
But every question that you're asked to answer involves Lucy Mae Starr, and that's because, as Mr. Reilly went in great detail, all of the issues you're asked to decide, all the questions on this verdict form, require plaintiffs to prove legal cause. Legal cause, as Mr. Reilly pointed out, meaning that there is direct, substantial contribution to the end
result of the question you're asked to answer. And I'll talk about that in more detail, but this is not a generic case; it's a case about Lucy Mae Starr.
Let me start with the very first question, and -and Mr. Reilly showed you the verdict form, talked to you about very specific instructions. I'm not going to attempt to -- to do that. I want to hit right to the points.
So the first question is the question of whether Lucy Mae Starr is a member of the Engle class. Has plaintiff proven to you that she's a member of the Engle class? And I'd submit from the evidence that they have not. They have not proven that -- the two questions that have to be answered as part of the verdict form, Question 1, they have proven the greater weight of the evidence. What are those questions? Question of addiction, is Lucy Mae Starr addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? And the second question, was addiction to nicotine a legal cause of her lung cancer and death in the case?
On the question of addiction, Mr. Reilly went into great detail talking to you about two witnesses,
Mr. Rosman and Dr. Werner, coming to testify. I don't want to go back over all that.
There is a conflict in -- in the evidence. That's
a conflict that you, as jurors, are going to have to reconcile. And all I would say is this: As part of your job in trying to reconcile that testimony and -and come to the facts of the case, if you can't reconcile that testimony, such as the testimony of Bud LaPointe about a quit attempt by Ms. Starr in 1984 that involved nicotine patches that we know did not exist, that everybody agrees were -- were not on the market. If you can't reconcile those inconsistencies, you're entitled to set it aside, to set aside that testimony, that evidence, because it can't be reconciled. And when you do, plaintiff's evidence trying to support that claim falls away.
And I'd submit to you that in trying to reconcile some of that testimony, that testimony has to be set aside, and it will leave you to establish that, in fact, the plaintiff hasn't even carried the burden of proof on the question of addiction because that testimony is that you had two motivated, serious quit attempts during Lucy Mae Starr's lifetime, 1980, 1981, I'm going to talk about that in a moment, and this one in 1984 that's inconsistent with what are the known facts of the rest of the case.
Addiction, causation, I want to spend more time on it because with this question, the real issue for you to
decide from the evidence is was Lucy Mae Starr an involuntary smoker who had no ability to stop smoking and prevent her lung cancer or, as Mr. Patacca has phrased it with Dr. Werner, was Ms. Starr caught in an addiction cycle with no way out?
Now, as Mr. Reilly pointed out, one thing these experts did agree on is that everyone who smokes can quit smoking. Addicted or not, nicotine-dependent or not, everyone agrees that you can quit smoking.
And so I found it interesting is when we got to this question of this addiction cycle, and this was put up during the examination of Dr. Werner, one big thing they left out -- it didn't come out until cross examination -- all the people who quit, the 17.6 million people who quit by 1965, the 30 million people who quit between 1964 and 1979. That's 2 million who quit per year; 5,000 are quitting per day during that time frame. And as Dr. Werner told you, 60 million ex-smokers today many millions of those, addicted, nicotine-dependent smokers.
So when you're listening to this testimony about some addiction cycle, remember the other side of that evidence, that millions and millions of people have quit smoking, and millions of others were addicted themselves.
Now, what does that also mean? Well, it means -as the witnesses have told you, that means that smokers, even addicted smokers, are responsible for their own behavior. Dr. Burns, a generic witness who testified by video, testified that, yeah, smokers, even addicted smokers, are responsible for their behavior.
Dr. Werner told us that some addiction -- any addiction about Lucy Mae Starr doesn't relieve her of the responsibility to quit smoking. She still has that responsibility. And, in fact, Dr. Werner said, her testimony that -- that Lucy Mae Starr was nicotine-dependent isn't something that she's coming into the courtroom to tell you as a basis for judging fault in this case.
And, of course, it doesn't because that opinion doesn't tell you about her ability to quit smoking.
Dr. Werner, in fact, told us on cross examination, does nicotine affect a smoker's ability to understand the warnings, the information about the health risks of smoking, and she told you no. And she told you no -and you'll remember that answer -- because it's different. Nicotine is different than alcohol, than heroin, than methamphetamine that creates an intoxication that does impair the user, impairs the user in a way that they might lose control if they can't
understand all the warnings associated with using those substances. That's not true of -- of nicotine. That's what Dr. -- Dr. Werner told us.
And what does that mean? Well, what it leaves us with is Dr. Werner's testified about nicotine releasing dopamine in the brain. Well, many substances do that; caffeine, chocolate, activities do that, video games, falling in love, sex even. What does that have to do with this second question of whether addiction to nicotine would have compelled Ms. Starr to smoke herself, become an involuntary smoker with the inability to quit smoking until she got lung cancer?
In fact, I'll tell you that when coming to this legal question, whether the addiction to nicotine in cigarettes was a legal cause of Ms. Starrs lung cancer and death, apply the law that Judge Taylor gave you, that Mr. Reilly explained to you. These are your two questions to answer. Either that addiction to nicotine in cigarettes was such a substantial contributor to her smoking that but for that nicotine addiction, she would have quit smoking and avoided her can- -- lung cancer.
Mr. Patacca suggests addiction and choice can work together; they can be both causes. But I would submit to you on the facts of this case, its simply not true.
Its something in this case that nicotine addiction is
going to be such a substantial contributor to the end result of Ms. Starrs lung cancer, the question really is does the evidence say that Ms. Starr had the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking, or does the evidence tell you that nicotine addiction controlled her and left her no choice, no matter how hard she tried, but to continue smoking?
And I tell you, the answer to that question comes very straightforwardly in the testimony of Lance Proctor. Lance Proctor testified, undisputed, about the episode in which Ms. Starr quit smoking in 1980, 1981 for about two months. That was one of two motivated serious, quit attempts that Dr. Werner testified about, the other one being the one thats in dispute because we know that the facts dont line up, coming from Mr. LaPointe.
And what do we know about this two-month period where Mrs. Starr would have quit smoking while working at the Four Way Pub? Well, what we know from Dr. Werner is within a few days the nicotine would have been out of her system. Within a few weeks, any of the effects of nicotine, those withdrawal effects, were gone.
So when we talk about whether she had the ability to quit smoking and to quit to avoid her lung cancer, that evidence, I submit to you, tells you everything you
need to know. We dont know why she went back to smoking after that two-month period, but what we do know, from Dr. Werners own testimony, is her reasoning to go back had nothing to do with a nicotine effect.
The nicotine was out of her system. Nicotine would not -- is not causing any effects on her at that time.
So she made a decision to continue or resume smoking foi decisions -- for reasons other than any kind of nicotine or nicotine addiction.
What else do we know? Well, we know that had she stayed quit at that point that she would have avoided her lung cancer. Dr. Burns told us that in the testimony he presented. And its about how when you quit smoking, you start reducing your risks of disease from smoking.
And when it comes to lung cancer, Dr. Burns tells us, after 10 years of quitting smoking, you reduce your risk 66 percent of getting lung cancer from that prior smoking. And when you quit for 15 years, you start approaching that of someone who hadnt smoked. You reduce your risk by 80 percent.
And so what we know from this evidence is had she stayed quit in 1980, 1981, during that two-month period, where the nicotines out of her system, where shes not having any effects of nicotine at that point, we know
that she would have avoided the lung cancer she ultimately was diagnosed with in 1994. Thats undisputed.
Now, why did she resume smoking? We dont know with certainty but, of course, we do know from the fact testimony Mr. Reilly went over that Ms. Starr enjoyed smoking. She enjoyed the lifestyle, the sociability that came with smoking. And what makes Lucy Mae Starr different than the millions and millions of smokers who have quit smoking? I showed you just a moment ago from Dr. Werners testimony. What made her different from all of those 30 million Americans who quit smoking between 1964 and 1979? We know from the evidence of Lance Proctor, it had nothing to do with nicotine or nicotine effects.
And so when you come to Question 1 on the verdict form, I submit to you the evidence is very clear that plaintiff hasnt -- cannot prove that Lucy Mae Starr was addicted to nicotine cigarettes and certainly that that addiction, any addiction, was such a substantial factor in her decision to smoke that she was controlled and became an involuntary smoker who had to smoke until she got lung cancer.
I want to turn now to the third question on the verdict form.
I think you get to the first question; you'll answer that no and you can return to court and your service is done. But like Mr. Reilly said, you have to cover these other questions to address -- to the evidence and the issues that come out with them as well.
And this third question deals with -- third and fourth questions on the verdict form deal with the question of concealment and conspiracy to conceal. And the question is whether Ms. Starr died because information about the dangers of smoking were concealed from her. And this legal cause -- cause question also appears in Questions 3 and 4, as Mr. Reilly talked to you about.
So let's take a step back, and let's talk about not some of the specific evidence that Mr. Reilly talked about, but I want to talk -- talk to you about more the general evidence of what was being told, what was known in the environment in which Lucy Mae Starr grew up, raised her family in Baltimore and South Florida during her lifetime.
And I'll start here. I'll start with a pack of cigarettes that from 1966 forward contained a warning about the health risks of smoking. Every cigarette pack she picked up from 1966 for more than 25 years contained
a warning about smoking. That's millions of times during that 25 years that she would have had access to the very warning on the side of the packs. And then beginning in 1972, on every advertisement that she would have seen for cigarettes.
But that's not all because if we can step further back in time, about just how far back information and warnings about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking go, this 1965 Florida Health Notes -- we talked about it in opening -- was published to you. It's in evidence.
It actually describes health hazards of smoking going all the way back to 1798, studies being done in 1912, in which at that time scientists were suggesting that as smoking cigarettes gained in popularity, so would the rate of lung cancer.
Another one, the Florida Health Notes from 1906, discussing the fact that smoking is addictive. In fact, it says it's the very worst form of tobacco addiction, not just that cigarettes themselves are addictive, but all forms of tobacco are and cigarettes are the worst of that.
And then what did we also talk about during trial? Reader's Digest. Now, I spent a lot of time showing you different Reader's Digests. I'm not going to go all through these. Maybe I do want to show you a few,
including 1938. "Sometimes halfheartedly, sometimes earnestly, he wrestles with his addiction." Nicotine addiction was not a secret. It's not something that tobacco companies were hiding from the public. It was out there.
Likewise, dangerous chemicals, they weren't a secret. 1941, the Reader's Digest is publishing about all of these different chemicals that are in tobacco smoke; carbon monoxide, ammonia, carbolic acid, pyridine and a host of tarry substances get into your lungs.
These -- the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not a secret, certainly were not a secret from Ms. Starr.
The dangers of addictive smoking made it into our pop culture starting in the 1930s, 1940s, 1950s. I promise you I'm not going to play "Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette" again but you remember the lyrics. The lyrics talk about the dangers of smoking, the addictiveness of smoking. And what we know is Lucy Mae Starr not only had the song on her jukebox but from the witnesses, played and sang the songs.
Reader's Digest continued to carry information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking in the 1950s. And the epidemiological studies and animal studies came out now linking, very specifically, smoking
cigarettes with lung cancer.
Again, discussing in 1950, the dangerous chemicals in tobacco smoke, including benzopyrene, one of the carcinogens that plaintiffs had presented evidence and talked about. It wasn't a secret. It was being discussed in the Reader's Digest, not only in the Reader's Digest, but as a reprint of other articles that the Reader's Digest is picking up and reprinting as part of its format. What else? The Reader's Digest is telling us how to quit smoking, how to go about quitting smoking as early as 1954.
So the information about the dangers, the addictiveness of smoking has been out there, was out there throughout Ms. Starr's lifetime. Newspapers warned about the health risks of smoking. Weekly magazines warned about it, including you see how to stop smoking in TIME magazine. Newsweek, smoking is the most serious sort of drug addiction, with a real -- real psychological basis. These weren't secrets. These were out in the public. And as -- as news -- as TV came to be, TV shows carried those.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Brought in partnership with Edward R. Murrows. Tonight the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer.
"In 1954, Drs. Hammond and Horn of the American Cancer Society began an extended study of the smoking habits of American men. Here is Dr. Hammond reporting on the results of the first two years.
"DR. HAMMOND: It is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer.
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. BASSETT: The information was out there. It was being publicized by newspapers, weekly magazines, monthly magazines, television, radio, songs, movies. It was out there.
Now, a whole new way took effect in 1964 when the Surgeon General's committee released its report concluding that smoking was a cause of lung cancer. And we've talked about this evidence. We've talked about how widely publicized it was.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: This is a CBS news on smoking and health.
MR. BASSETT: Showed you one of these that -"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: The findings of the Surgeon General -- "
MR. BASSETT: -- every network --
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: -- are that every single time that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. The attack took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's committee. This, in summary, is what the committee says. 'Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer and men, and data among women smokers point the same way.'"
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. BASSETT: Surgeon General's Report was carried in every major newspaper, evening and a.m. editions and, again, going back to that 1965 Florida Health Notes, discussing the '64 Surgeon General's Report.
So what happened then? We know at that point, public health authorities continued publicizing about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking, but they also not only were publicizing it through media, they started publicizing it through brochures, started publicizing it through public service announcements. And the discussion changed not only from the dangers of smoking, the addictiveness of smoking, but the benefits of quitting and how to go about quitting.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: What does a cigarette have to do to you before you get our message?"
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. BASSETT: Public service announcements started playing on television, and by 1968, what we know from the head of the National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, the individual responsible for providing information to the public about the health risks of smoking, Dr. Daniel Horn, who himself was involved in one of the first epidemiological studies linking smoking and lung cancer said, "Look, you can stand on the rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they didn't already know."
Information was out there. It was out there in studies. And, in fact, it was not only out there, but so was information about quitting in the newspapers that Ms. Starr and her husband later took down in South Florida.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: What would happen if y stopped smoking cigarettes right now, right this minute?
I'll tell you what would happen. Your lungs would immediately start to repair themselves. Even if you've been smoking for years and years, once you stop assaulting your lungs, it's only a matter of time before they're healthy again and pink again.
"Now you have every reason in the world to stop smoking cigarettes because you now know what'll happen if you do and what'll happen if you don't."
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. BASSETT: Not only that, these were not secrets. The dangers of the addictiveness of smoking were not secrets. Even compensation that Mr. Patacca talked about this morning, it was not a secret.
Consumer Reports, 1976, talking about the fact that smokers who changed their smoking habits when they go to light, low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes, this is in evidence. This is something you can go look at.
Mr. Reilly talked to you about the fact that, look, in this case, the evidence is Ms. Starr smoked light cigarettes on occasion. She smoked them for taste, not for any kind of belief in the health benefit.
But even so, compensation wasn't a secret. It was being discussed publicly in the media. And you'll find it actually in the Surgeon General reports of the time as well.
So what was the effect of all of this information going to the public? Well, the -- the effect was smokers quit and quit by the millions. The public health campaign to inform people about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking worked. And it worked as -- by
a result of showing how many millions of smokers, in fact, did quit smoking.
So when we look at the evidence of whether -- Lucy Mae Starr, whether she was -- somehow had information concealed from her about the health effects of smoking that prevented her from quitting, well, did the concealment of R. J. Reynolds or Philip Morris prevent the public health community forewarning people about the dangers of smoking? No.
Did any concealment by R. J. Reynolds or Philip Morris prevent the media from warning people about the dangers of smoking? No. We just saw that.
Did the concealment by R. J. Reynolds and Philip Morris prevent Lucy Mae Starrs family knowing about those health risks? No. Mr. Reilly talked to you about that and what the evidence showed.
Did the concealment by R. J. Reynolds and Philip Morris prevent Ms. Starr from knowing herself that smoking was dangerous? No. Theres testimony throughout this record of her knowledge.
Did she quit when she was warned about the health risks of smoking? No.
And were the risks of smoking known or knowable to Ms. Starr? Of course, they were. Of course, they were.
When you get to this issue of concealment,
Questions 3 and Questions 4 on the verdict form, remember this: You cant conceal something thats already known. And the evidence in this case is that not only was the information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking out there but they were known to Ms. Starr. And the evidence is that they failed to prove on these Questions 3 and 4 that any concealment of information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking was a legal cause of Ms. Starrs lung cancer and death in this case.
She was warned through her community, from the media, public health community, from the family. She received warnings from the Surgeon General, and she received warnings on those packs of cigarettes for 25 years.
And we turn now to Question 5. If you get to -through these first two, three, four questions, youll be asked about the allocation of fault for Ms. Starrs injuries. And Im not going to rehash what Mr. Reilly talked to you about, but I will say this: Plaintiff has admitted that her own mother, Ms. Starr, was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death in the case. And what does that really mean? The only thing those admissions can mean is that she was warned about the dangers of smoking, and she was warned from the day she
started smoking. It can only mean that she knew that smoking was dangerous but chose to continue smoking.
And those admissions can only mean that she had the ability to quit smoking earlier. It cant be a legal cause without having the ability to avoid that lung cancer, and that avoiding the lung cancer is that she knew she had the ability to quit, and she just didnt try hard enough to quit. Lance Proctors discussion of quitting in 1980, 1981 is the right example and the testimony in this case.
Question 6, damages. Again, Im not going to hit on damages other than to say, youve got to be fair and just in light of the evidence. I certainly will submit to you that the evidence doesnt support awarding the millions of dollars in the case under the facts here, where we know Ms. Starr had the ability to quit, did quit, resumed smoking for reasons that did not have to do with nicotine.
Now, my last point I want to cover is this question of punitive damages because if we get this far -- I dont think you will, I dont think the evidence supports it, but I need to address Question 7 dealing with entitlement to punitive damages. If you were to check yes, we have to -- we have to come back, well present some additional evidence, make some
additional arguments to you. Check no, we go home.
What does the evidence tell us? Well, first off, a couple things about punitive damages. Punitive damages can be awarded only for conduct that was a legal cause of Lucy Mae Starrs death in the case. What does that mean? Again, that means that all this generic conduct, all this generic evidence thats been presented to you, unless there is a nexus that the -- unless theres a connection of that evidence to Ms. Starr, its not considered by you in answering this question. I mean, it goes back to why did we spend two weeks listening to generic testimony that had nothing to do with Ms. Starr? Because even when we come to this question, this question, the only evidence thats relevant for your consideration is evidence to find that theres a legal cause of Ms. Starrs death.
Punitive damages can only be awarded to her estate, and that in this case is Ms. Blundell.
Remember, Ms. Debbie Starr Allens not a party to the case, and so the estate itself is Ms. Blundell. And punitive damages are damages that are in addition to any compensatory damages that could be awarded that we just talked about. So its not damages that are just to put in loss that Mr. Patacca may talk about but theyre in addition to that and they also go to the estate.
So what's the evidence that we've seen, that we've talked about? Well, let me start here because no one disputes that cigarettes and tobacco are dangerous and addictive by nature. You've heard the testimony. Nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. Carcinogens are naturally created when tobacco burns. It's the nature of tobacco; it's the nature of cigarettes.
This case is not a referendum on whether or not cigarettes should or shouldn't be legal. Goes back to whether the evidence shows a legal cause to Ms. Starr, her lung cancer and death.
What is some of the evidence I previewed with you at opening that I wanted to make sure you were going to be on the watch and to look for?
First is Larson Haag. When Mr. Patacca talks about companies weren't doing anything, well, here's an example of what was being done. 1961, 20,000 articles on the research, the science of the time on tobacco, summarized for anyone to look at and not just research about growing tobacco and manufacturing the cigarettes but also about the health effects. This is in evidence. The chapters are available to you, talking about lung cancer and other illnesses associated with smoking.
Mr. Patacca talked about -- something about
concealing the information about the addictiveness of smoking. Of course, you can't conceal something that's already known. We've already seen in the evidence the discussion of smoking and addiction, but, in fact, here's an article about a study published in the American Journal of Psychiatry in 1963, concluding that smoking is an addiction, and that a sponsor of that setting was CTR, Council for Tobacco Research.
In fact, Dr. Figlar, Dr. Lipowicz talked to you about the amount of research being sponsored through the CTR, $300 million worth, over 6300 published scientific and medical articles, over 500 times this research being cited by the Surgeon General.
Tobacco Working Group, efforts by companies the coming together with the government, public health authorities, to work on reducing the risks of smoking.
We heard from witnesses about incorporating reconstituted tobacco, adding puffed or expanded tobacco, changing different ways of filtration, all with the result of reducing tar and nicotine levels some 70 percent over the years. These were the actions of the companies over time and efforts to reduce the risk of smoking.
And even to the point of R. J. Reynolds, you heard, spending hundreds of millions of dollars, looking
for an alternative to burning tobacco that creates those carcinogens, heating tobacco instead. And Philip Morris, you heard about their efforts to put on the market denicotinized cigarettes.
Now, these efforts hadn't been successful. They hadn't found the market. But the efforts were made. And, in fact, as you see from the Eclipse cigarette, it's still available on the market today.
So when you're considering this last question,
I'll submit to you the evidence doesn't support that punitive damages should be warranted. Cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. Defendants haven't disputed the dangers or addictiveness of smoking for over a decade.
Nothing about punitive damages is going to prevent any type of concealment information now or going forward. And more importantly, there's nothing about the defendants' conduct to the generic evidence that's been -- been presented in this case that can tell you that any of that was a legal cause for the lung cancer and death of Ms. Starr.
At the end of the day, the evidence here is not going to -- in fact, I can tell you that -MR. PATACCA: Your Honor, I object. Can we approach the bench?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. PATACCA: Your Honor, I object to this argument right now. Mr. Bassett has now put up a slide that says will a plaintiff -- referring to anything in the future. He's finished his punitive. He's now talking about a general verdict and saying no verdict for the plaintiff will change what people know about smoking. He's basically using the conscience of the community, saying it will have no effect.
That's an improper effect to argue against a plaintiff verdict because it was -- it has no effect on the public. That was the screen he put up. He had already finished. He took down his punitives. He's now talking about a general verdict. They should not consider the evidence on the effect of the community or knowledge of the community.
MR. BASSETT: Your Honor, I meant to continue in the line of punitive damages.
Tell you what, I'll go to my last slide for the closing. We'll finish.
THE COURT: Sustained.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. BASSETT: Almost done. Told you I was going to be quick.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"MR. REASONER: In my opinion, people have been warned of the dangers and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. This is the kind of a country where it comes down to you and whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it.
"This is Harry Reasoner. Good night."
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. BASSETT: Mr. Reilly talked to you about who was near with Ms. Starr when she was making her decisions about smoking. And it's been true since 1955 and true again since 1964 that those choices were choices that the individual smoker makes.
In this case, what we know is Ms. Starr was well-aware of the dangers and addictiveness of smoking and during the time of the '50s and the '60s and the '70s, she didn't give any serious, motivated quit attempts. We know that from the evidence.
But when she did in 1980, 1981, she was able to
quit, quit for a period of time where we have no nicotine and no effect on her. And when she went back, she went back for reasons that had nothing to do with any nicotine addiction.
I thank you very much for your attention and patience during this process and look forward to your deliberations in resolving this. Thank you.
