CLOSING ARGUMENT BY MR. JOHNSON
MR. JOHNSON: Thank you, Your Honor. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. It's been a long road for all of us. And I, too, want to thank you, not just for showing up, for not doing the things that a person can do to avoid jury service but for your attention during some of the longest examinations I think I've ever seen in a courtroom.
You folks were paying attention to every word, taking notes. Can't ask for more than that. And I know that, as you said to us during voir dire during jury selection, when you folks got the fortunate numbers, that you'll be fair.
You'll keep the promises to decide this case based upon the evidence you've heard in this courtroom. You'll answer the specific questions on the verdict form which you'll be getting very soon. You're going to need to bring though all of your common sense and your intelligence today to answer those questions because there's been some
slight of hands, some word games that have been going on here.
I don't think you learned much about Frank Townsend from the other side. Instead Frank Townsend and his choices were directly obscured by issues which have little or nothing to do with Frank Townsend or the questions that you're going to need to answer on the verdict form.
And probably the biggest hot button issue I need to cover with you is the tragic statistic of
440,000	annual premature deaths of people, primarily in their 60s and 70s caused by smoking.
You may remember the most recent context in which that came up during the evidence. Came up in Mr. Dill's Cross-Examination of Dr. Gentry. He asked Dr. Gentry to compare that number with the number of people dying in automobile accidents or from AIDS.
He basically said to Dr. Gentry, put aside all those things you're doing to try to make a safer product and to migrate consumers to safer tobacco products, less risky products over the years, you're still making cigarettes. That was Mr. Dill's Cross-Examination of Dr. Gentry, as if Reynolds, which is at least trying to make safer
products and move people to safer products, as if they're going out of business would somehow cause that number, that 440,000 number to go away; as if people were all of a sudden going to quit smoking if Reynolds went out of business.
Let's assume, it's not true, but let's just assume that all 440,000 people who prematurely died from smoking each year smoked Reynolds products, not its competitors.
And what I'm saying to you is maybe that number ought to cause us to ban together to get a flag, get a slogan, and campaign for our legislatures to ban smoking, to put the tobacco companies out of business, fire all their employees. Besides that, the number's so tragic that people should no longer have the right to choose to smoke or not. Prohibition of a different product is worth trying again because of that number.
But as I told you when we started this case, that's not why we're in this courtroom.
Dr. Henningfield may feel as he candidly admitted to me on Cross-Examination that if the legislative process doesn't get you what you want, then you should choose lawsuits to change social policy.
But that's not what we're about here. Those are not the questions on the verdict form. We're in this case dealing with the death, the premature death of one person.
What I told you in the opening statement remains true. This case is about Frank Townsend and the choices he made; the choices he made to smoke and to continue to smoke until he decided to quit smoking cigarettes.
This case is about whether Mr. Townsend was so addicted that his smoking controlled him and his decisions or whether he was able to control his smoking and have the ability to decide to quit and carry out that decision.
76,	please.
Remember in his opening Mr. Mitnik described addiction as a compulsion, okay. Then he says what else does addiction do other than create a compulsion to use the product. Then continues the way the addiction cycle works, you've got the physical effects and the psychological effects, you've got tolerance, compulsion. That's what he said to you in opening statement; that Frank Townsend was compelled to smoke.
Well, of course, the evidence didn't support
that; not even his own evidence. Even Dr. Henningfield, the policy making by lawsuits and Dr. Cummings, the soldier in the war against tobacco, testified that even addicted smokers can choose to quit.
20,	please.
Being addicted doesn't mean you can't quit smoking. That was Dr. Cummings.
Now, pull up 115 for me.
Mr. Mitnik just mentioned this document. A document from Hill & Knowlton, the public relations, okay. Public relations company opining about addiction and things like that. And he points, it's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they can't break.
Well, how do you square that with the testimony that you just saw from his own witness,
Dr. Cummings, that even addicted smokers can quit? This is a statement which they are using to dazzle you, that even their own experts don't believe in.
So what happened after we walk away from compulsion because of the evidence? Then it became constrained choice, whatever that means.
Dr. Bernstein who actually was the only expert that appeared here who treats individual patients,
diagnosis them for substance abuse disorders said, that's not a notion that appears in the DSM-IV, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual that are used by professionals in the field. That's not a term he ever used or heard of.
Please understand it was their experts who said that even addicted smokers can quit.
Number 48, please.
This is my cross of Dr. Henningfield: More than half of all smokers in America quit. Latest estimates 60 million smokers quit. Vast majority of them quit without formal treatment of any kind. Each year about 1.2 to 1.3 million people quit.
Even their own experts don't believe that, Hill & Knowlton document and the things Mr. Mitnik said in opening statement.
Now Mr. Mitnik says, well, it can be choice and addiction. Come on? Well, that doesn't make any sense either. I mean, if it's choice, it's choice. Remember also in my opening I told you that every pack of cigarettes that Frank Townsend smoked after 1965 carried a warning and I showed you how that warning changed through the years.
77,	please.
Mr. Mitnik says, you'll see the cigarette
warning labels, I expect they'll show them to you, we're going to present evidence of the FTC report that talks about how little good they did. Those warnings labels actually worked -- how little they worked from the FTC.
109 please.
Well, 91.8 percent of male smokers had, of course, seen or heard about health label on a pack of cigarettes, but more than that -- and let's pull up, please, number 51 -- more than that,
Dr. Henningfield, their expert, first health warnings came on the packs in '66?
Right.
And millions of people quit smoking after those warnings came out on the pack, didn't they?
Yes.
And, in fact, there were estimates that about
13	million people quit after those warnings came out on the pack?
Answer, yes.
Ineffective? That's his expert,
Dr. Henningfield.
Told you when we started that Frank Townsend lived his life the way he wanted to and was prepared to live with the consequences of his
choices. He worked very hard and he enjoyed himself. He had a fast car, motorcycle, Arabian horse, he was a hunter and he was a smoker.
I'm not being critical of his choices. Don't be under that impression. We're not blaming him for his choices. We all take risks every day. We all walk in downtown Gainesville and we cross against the crosswalk sign. We know there's some risk in that. We all eat things we shouldn't eat.
We all don't do things we should do.
MR. MITNIK: Objection on the golden rule.
THE COURT: I didn't hear the last part,
Mr. Mitnik.
MR. MITNIK: Golden rule objection. We all.
We're not supposed to try to put the jurors in our shoes. I'd like to do it to but I'm not allowed.
I hope he would quit.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. JOHNSON: Mr. Townsend was smart. He read the Sunday paper. He read Ebony, watched the news. Those are the statements by Mrs. Townsend and Derrick Townsend, their 50-year-old son, their only child now.
Now, we only have the deposition testimony of Hinson Townsend to tell us about Frank starting
but it was important. He said it wasn't because of ads but it was peers. Hinson himself, his older brother was smoking. The evidence was Frank Townsend controlled, just as I said in opening, where and when he smoked. Not around his pregnant wife in 1969 -- excuse me, 1959. Not around his kids and only in certain restricted areas of the house.
One incident in 27 years at Brach's of smoking where he wasn't supposed to smoke. 27 years worked in that job he got in trouble once for smoking in the bathroom.
Pull that up, 44, please.
The only time in 27 years -- this is my cross of Dr. Henningfield again -- other than that one time, there's no other examples of where he smoked in the place where it was not permitted; is that right?
Answer, Not that I read in the depositions.
Frank Townsend made his own decisions. He was his own person. He was not driven by ads. That was the testimony of Hinson Townsend. That was the testimony of Mrs. Townsend.
Let me talk to you now about Frank Townsend's quitting. He made two half hearted attempts of a
couple of days each to quit. No evidence he ever threw away his cigarettes, ever threw away his ashtrays. There were no quitting aids. No kind of counseling, none of that. He never even told Mrs. Townsend, at least the first time, that he was quitting.
It made so little impression on her that she couldn't even tell us when that happened in the -within the ten years that they were living in the Chicago area.
Second quit attempt was similar. He quit on the third attempt. That's the overwhelming weight of the testimony.
Now, in closing, Mr. Mitnik refers to Beverly Seales. Plaintiffs' counsel puts on a witness, you may not -- it happened so fast you may not remember this -- put on a witness to say he was still smoking after he had been biopsied. That's not what Mrs. Townsend testified to. That's not what Derrick Townsend testified to, the son in his deposition. That's not what Clarencia Walker testified to, the good friend of Mrs. Townsend.
It's not what Dr. Henningfield testified to. He concluded that the records and the deposition testimony showed that he quit on the third
attempt. That's what he based his opinions on.
It's not what Dr. Cummings testified to. He, too, based his conclusions, looked at the record and said he quit on his third attempt.
It's not what Dr. Alan Feingold said. He's the one with the unpaid position at South Miami Hospital, you know, worked on about 10,000 asbestos cases. He's the guy that told me how I should be asking my questions.
I was happy to learn from somebody with more courtroom experience than I have.
But even Dr. Feingold, even Dr. Feingold premised everything he said on the fact that Frank Townsend quit smoking successfully on that third attempt after he was biopsied.
Now, his medical records, and I showed them to you before -- pull up 83 to start with, please -Mr. Townsend, for reasons we don't understand, told his treaters that he quit smoking seven years before 1984 (sic). That would have been made in
1987.
Pull up 84.
He told his treaters at Loyola University Hospital that he also quit smoking seven years before.
Pull up 85, please.
And, again, when he comes back to Shands after he's being treated at Loyola says to Shands treaters, I quit smoking seven years ago. Those are in the medical records that are in evidence.
In fairness, Mrs. Townsend's friend Clarencia Walker said she thought Mr. Townsend smoked until his diagnosis in '94. So did Derrick Townsend in his deposition. But one thing is very clear, everybody agrees that Frank Townsend need far -needed far fewer quit attempts, no -- remember the testimony that most smokers who are trying to quit need six or seven quit attempts in order to be successful. Frank Townsend needed three.
36, please.
You would agree, and this is Dr. Cummings, that the average smoker attempts to quit about seven times before he's successful?
Seven or eight times.
Mr. Townsend was successful in quitting on his third attempt, isn't that so?
After he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
His third attempt?
Third identified attempt.
We didn't have the opportunity to interview
Mr. Townsend. None of us did.
41.
And I take Dr. Henningfield through the same drill. And he agrees that it takes three, four, sometimes seven in the different surveys that are used.
And then 46, please.
And then I asked, assuming that six or seven is an accepted number, the average person,
Mr. Townsend had fewer attempts than average. And he agreed.
Now, what Dr. Henningfield also agreed -- and pull up number 54, please -- and Dr. Henningfield agrees that the '64 Surgeon General's Report reported that withdrawal that smokers may experience upon cessation appears to be mild. And the answer is yes. And Dr. Henningfield agreed with that.
Now, that statement may not be true for all smokers, but it sure was for Mr. Townsend.
Mrs. Townsend describes nervousness and irritability, some sleeplessness, similar to giving up anything that you might like, those are the kinds of symptoms he had. As the Surgeon General has said, mild.
Pull up 22, please.
Remember Dr. Cummings's theory about quitting smoking. He asked people when they come in three questions from his pamphlet on quitting smoking. And this is according to Dr. Cummings, how simple it is.
Do you want to stop?
Second one is are you willing to make changes in your routine.
And the third one is are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments before stopping -- after stopping.
And says if you answer yes to all those questions, then you can quit. And that was true, maybe not for everybody, maybe not for even the majority of smokers, but it was true of Frank Townsend.
Now, much effort was made in this case to convince us that quitting is hard for people and relapse rates are high. Even those that use cessation aids, even the Cross-Examination of Dr. Bernstein. But that wasn't true of Frank Townsend. He quit; no aids; fewer than average attempts.
He was not -- remember I said in opening, this
is not a case of some tortuous smoker who tried everything to quit but could not. I said that's not this case. And that's what the evidence has shown.
If Mr. Townsend had quit when the warnings went on, he likely would not have gotten cancer.
You remember that testimony. Dr. Thomas showed you that data on a graph. Dr. Feingold -Pull up 68, please.
I asked Dr. Feingold that question: Do you agree that by the time a former smoker who stopped smoking at age 30 reaches age 60, that former smoker's risk of dying from lung cancer is indistinguishable from the risk of dying from lung cancer for a person who never smoked at all; is that correct?
Yes, that's the word I used. And it's true.
But it's interesting, it doesn't mean that it's not greater. Indistinguishable just means that you can't detect the difference. It's so small that you can't detect the difference.
He fought with me a little bit about that but even he admits it's so small that it's indistinguishable.
70, please.
I asked him if Mr. Townsend had quit smoking at the time the '64 Surgeon General's Report, his risk would have been indistinguishable from that of a person who never smoked cigarettes, true?
But I agree that the answer to your question is true.
That's the last down there, and finally says that.
Again, I'm not blaming Mr. Townsend for the choices he made. But these are -- these are the consequences, if he had made a different choice, but it was his choice.
Now, let's ask ourselves was Frank addicted. That's as Mr. Mitnik has pointed out and the very first part of -- the very first question on the verdict form. What's the evidence of that?
No evidence that Frank Townsend ever used the word addicted to describe himself.
Number 19, please.
This is Dr. Cummings. He did not use that word to describe himself. He didn't use any words like it. There's no evidence of that. No evidence saying I can't quit, whatever anyone thinks about addiction and what it means.
Pull up 43.
It's also true that he was never diagnosed as addicted by anyone in his medical records before he passed away.
That gets us to the question of what does this word addiction mean. Dr. Henningfield -Pull up 55.
This is important here because Mr. Mitnik's talked about fraud and hiding the word addiction and things like that. This is important.
Dr. Henningfield: You would agree with me, Doctor, that the history of the use of the word addiction has a tangled and confused history?
Yes, yes.
It's your opinion that an addiction expert that over the years both lay people and professionals have misused and misapplied the word addiction; is that correct?
Answer, Yes.
I believe you yourself agree that the word addiction was used so generally and invariably that it had lost much of its technical usefulness; is that correct?
Yes, I believe I wrote that probably in the 1980s.
Pull up 53, please.
And this is Dr. Henningfield again. Now, the Surgeon General knew and the Surgeon General in '64 concluded that smoking was not an addiction but rather a habit; is that correct?
Answer, Correct.
Remember, 1964 report Surgeon General says it's a habit. 1988 Report the Surgeon General changes his mind. It's now an addiction, whatever that word means. Nothing has changed about nicotine during that time period. Nothing has changed about the impact of nicotine on the smoker during that period. Only thing that's changed is the definition.
And Mr. Mitnik made much of the CEO of Reynolds and that film clip that they showed you getting up and saying that under the classical definition of addiction, smoking -- and then it gets cut off by the Congressman who wants a sound bite.
The fact of the matter is that what Mr. Johnson was saying as you can see from Dr. Henningfield's testimony was a reasonable thing to say.
Pull up 56, please.
Doctor, in 1994, a reasonable person could say
I don't like the label addictive to refer to cigarettes, and ultimately he answers that that's correct. That was a reasonable thing.
Now, of course, the word addiction isn't used by professionals anymore. It's dependence.
Dr. Bernstein told you that. It's not used in the DSM-IV because it's a word that has lost its meaning. It can mean anything you want it to.
Not surprisingly Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Cummings and Dr. Feingold all were happy to use a word that doesn't have any scientific meaning anymore and apply it to Mr. Townsend. And basically what their conclusion was that he smoked a lot for a long time. He did smoke for a long time. No argument there. They don't really know how much he smoked because, you know, you've heard the evidence. Some records say half a pack-a-day. Some records say a pack-a-day. Some records say a pack-and-a-half a day. It goes up and down. They take the highest estimate from the records that they want to rely on.
Mrs. Townsend couldn't help as much on how much he smoked because she didn't know. They had very different schedules. She barely knew what brands he smoked much less how much he smoked,
until they moved down to Florida.
You heard the testimony, Frank Townsend really didn't have much time to smoke during his work day. He'd get up very early in the morning, get to work, have a break in the morning, a lunch hour, a break in the afternoon. He'd come home. He'd eat his dinner. He'd go downstairs and he'd smoke by -- the testimony was three or four cigarettes and then he'd go to bed.
But in fairness, he smoked a significant amount. He was not a chipper as that term has been used in the courtroom. Dr. Bernstein assumed as much when he said I base my conclusions he wasn't addicted on a level of about a pack-and-a-half a day.
But as he also told you that evidence about how long he smoked, how much he smoked, doesn't automatically make you addicted or dependent, the proper word to use.
Dr. Bernstein is the medical doctor, the neuropsychiatrist who actually treats patients for a variety of substance abuse, and he's skilled at evaluating and diagnosing and prescribing for individual patients. His opinion is much more credible than any other expert you heard in this
case. And his opinion was that Frank Townsend was not dependent or addicted. He quit with relative ease. It didn't disrupt his daily routine or activities. He controlled his smoking. It did not control him.
The question one on the verdict form goes on to ask as pointed out, was it -- was it the addiction which caused the ultimate injury to Frank Townsend? And the answer is no. The answer is even if you assumed he was addicted, it was his choice to continue to smoke. That addiction didn't control his decisions. It is an either/or.
Either you choose or you don't choose. And there's nothing here that says he was overwhelmed by -- his ability to decide and choose was somehow overwhelmed by his addiction.
Pull up number 20, please.
Just as Dr. Cummings admitted, someone who is nicotine dependent or addicted, that, of course, doesn't mean they cannot quit, does it?
Answer, true.
Being addicted doesn't mean you cannot quit smoking; is that right, Doctor?
Being addicted means it's hard to quit but that doesn't mean you can't.
21, please.
Again, Dr. Cummings. Of those 50 million who have quit, have quit smoking, the vast majority in his opinion were choices. Choices, not addiction causing the injury.
35, please.
Dr. Cummings again. I showed him his deposition. Okay, but whether constrained or not, he still had a choice, correct?
Answer, Yes, it was a constrained choice.
Question, But it was still a choice?
Answer, Sure.
Let me move now from that subject of addiction and whether it was addiction that caused his injury to the subject of Mr. Townsend's awareness of the risk of smoking. Let's start off with the fundamental reality that anyone, anyone knows that inhaling 200 or more puffs of either filtered or unfiltered smoke into your lungs every day cannot be good for you. That's just common sense.
Mr. Mitnik talked about the whisper. And, ladies and gentlemen, I suggest to you that you can't hear a whisper when the newspapers, the TV, every bit of our culture is shouting at you that there are risks to doing what you're doing.
Dr. Sharp. I'm not going to go through all of Dr. Sharp's testimony with you. That was an all day event. But he brought with him overwhelming evidence, overwhelming evidence that the risks of smoking were known to all.
Pull up number 80, please.
Remember we started off with a Mississippi school book in 1914; 1914, well before Mr. Townsend was ever born, that these were the kinds of things that were being taught to school children in 1914. Very injurious effects on the lungs. He then went on to a whole series of textbooks to show you how that information got more precise.
98, please.
Remember he went through all these pop culture references. You know, the slang, coffin nails, et cetera, TV, movies, music. I will spare you my version of Smoke Smoke Smoke That Cigarette.
And pull up 99, please.
And the awareness, ladies and gentlemen, was not just of the dangers of tar and what it can do to you, cigarette tar if you inhale it. It was also about the tobacco smoke containing nicotine and it was habit-forming; could be hard to quit.
Everybody knew about that.
100, please.
Remember he showed you a lot of magazines, a lot of newspapers of the vast coverage that the smoking and health scientific experience got during periods of the early '50s, the '60s, et cetera. This is just one example they showed you.
Number 105, please.
Remember he showed you banner headlines, what they call second coming headlines about the Surgeon General's Report in Chicago where Mr. Townsend was living. Same was true.
104, please.
Same thing was true in the Chicago Tribune reporting on that; you remember that.
Ebony magazine, we know for sure that was in the Townsend household.
Number 81, please.
And this is the awareness poll that he showed you. 90 percent awareness back in 1954 that they've heard or read that cigarette smoking may cause lung cancer. Thwarts every our kind of statistic that people ought to know about.
97, please.
Remember how I showed you the Harvard study,
okay. Have you heard that lung cancer may be caused by smoking? Senior high students 95 percent. This is '59. Junior high students, 90 percent.
103, please.
The paraphrase, the proof is in the polling.
This is what people believed. The message got through. This is what people believed. How could anybody, how could anybody not know that there were risks associated with smoking, that it could be hard to quit smoking. You saw that data.
106, please.
Conclusion, '57, Surgeon General of the United States, we have informed the public.
108 please.
Health hazards of excessive smoking, well publicized for more than ten years. This is in '64.
52, please.
Here we go. I just want to end this little bit with this. Dr. Henningfield, again: And the fact of the mother is, Doctor, it's a myth that cigarette smokers are ignorant of the hazards of smoking, isn't it?
I think all cigarette smokers likely know
there are hazards. The question is the degree to which they think it's going to happen to them and the high risk of outcome.
And he talks about most cigarette smokers don't know that there's a 50 percent chance, but I think it's clear that most smokers know the bottom line that smoking is bad for them.
Now, let me address this issue of filters and filter fraud that Mr. Mitnik was talking about to you a little bit earlier.
58, please.
In his Cross-Examination -- in my Cross-Examination of him he talks about the 1981 Surgeon General's Report and I asked him, no such things as a safe cigarettes? No safe level of consumption?
He talks about -- and I ask him, same report concluded that smoking cigarettes with lower yields of tar and nicotine reduces the risk of lung cancer and to some extent improves the smoker's chance for longer life; is that right, provided there's no compensation?
Yes, that was the '81.
Question, Right?
Answer, Yes. And you are aware that in the
1950s public health officials -- does that say cigarette companies? No, it says public health officials were stating publicly that a filter tipped cigarette would reduce the risk of cancer considerably?
Answer, Yes.
Filter fraud? Public health officials.
16, please.
And, again, And you are aware that in the 1950s public health officials were stating publicly that a filter tipped cigarette would reduce the risk of cancer considerably?
Yes.
And Dr. Wynder was one of those people? He, of the mouse painting studies?
Answer, Yes.
Now, the fact of the matter is they're right, filters work. They don't make a cigarette safe, okay. No one's saying that. No one said that, but they make them safer.
91,	please.
Remember Dr. Gentry came up and showed you the decline of tar and nicotine over time, part of that was filters, part of that was other things that Reynolds had developed to reduce the risk
cigarettes.
And remember also -- pull up 16, please -Cross-Examination of Dr. Cummings, I showed him an article from the International Agency For Research on Cancer, a part of the World Health Organization, an agency that had funded him, relative reduction in risk has also been observed among long-term smokers of filtered cigarettes compared to smokers of unfiltered circumstance, you disagree with this?
I don't disagree with that statement.
He goes on to say that he wouldn't make the same conclusion but International Agency For Research on Cancer, in addition to other public health authorities that I just showed you.
Where are the flood of ads from R.J. Reynolds saying that filtered cigarettes are safe? Where are they? Mr. Mitnik talked about how this was a flood that would, even though there's no evidence that Mr. Townsend saw anything like that, that that kind of thing would get to him.
Well, he showed you some internal documents of people talking about in his terms, filter fraud, but he didn't show you -- he did not show you because there aren't any. Advertisements where
Reynolds is selling a cigarette, Salems or Kools or Pall Malls to anybody that says, smoke this because a filter is safe, filtered cigarettes are safe. You didn't see that.
Some of the ads he showed you from particular Salems, you know, you had springtime fresh and all that kind of thing, what they're doing is they're talking about the menthol. They don't -- they are not saying to the consumer filter cigarettes are safe, even though public health authorities were saying, filtered cigarettes are safer.
Let me talk now about the agreement to conceal.
111, please.
Here we go. This was the document in the agreement to conceal. Let's look at that document and what it really says. In the very second paragraph, here is the statement saying, you know, we don't think the questions settled, and this is 1954, and I'll show you, the question wasn't settled in 1954, that's the truth.
The question was not settled, but there are these experiments out there. And here we are, in the Frank Statement they're telling you, however, we do not believe that any serious medical
research, and they call those early experiments serious medical research, which they are, but they didn't denigrate them, they didn't dump on them. Serious medical research, even though its results are inconclusive, and they were inconclusive at that time, should be disregarded or lightly dismissed.
24,	please.
Dr. Cummings says the mouse skin painting studies received wide publicity. The Frank statement said that?
It did.
That was true?
That was true.
25.
And this is interesting to me, you may not remember this, but I asked him, In your review of the Hill & Knowlton documents, you found a report of a poll that says the Frank Statement scared people into cutting down or quitting; isn't that so?
Answer, That's right.
Frank Statement wasn't some fraudulent concealment thing. It scared people into cutting down or quitting.
34, please.
This was Dr. Cummings again. Remember I told you in '54 it wasn't agreed by the scientific community that causation had been established.
Here's Dr. Cummings. I asked you about independent scientists from distinguished institutions and the fact of the matter is, were there some folks, independent scientists from distinguished institutions that held the view the evidence was not sufficient before 1964 when the Surgeon General's Report came out to demonstrate smoking had actually caused cancer?
Answer, Sure.
That wasn't a lie in the Frank Statement back in 1954.
You recall Dr. Sharp's evidence, and I'm not going to go back through it, in which he talked about the independent scientists from distinguished institutions who were saying back in 1954 that causation had not yet been established. Dr. Cummings kind of sums all of that evidence up.
50 please.
Here's Dr. Henningfield. You know, what's being hidden here, folks? Question, Well it was known for 100 years that there was nicotine in
tobacco, wasn't it, sir?
Answer, Yes.
And it was known for well over 200 years that it could be difficult to quit all forms of tobacco products; isn't that accurate?
Answer, Yes.
In fact, you've written that?
Yes.
And it's been known since the early part of the 20th century that nicotine had effects on the brain; isn't that fair?
Answer, Yes.
If there was an agreement it had to be the most ineffectual agreement known to man, because all of the information was out there.
Now, I want to talk to you about reliance.
It's a very important issue and when I get to the verdict form you'll see why. First off, as we talked about, there was no wallpaper saying that filters are safe. So what was there to rely on?
Pull up 102.
Remember I said to you previously in this case that when a tobacco company or Tobacco Institute or any of those folks ever even got quoted in the flood of information about the risks of smoking
that was going out to consumers, that it would be this little add-on at the end of the article.
Here's the banner headline, Cigarettes Cancer Link Found.
And then right at the bottom of the article for anybody to get that far you'd have a comment from like the TIRC or something like that. And soften the poles. We soften that polls; that that didn't effect people.
72,	please.
Well, what effect did that have? Dr. Sharp, now, based on your research, how did these articles, when you ran across them, affect the public awareness today?
I took them into account when I came to conclusions. In no way did they diminish the overall impact of this overwhelming message that smoking is bad for you and it very well could kill you and it very well might be difficult to quit once started, so that message was out there. It was a very strong message.
The justification for that conclusion by Dr. Sharp were the endless number of examples he gave you of that information.
73,	please.
Did you find that cigarette ads affected public awareness about the dangers?
No I did not.
Can you explain it?
He looked at them but the company statements in no way diminished the overall message.
Again, the examples he brought to you that you could see justified that conclusion by Dr. Sharp.
75, please.
But even if, even if there was this wallpaper of ads or statements let's talk about reliance.
Here is a poll he showed you that talked about where do people get their information about smoking and health. They get it from organizations like the American Cancer Society, 62 percent; American Medical Association, independent laboratories, medical schools, government agencies, tobacco companies.
Three percent of the people polled would get their information about smoking and health from tobacco companies. There's no reliance on tobacco companies statement, even if they had seen them.
And, again, 37, please.
No evidence that Mr. Townsend began smoking because of anything the tobacco company said or
did, is there, Doctor?
We don't know why he first picked up a cigarette, that's true.
38.
No direct evidence that Mr. Townsend saw any of the documents you're relying on in forming your opinions in this case, is there, Doctor?
Answer, No.
39.
So we're clear, my question is not what Mr. Hyman expected, but whether there is any evidence in the record that Mr. Townsend saw or relied on a statement by R.J. Reynolds?
Nothing in the record that I think of, depositions and medical records that I reviewed.
Now, he went on in his answer in fairness to say that in his opinion, which is totally unsupported, that Frank Townsend had to have seen something because there was so much out there.
But there's no record of evidence of that.
Where was that evidence? Where was the evidence that Mr. Townsend saw or relied on anything? Where was Derrick Townsend, their now 50 year old son to come in and tell you that Mr. Townsend saw or relied on anything by R.J.
Reynolds? It wasn't there. He wasn't here.
Not even Mrs. Townsend testified that Frank Townsend saw or relied on anything by R.J. Reynolds or any of the other organizations that Mr. Mitnik talks about.
52, please.
Here's a pretty good bottom line for you again, folks. The fact of the matter is, Doctor, it's a myth that cigarette smokers are ignorant of the hazards of smoking, isn't it?
I think all cigarette smokers likely know there are hazards.
23.
No evidence -- from Dr. Cummings -- that Mr. Townsend saw the Frank Statement or relied on it, is there?
Answer, No.
42.
Dr. Henningfield, No direct evidence in this record, is there, that he started smoking because of anything that Reynolds did or said?
Not that I'm aware.
47, please.
Dr. Henningfield, You are not aware, are you, Doctor, of any evidence in this record that
menthol in the Kool and Salem cigarettes that
Mr. Townsend smoked reduced concerns he might have
had about smoking, are you?
Answer, That's correct. I'm not sure I answered that right but I agree with you.
Let me talk to you about the accusations that Reynolds was targeting youths. First off, this has nothing to do with Mr. Townsend. We know the testimony from Mr. Townsend's brother that Frank Townsend started smoking because of the peers, because he, Hinson Townsend was smoking. Doesn't have anything -- it's one of those hot button issues to get you all riled up but it can't obscure that basic fact that it has nothing to do with Frank Townsend.
Mr. Mitnik showed you a document from Claude Teague in which he made suggestions about developing a cigarette for a youth market.
113,	please.
That document.
114,	please.
The very first thing Teague says is, At the outset it should be said that we are presiling (phonetic) and I believe unfairly -- well, none of us agree with that -- constrained from directly
promoting cigarettes to the youth market, that is, to those in the approximately 21 years old and under group.
But whatever we think of Claude Teague, he believed that they were constrained from promoting cigarettes to a youth market.
And, again, 42, please.
No direct evidence in this record, is there, that he started smoking because of anything that Reynolds did or said?
Answer, Not that I'm aware.
45.
Remember Mr. Mitnik showed you this document. It was a press release from TIRC. Let me show you Exhibit 360. You have no evidence that Frank Townsend ever saw this document, do you, sir?
No, I don't.
But there it was, supposed to distract you from Frank Townsend and his case.
Most of the documents that had to do with youth marketing talked about young adults, adult smokers and I want you to remember that when you look at them.
Now, there were some documents that made references to the smoking rates of people under
18, as young as I think 13 or 14, something like that. Remember I asked on Cross-Examination where did that data come from. That wasn't data that was generated by R.J. Reynolds. That was data that was published by HEW, Health Education and Welfare Department of the U.S. government.
But most important on this subject, looking at all the documents, Dr. Gentry was asked about all those things, and he said that he was not aware of any marketing plan that was ever carried out to do that. He also testified that there was never an instance where they were asked to develop a product, a particular cigarette to appeal to the youth market. He was there. You can judge him. Again, a subject that has nothing to do with Frank Townsend.
Dr. Gentry also talked about that Teague document about color changes on the filter. You know, we talked about how you could change it from red to blue or blue to red or brown as it got exposed to smoke.
Now, Dr. Cummings, remember I said, told him, you know that was never done.
He said, well, I don't know. It's there.
Why would he put in front of you a document
that he didn't know was ever carried out, a plan that carried out? Why would he do that?
Well, of course, he's advocate. He's an advocate. He wanted to distract you with a document where he had no basis to believe that Reynolds had ever carried out the things in that document.
And Dr. Gentry, Dr. Gentry got on the stand and he said, we didn't do it. We did not do it.
You couldn't really do it. Not practical. Even if you had wanted to, you couldn't do it.
Now, there were other documents -- 57, please. -- talked about changing the pH of cigarette smoke, things like that, increase nicotine or nicotine effect, reducing the tar. Remember we talked about even in opening how that was something that people thought was a good idea because you'd get less tar. You'd get nicotine satisfaction but you'd get less tar.
Dr. Henningfield admits that the Journal of the National Cancer Institute contained articles as early as 1972 that suggested that changing the pH of cigarette smoke could reduce the risk of smoke, didn't it?
Yes.
And there are Reynolds documents that talk about that. It was never done because it wasn't practical, but this was not something that was some big secret plot by Reynolds. This was something suggested by public health authorities.
Remember those minutes from the National Cancer Institution, Tobacco Working Group chaired by Dr. Gori referred specifically to that kind of thing. This was not some secret nefarious plot by Reynolds. This was a public health authority motivated idea to try to reduce the risk of smoking.
Dr. Gentry at great length told you about safer cigarette efforts through the years and migration.
89,	please.
He was here, you can judge him. He went through general reduction, selective reduction, tar to nicotine ratio changes, tobacco heating cigarettes and tobacco substitutes.
90,	please.
He talked about the general reduction techniques that they tried for the years. A lot of them very successful reducing the tar and nicotine levels in the cigarette. Remember he
showed you the chart. Those were all the kinds of things they did. Not to make a safe cigarette because you can't make a safe cigarette. You can make a safer cigarette.
92,	please.
Then he talked about selective reduction.
Okay. There are carcinogens in cigarette smoke just like there are in the smoke of a lot of different things. Let's try to get those out.
And he talked about the efforts to do that.
Talked about filter materials, additives, all
those kinds of things. Went through that in great
detail.
Finally we got to Premier and Eclipse.
93,	please.
And he took you through the large reductions in carcinogens and other kinds of compounds that we're not sure about that have been accomplished through Premier.
32, please.
Even Dr. Cummings had to acknowledge that that was a good thing.
Eclipse, I believe you testified was the safest cigarette manufactured, isn't that right?
At time I testified I believe I stated that.
You believe that Eclipse was a step in the right direction for cigarette manufacturers; is that correct?
Yes. Compared to cigarettes they were selling it would be a step in the right direction.
33.
Reynolds' efforts to develop Premier and Eclipse were responsive to the Public Health Community concerns, weren't they?
Sure. They were responsive to the concern that cigarettes caused cancer and a variety of other illnesses.
Remember Dr. Gentry said we're also trying to, for those who wish to continue to use tobacco products, migrate them off of cigarettes into safer products like Snus.
Would you pull up 94, please.
And he showed you this chart. And it compares Eclipse, Snus and Ultra Light cigarettes and talks about the reductions from all these devices of carcinogens, and even chemicals that aren't known to be carcinogens, the efforts they've made through the years, sincere efforts through the years, billions of dollars to develop and hasn't done too well in the market place._
Let me turn from that to the Council For Tobacco Research. You remember the attacks on the Council For Tobacco Research that were made, just a front organization, you know, at the time of the Frank Statement, really didn't do anything, didn't mean much. But even its biggest critic, Dr.
Cummings had to admit -- 26, please -- founded research, excellent research, Nobel Prize winning scientist, including funding here in the University of Florida, thousands of articles that got published from that funding in the health literature. And then he admitted that 6 to 700 of those articles had been relied upon in Surgeon General's Reports.
And then he talked about -- number 27, please -- that Larson, Haag and Sylvette volume, which was a primary source for the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee in developing the 1964 Surgeon General's Report funded by CTR, that terrible fraudulent organization.
Let me talk about the findings briefly.
86,	please.
Number 1 is not an issue. Frank Townsend's cancer in this case was caused by cigarettes, no question about it.
Number 2, nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. Absolutely true. The question is was Frank Townsend addicted. That's what you have to decide in this case.
87.
Defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. What was it about the cigarettes that Frank Townsend smoked? Pall Malls, Kools, the Salem's that was defective and unreasonably dangerous.
How were they different from ordinary cigarettes? You can get an answer to that. What was the defect? Well, they contained nicotine according to Mr. Mitnik. But all cigarettes contain nicotine.
Dr. Gentry talked about -MR. MITNIK: Excuse me, Judge, that's an improper argument. May we step up?
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. PRYSOCK: Mr. Johnson is arguing how were these unreasonably defective. He's asking him to re-litigate and relook at the Engle findings and determine that. He's asking the jury to question
it. He said how are these any different than any other cigarettes placed on the market. That is completely improper and I would ask for a curative instruction, Your Honor. I think that's the only way to get past this.
MR. JOHNSON: Judge -THE COURT: You want to move in?
MR. JOHNSON: Yes. Just as -- I mean, are the Plaintiffs in this case saying that that finding means that all cigarettes ever manufactured by any tobacco companies were defective? If that's their position, I think that's just flat wrong, number one.
Number two, Mr. Mitnik went on during his closing argument about how real cigarettes contained nicotine and how that was -- made them defective. He talked about that during his opening statement. They spent a lot of time about that during his opening statement.
The fact of the matter is just like for every other finding, they have to prove the relevance of that finding to Frank Townsend, and are the cigarettes that Frank Townsend smoked defective. And they argued -- they argued in his closing argument that they were defective because they
contained nicotine.
THE COURT: I think you're getting close to asking them to reargue the findings that they're entitled to have given to the jury once they prove he's a member of the Engle class. So I'm going to suggest to you, Mr. Johnson, that you don't revisit that and don't go back down that road.
I'm not going to give a curative instruction but I think they're right about that. They do have to prove it and he may argue that they have to prove, you know, the relevant -- or the application to Mr. Townsend. Do you not agree? If they prove that he's a member of the class, that that -- that the respondings do apply to Mr. Townsend.
MR. JOHNSON: Yes, sir, but my position is -my position is that I will follow the Court's order, of course, that that finding does not mean that every cigarette ever made by tobacco manufacturer is defective.
THE COURT: But that -- I don't think you can go back that way.
MR. MITNIK: And, Judge, my problem is I've been sitting, because I hate getting up and objecting, but there have been -- but it's not
just that. He's basically saying we didn't do anything wrong. We didn't commit a conspiracy. He's making a mockery out of Engle and I think it's time for a curative that if we're a member of the class, those findings would be binding.
THE COURT: I'm just going to say that you need to stay within the parameters of the Engle directives and not try to revisit that.
MR. JOHNSON: And I have been trying to do it. But my point is you still have to show what those findings mean in this case to Frank Townsend. And they haven't done that, and I've pointed that out.
MR. MITNIK: We got to prove he's a class member and then we have those findings.
THE COURT: I think that's right. I think we need to stay with that.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:)
MR. JOHNSON: You will recall that in Mr. Mitnik's closing that he suggested -- and Dr. Cummings testified that Reynolds should have only made no nicotine cigarettes.
Dr. Gentry told you that no nicotine cigarette had been tried. First you can't remove all the
nicotine from them, number one; and number two, nobody bought them. There were some that were close to nicotine and nobody bought them.
Number 118, please.
One of the jury instructions you will get have to do with whether we concealed a material fact from Frank Townsend. And you will hear that a material fact is one that is of such importance that Frank Townsend would not have acted as he
did,	but for the concealment or omission.
What evidence is there that Mr. Townsend would have done anything other than continue his choices as he made them based upon anything that was said or not said by Reynolds. I've gone through that evidence for you and there is none.
Pull up the verdict form.
First question, Was he addicted to cigarettes?
I've told you that he was not and I've told you why he was not.
And then was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. So that's a two-part question that you've got to answer there; was he addicted; was it a legal cause of his lung cancer and death.
14, please.
And I would suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the answer is that it was choice and not addiction which was the legal cause. It wasn't both. We've gone through that.
Constrained choice, compulsion, none of those things. It was choice.
116 please.
Remember we went over these. These are from various Surgeon General's Reports, okay.
Cigarette smoking represents a category of health problems that can be called personal choice health behavior. Again, in '82, a personal choice behavior.
'86, it's an addictive behavior, individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
Choice decision hasn't been taken away by addiction.
49, please.
Dr. Henningfield tells us the same thing.
Personal choice health behavior. That's what smoking is.
Pull up the verdict form again.
These are -- if you answer no on question 1, as I believe you should and as I believe the
evidence calls for, then we stop.
If you go on to question 2, Was Reynolds' negligence a legal cause of Frank Townsend's death?
The answer to that I would suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, is no, once again. There is nothing Reynolds did or failed to do that caused Mr. Townsend's death, other than selling ordinary cigarettes.
You've seen all the testimony. You've heard all the testimony. And there was nothing that we said or that we did that trumped his choice to smoke and to continue to smoke.
Number 3, similarly, nothing we did that caused his death.
Now, I'm going to sit down in a minute. But I want to ask -- the thing you've got to keep in mind, where was this evidence. Derrick Townsend didn't come to testify that his father wanted to blame Reynolds for his injury or his smoking, the consequences of his choices.
Even Mrs. Townsend didn't say that Frank Townsend ever wanted to blame Reynolds for the consequences of his choices.
Where was the evidence that he felt agreed by
anything Reynolds said or did to him.
And let me get to this bit of sophistry about, well, we're accepting responsibility and Reynolds isn't. Here we are 15 years after his death and the attorneys representing Mrs. Townsend are asking you for lots of money for the choices that Mr. Townsend made.
How is it that accepting responsibility by second guessing Mr. Townsend's choices. We accept responsibility by asking for a slightly smaller boat load of money than we otherwise would?
That's not accepting responsibility. They haven't given you the evidence to justify that request.
I don't get another chance to talk to you.
Mr. Mitnik gets to go and that's fair. He has the burden of proof in this case. He's the one that's got to prove these things to you. But when you listen to him, please ask yourself what's the evidence that supports the statements. What does that evidence really mean? What might be the response to that evidence in those claims of evidence? And most importantly, what has it got to do with Frank Townsend?
Thank you.
