MR. LANTINBERG: Yes, your Honor.
May it please the Court, Counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon.
About a week ago, we all had the opportunity to meet each other and for you to begin to learn a little bit about this case during the process of the jury selection before Judge Klindt, and then on Monday of this week, we began with opening statements and you learned a little bit more.
I hope that during this past five days we have been interesting, that we’ve educated you, that you’ve learned something that you didn’t know.
And counsel for the defendant started this case and told you that this case was all about Pauline Walker, Albert Walker, that they were not going to talk about other smokers. And we talked an awful lot, as you know, in this case about a lot of things.
We presented to you evidence of the science of addiction. We presented to you evidence of the epidemic of lung cancer that began with the invention of the cigarette rolling machine. We presented evidence to you of the modifications that have been made to the cigarette in the last 50 years, and we presented extensive evidence of the conduct of these corporate conspirators, including R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Philip Morris, Lorillard,
Liggett to conceal from the American people what they knew about the dangers of cigarettes, what they knew about the addictive properties of cigarettes. They did so collectively and they did so powerfully.
They formed organizations such as the Tobacco Institute and the Council for Tobacco Research. They had meetings, they hired scientists, they bought research.
I’m going to go through some of those items with you today. Obviously, I have a limited amount of time. We all have had a limited amount of time, and trials unfold in an interesting way. Kind of like peeling back an onion. So my hope this afternoon is to try to bring together this information.
At the end of the case the Court will read to you a series of instructions, sort of the closing instructions, and the Court will tell you about the rules of law to be applied and the questions on the verdict form to be answered. Ultimately, the verdict form is the last product, if you will, of this lawsuit. So there is a series of questions on there, and I’ll go through those.
I want to start with, I certainly want to thank you all for the time and attention. Obviously, we have done a lot of talking and you haven’t had an opportunity to do any talking. The Court has told you not to talk about the case at all and you probably have a lot to talk about and mull
over. At the conclusion of this, you’ll be given that opportunity to speak more on what happened here and what happened with Albert Walker and the pain of Pauline Walker.
Pauline Walker, as you heard, was married to Albert Walker. Albert Walker was born in the Deep South in the ’20s and he grew up in a small town in Fitzgerald, Georgia, and at a very earlier age, joined the military; ultimately, met Pauline in 1950 and they married.
Over the 44-year marriage, they raised five children, come to see six grandchildren born, and they lived a modest but productive life. They put their children through college. For people that didn’t have any high school education, they worked hard and were industrious and kept to themselves and were productive members of society.
Albert Walker was described by Mr. Persons as a hard-working man, a voracious reader. He excelled in the military, and all of those compliments are well earned; but unfortunately, Mr. Walker did have a failing and his failing were cigarettes.
He started smoking at a very young age and was hooked. And we are going to talk an awful lot about addiction, and I drew a lot of pictures on these flip charts over the last couple of days, and I’m going to go back over those. And I have slides, as you might imagine, to point out some of the documents and some of the things we talked about
with Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns.
But for the Walker family, who raised these children and had a family and a home in Pensacola where they lived for 30 years until his death, the 90’s were a difficult time.
Albert Walker, as you’ve heard, was diagnosed with terminal lung cancer in August of 1990. And it’s terminal because small cell lung cancer is simply not survivable.
It’s very fast growing. You heard Dr. Burns testify about that. There’s been no other expert that’s come into this courtroom to tell you anything about the science of disease other than Dr. Burns.
That lung cancer was diagnosed in August of 1990.
He underwent the aggressive type of treatment that he was recommended to, and he had a really longer-than-expected life span.
It was not an easy time for Pauline Walker. Albert Walker lost his hair, he lost weight, he became weak.
Pauline had to attend to him; and then ultimately, as we know, on that fateful day in April of 1994, he succumbed to the cancer that he had developed and that had shown itself in 1990 -- in August of 1990.
For Pauline, of course, her pain began with the diagnosis of the cancer in 1990, and it continued through his treatment, through his remission and through its
reappearance. And then, of course, the death, as we might all expect, was difficult. None of us were there. None of us know exactly what happened.
You’ve heard from some family members, but we can all apply our own common sense to the situation and understand that was not an easy time, and no one losing a spouse that you’ve been married to for 44 years can be easy.
They had a life of memories, they had a life together. It wasn’t a perfect life. Not everything was rosy. They had difficulties. They had difficulties over money. They had difficulties at times, but they were together, and they had the kind of marriage that was built on trials, on tribulations, and they stuck through it and they were with each other and for each other.
We heard about some of the more personal moments in their lives when they would play with friends with cards and have barbecues in the backyard with friends and family. For each of them, they were an important part of each other’s life. And for Pauline, she’s been deprived of that for the last 10, 15, and into the future years.
You’ve heard about life expectancy of Americans who die in 1994 at age 66 is about 16 years, and we leave that information to you to evaluate as you see fit. Those will be your choices to make.
You heard about the slow spiral, if you will, for
Pauline Walker after Albert’s death in 1994. The house fell into disrepair, the grass became overgrown, the house became dark. It’s probably a symbol of Pauline’s own despair and difficulty. And ultimately a sheriff came to her house, and she lost the house. She lost the home they had lived in for 30-some-odd years.
So, what is clear to us, we don’t know everything about Albert Walker. We don’t know all the details of the first cigarette or the second cigarette. We don’t know exactly when he switched from one brand to another, but what is clear is that he was a heavy smoker, a lifelong smoker and one who started in his teens.
You heard from Dr. Cummings that age of initiation matters, and it matters for several reasons. It matters because it dictates the intensity of the addiction that someone might have for a lifetime. It matters because in the context of what was going on in the ’30s, ’40s, ’50s, and ’60s. It explains Albert Walker’s attraction to cigarettes, his affinity to cigarettes, his addiction to cigarettes.
This was a pervasive time of marketing, of advertising, of promotion. It was a time when everybody,
80 percent of males from his cohorts -- you probably heard the word "cohort." Those are people basically around his age. That’s when it came up. We do have these charts. But 80 percent of men of his cohort were smokers. It was as
common to smoke as it was to have a cell phone today.
I told you in opening statements about how common it was to smoke everywhere and that the list of places you couldn’t smoke or the list of people that didn’t smoke would be shorter than the list of places you could smoke and the list of people that did smoke. You saw images of the strongest and the healthiest and the most vibrant and the most respected of our society smoking cigarettes and being promoted to smoking cigarettes.
And the essence of the defense advanced by R.J. Reynolds in this case has not changed since the 1950s. They advance it before the public and they advance it in this courtroom. And you’ve seen an awful lot of documents.
MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, we have something we need to take up at sidebar.
THE COURT: Okay.
(The following was held at sidebar:)
MR. PERSONS: There was a ruling in limine on this case, your Honor, specifically addressing the point that plaintiff’s counsel just made, which was that under no circumstances was counsel to suggest that the approach to litigation taken in this case, the defendant’s defense of this case, is a continuation of the corporate misconduct.
THE COURT: Judge Dalton?
MR. PERSONS: Yes.
MR. LANTINBERG: I’m not sure that that’s what I was arguing, but I understand the point. I’ll do it differently.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. PERSONS: That’s not going to cure it. We need to put that on the record.
THE COURT: Do you want an instruction?
MR. PERSONS: We would like to move for a mistrial.
THE COURT: I’ll deny it.
MR. PERSONS: And an instruction.
THE COURT: Okay.
(Sidebar ended.)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you recall on a number of occasions I told you what the lawyers say is not evidence. I’m going to instruct you with regard to the last statement that was made by counsel, you are to completely disregard that statement and you should not consider it in any way -- in any way -- in your deliberations. Okay.
MR. LANTINBERG: Thank you, your Honor.
Ladies and gentlemen, the conspiracy that was started in the ’50s was a conspiracy that was premised on creating doubt in the minds of the American consumer, in the minds of Albert Walker, in the minds of smokers.
They tell people that the hazards of cigarettes was not yet determined, that the question was still open. And
ultimately, they came forward and they promoted the proposition that smoking was not injurious to the smoker’s health.
You heard that and that was an often repeated phrase that was repeated from the ’50s to the ’60s. You saw images on television, you saw spokespeople speaking of the fact that the question was an open question.
We have shown you extensive documents internally that reflected this deep understanding of both the power of addiction, as well as the hazards of their cigarettes, and they kept it a secret.
I point out to you at this early stage in this opening statement that -- remember, the Court told you that the Engle findings apply once you determine that Albert Walker is addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that his death was legally caused by that.
We presented to you all of the evidence of the concealment of the addiction, of the knowledge of the joint conduct because there is a claim in this case for punitive damages.
Punitive damages are a type of damages that are allowed in extraordinary circumstances where the evidence supports an understanding by the people that committed the wrong that it was knowing, it was intentional, that it wasn’t an accident. An example would be typically a drunk driver
who drives and kills someone. That might be a case in which punitive damages would be awarded as opposed to somebody who was looking down at their cell phone accidentally and maybe rear ended somebody in the back of a car. That might be an accident, negligent, didn’t intend to create the harm. It wasn’t reckless. It wasn’t with knowledge; but if we go forward with this course of action, it will absolutely cause the harm that we know it will cause.
You heard evidence in this courtroom that if you take three smokers, three regular smokers, one of those three smokers will die of a cigarette-related disease. One will quit and one will die. So, I point out to you this punitive damage aspect of the case because as we evaluate the information today and as you go back and deliberate, we ask that you evaluate the conduct of the defendants with an eye toward whether or not it was an accident or it was intentional, whether they knew what would happen to people like Albert Walker would happen to Albert Walker.
Let’s sort of launch, perhaps, quickly into this.
Mr. Warren, if you would put up the PowerPoint, we will look through a couple of things. We talked about a couple of things already. If you could, activate it. All right.
So we have seen pictures of Albert Walker and Pauline Walker. I do want to point out quickly on the death
certificate, because one of the questions, of course, is addiction, but the other question is: Did the addiction cause Albert Walker’s death?
It is undisputed that Albert Walker died of lung cancer. I read to you that admission just before we started opening statements. That’s not an issue in dispute.
The issue in dispute on this question is whether or not he got his lung cancer from his addiction to cigarettes. And we put before you the testimony of Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings who talked to you about the fact that Albert Walker was addicted.
You’ve heard testimony from the defendant’s expert that they say he wasn’t addicted, and we contend that the evidence supports the findings of Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, and we will go through that.
You are going to have an instruction on the verdict form, probably something like this on the jury instructions, about punitive damages. The concept is whether it was gross and flagrant to show a reckless disregard for human life and safety. An entire lack of care, a conscious indifference to the consequences. A conscious indifference, a wanton and the reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the public and almost to be the equivalent of an intentional violation of those rights. These are what we sort of describe as conduct violations.
So as you evaluate all of the documents that we have talked to you, showed you, all of the testimony -you’ve heard from a Robert Heimann, that videotape from 1986, in which he said that the Surgeon General was dead wrong.
They simply are unable and unwilling throughout this conspiracy to ever admit what they knew internally.
I want to talk a little bit about conspiracy and this concealment because it’s really important. We know that a conspiracy only works if all of the parties to the conspiracy keep the secret.
For those of us that enjoy the TV show Survivor, we have all seen where one of the survivors reveals the secret of some alliance and the alliance falls apart. And for the tobacco conspirators -- and they are conspirators -- this is not an allegation.
Once you conclude that Albert Walker’s a member of the Engle class, the finding from the prior Engle jury apply. So we are not alleging that they were a conspiracy. It has been determined, and those findings are binding on me, they are binding on the Court, they are binding on the defendants, and they are binding on you.
I would also point out to you that there’s not been a single piece of evidence brought forth by the defendants to rebut a single contention that we have brought forth in this case as relates to what they did, when they did it, and that
they knew what they were doing. And I think that’s really important.
The other important feature or factor about this evidence is internal documents were written at a time and by people that had no expectation that they would ever be seen in a courtroom, that they would be ever be evaluated by jurors.
When we go to law school we are taught about this mythical creature called the reasonable man. If you walk down the streets of Jacksonville or New York or anywhere else you won’t find a reasonable man. The only place you find a reasonable man is in a courtroom, on that side of the jury box. And when we come to court and we display the facts of a case and we ask you to decide the facts, we are asking you as a collective group to tell us what is reasonable conduct. Reasonable conduct for the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, reasonable conduct for Albert Walker. And to be sure, the defendants told you that Albert Walker made choices and that Albert Walker should have quit.
And certainly the R.J. Reynolds company made choices, and there will be a place on the verdict form. We started this case and we told you we would never come in here and say Albert Walker was blameless. He wasn’t blameless.
Certainly, we live in an era today in 2012 in which everybody knows in excruciating detail how dangerous
cigarette smoking is. Our kids understand this, but it was a different era back then and the understanding was not quite as acute.
There was a very conscious and deliberate effort by the tobacco companies to advance an alternate hypothesis, an alternate reality for smokers to follow. The constitutional hypothesis was this notion that some people are just different. The people that want to smoke or the people that get addicted to smoking are simply susceptible to disease.
The studies that were done and the marketing and the advertising that followed from that reflected that smokers were looking for, in the words of a Philip Morris executive or Philip Morris employee, a psychological crutch. They were looking for a reason to continue to smoke. And so the tobacco companies altogether came up with what -- not my words -- ready alternatives. They gave them an excuse, an explanation for the addicted smoker to continue to smoke.
Addiction, as Dr. Cummings told you, is a brain disease. It does change the mind. I use this word "exogenous substance” during the examination of Dr. Cummings, and it reflects a difference between a habit such as waking up at the same time every morning or, you know, I don’t know. The route that you take to go to work. An addiction, as Dr. Michael Cummings and Dr. Burns told you, is very, very, different.
So let’s sort of move a little bit forward. We use this chart. Albert Walker’s smoking history is important. You’ve seen this chart, and I’m going to use it several times, and I drew it on the board. From a chronological point of view, we think all of the evidence in this case can be laid on top of this mountain. This mountain has a couple of important time points, and I just want to point out we have the early 1900s, lung cancer is nonexistent in the 1900s.
In fact, if I drew lung cancer on this chart, here, you would have sort of a latency period of about 20 years.
And then you start to have this almost parallel lung cancer curve that followed the rise and sales of cigarettes.
So in the 1900s you have the creation of the machine, the creation of a new industry, the machine-rolled modern American cigarette, sales increased. This is what this is. This is a sales chart. It’s the number of cigarettes every man, women, and child in the United States is smoking.
So Albert Walker is on the front end of this curve. Before World War II, before the Depression. He was born here, joins the Air Force in the middle of the World War II and becomes a devoted customer of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. We heard the brands. The brands are all R.J. Reynolds brands.
American Tobacco became a part of R.J. Reynolds. Pall Mall was the big brand that you heard about from American Tobacco. Winston from its inception in 1954, and we had this dip. This dip in 1954. That’s the cancer scare and that’s the introduction of a psychological crutch, an alternative. The illusion of filtration. That’s not my word. The illusion of filtration was marketed to people who heard the message. We are not saying Albert Walker didn’t hear the message. In fact, it would seem to me that had Alvin Walker’s report that we’ve heard so much about, if that had been delivered to the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, perhaps they would have recognized that cigarette smoking was dangerous as they are suggesting that Albert Walker should never have smoked after his son brought to him what he had learned in the classroom. But as we said, it was known.
There was information out there, but that’s not the whole story, and it’s not an excuse.
A company that sells a product that causes harm is responsible for the harm it causes, whether it’s a hammer. They sell a hammer that they know breaks the third time you smash it and it hurt someone, they are liable. And they knew their cigarettes were addictive and they lied about it, and they knew it would cause cancer in ways that people didn’t understand. And they lied about it, and they kept that conspiracy together.
So here we have this heavy smoking and ultimately, we know, diagnosis and death, and we talked about that April 1994 time period. Time periods matter in this case. There are several questions on the verdict form that ask you to look at when things happen. You are going to be asked to determine a question about when Albert Walker knew or should have known that he had lung cancer.
The first time Albert Walker knew he had lung cancer was when he was diagnosed. You heard evidence from Dr. Burns how rapid small cell lung cancer is, and he had a six-week prognosis of life at the time that he showed up if he did nothing, and there was no evidence that he knew or should have known earlier than August of 1990.
Another date is the 1982 date. You’ll be asked to decide whether or not there was conduct before or after a date in 1982 that Albert Walker relied on, that Albert Walker -- that manifested itself in such a way that it continued to make Albert Walker smoke. We have shown you a lot of documents, and I’ll show you this continuing conspiracy and the omissions and frauds.
There is two types of fraud in this case. As you evaluate this reliance on the advertising, on the "we don’t know" -- and you saw that video of all those spokespersons saying, "We don’t know. It’s not yet proven." And you might have even saw Anne Browder, the spokesperson for the Tobacco
Institute who said that the jury is not yet in on whether or not cigarettes are dangerous. I think the jury is in. I think the jury is in this courtroom.
So there is the smoking history, and these dates are important. And so, like I say, you’ll see documents that reflect fraud.
Fraud has two parts. Fraud has active fraud and there are omissions. When a party has an obligation to tell somebody something and they don’t, that’s fraud. If you go to buy a home and you look around the home and the guy knows that the foundation is cracked and he’s painted over it, that’s fraud by omission. There is a duty to disclose what you know about your product, there is a duty to disclose what you know about the hazards of using your product in the way it’s intended.
Should R.J. Reynolds be permitted, should you accept their defense that we told Albert Walker everything was okay. We told them he could smoke our cigarette. You heard Robert Heimann say, "We don’t take any fault with someone smoking one or two packs a day. No fault at all."
But now that Albert Walker has smoked one or two packs a day, was addicted to their cigarettes and died, the defense in this case is, it was all his fault. It was his choice.
All right. So we know that these are some stipulated facts. We talked about this when he died, medical
cause of death. Preponderance of the evidence. The Court is going to read you the instructions in this case. We are not in a criminal case. We are in a civil case, and perhaps the easiest way to describe the preponderance of the evidence is to talk about the blind lady of justice. And maybe some of you have seen the statue or drawing in which the lady is holding scales and she’s blindfolded and the scales are even and they are empty. That describes really the situation we all started with before this case started.
We did the jury selection and tried to get people off that thought they might not be completely fair so those scales would not start off even. So she’s blindfolded. Throughout this trial, we have submitted to you that we have placed evidence on those scales. We have placed to you all the testimony of the conduct of the defendants on one side of that scale.
All of the documents -- and these are the documents -- you are going to get these documents back with you. And some are long and some are short. There will be an index that will help guide you a little bit to what those things are, and I’m going to try to give you some numbers in a little bit to focus you as you go into the jury room, but the scales have been filled with our evidence.
I said to you before, there’s not been a single piece of evidence that the defendants, that R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Company has come in and placed on their side of the scale to say, "We didn’t conspire." That we didn’t addict, that we didn’t do it negligently, that we didn’t sell a defective product. There is no evidence. And no witness came to -MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, pardon the interruption. May we have a sidebar?
THE COURT: Do you have an objection?
MR. PERSONS: Yes, your Honor. Engle findings. Incontestablility -THE COURT: Overruled. Again, I remind you what the lawyers say is not evidence. It’s not the law. I’ll instruct you on the law, and you heard the evidence with regard to the facts, and you are the judges of the facts based on the evidence.
MR. LANTINBERG: No witness came through those doors, testified in that chair for the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and tell you anything that was presented to you was even slightly incorrect about what they did and when they did it along that mountain slide that we showed you.
So as you evaluate the evidence, evaluate it against this concept of the preponderance of the evidence.
The Court is going to use that. You’ll see that word several times in the jury instructions and in the verdict form.
So Engle class member. We have talked a little bit
about addiction, and I will -- I’m going to want to show you on the ELMO the verdict form in a minute, if I can get my hands on my verdict form. So you’ll be asked questions on the verdict form. Let me see here. Prior jury findings.
All right, class membership. Addicted to nicotine that causes lung cancer. We talked about that.
Addiction, Dr. Cummings told you that he takes his definition of addiction from the National Institute of Drug Abuse, that the definition of addiction as testified to by Mr. Abramson -- Dr. Abramson was this morning. It’s his own definition. But addiction is defined, and the modern definition of addiction is a chronic relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite knowledge of harmful consequences. We have demonstrated each of those pieces. You have got the heaviness of smoking index.
It is an admittedly simple scale. It is two questions. It’s what doctors and practitioners use to diagnose addiction to cigarettes every day. It is incontestable that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, and it is incontestable that smokers get addicted to cigarettes.
The defense in this case is that Albert Walker wasn’t one of them.
Legal causation. Legal causation, this is where it contributes in the definition of legal causation. Legal
causation doesn’t mean one thing and nothing else. It’s described as a series of events that in natural and continuous sequence contribute to the result. And so the addiction contributed to the result of death.
You heard Dr. Gentry by video deposition testify, and he doesn’t believe that addiction is a problem, that addiction to a safe product is not dangerous. Okay. But their product isn’t safe. There is as sort of a simple formula that I think bears some drawing. I’ll find a blank page. We know that if A equals B and B equals C, then A equals C. We suggest to you that if addiction leads to smoking and smoking leads to disease, then it’s the addiction that equals the disease.
The one thing the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company admits it can do, but refuses to do, is make their product nonaddictive. And, yes, cigarettes are legal. The sale of tobacco products in this country have a legal product. It’s a legal agricultural product, but the modern American cigarette is as far from the tobacco leaf in the field as the space shuttle is to the first airplane that the Wright brothers flew. It is an exquisitely engineered product in which every aspect of the cigarette has been modified in order to enhance its inhaleability.
We talked about the concept of inhaleability in this courtroom at length because it is the essence of the
danger of the cigarette, and it is the essence of addiction. And without inhaleability, people don’t smoke. You heard about -- we showed you this drawing about pH and saliva and cigars and cigarettes and that tobacco, when in cigar form, can’t be deeply inhaled. And cigars, of course, existed on that chart years and years before the modern American cigarette, long before the modern American cigarette, but we didn’t have the level of disease, because we didn’t have deep inhalation. We didn’t have all the surface area in the lungs getting bathed in nicotine, which enhanced the addiction, and the lungs being bathed in the carcinogens that are created in cigarette smoke.
So we saw a deep and substantial understanding of the -- deep understanding of what it took to make the cigarette deeply inhaleable with the use of additives, with the use of flavoring. They used cocoa, sugars, with the understanding of how to blend different types of tobacco to create different levels of pH, to deliver different amounts of nicotine, that a cigarette is a delivery device for a daily dose of nicotine.
These documents, I suggest to you, just as the mountaintop kind of looks like the tip of an iceberg, are a tip of iceberg. And we admittedly have selected documents that we think are the most powerful. No doubt about it. But as I suggested to you before, the defendants haven’t brought
in any documents at all. We do have a punitive damage case and those documents go to that point; and if there were documents that they wanted to bring in opposition to that, they could.
In evidence, Exhibit 2012 Surgeon General’s Report is in evidence as 237. Well, 2012 is 1302, and I encourage you to take a look at 1302 in evidence and 237 in evidence.
It really is the gold standard of what we are talking about. It brings forward this notion of what the tobacco companies knew and when they knew it. It describes the changes to the modern American cigarette that made it more addictive, the ones we talked about that are incontestable, and cigarettes kill.
You heard about the 400,000 people a year that die from cigarettes and the hundreds of billions of dollars of productivity and medical costs associated with it.
Cigarettes -- this is the 2010 Surgeon General report,
Page 105 in 237, cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting.
This is the incontestable facts, and the suggestion that Albert Walker is some rare breed of life-long smoker who was not addicted is not supported by the evidence.
We talked about addiction and the factors that are important in the 1989 Surgeon General report, and we have a dog-eared version here on my desk. It brought forward a lot
of that science, and in 1989 -- and in 1989 and 1988 are important years. 1988, as you saw, the Surgeon General, for the first time changed what it thought about addiction, about smoking and described it as addictive. It was in that year, immediately following that there was a press release that said that claims of addiction are irresponsible and scare tactics.
That was part of that same decision in the 1950s to hire the Hill and Knowlton public relations firm to help them start their conspiracy at the Plaza Hotel and bring it forward. And you’ll see a document called the "Roper Proposal” in 1972 in which they were looking for yet another message. That’s the one that, I think, has the constitutional hypothesis. They are looking for a ready alternative message.
This conspiracy continued through -- and 1988 is an important date, I suggest to you, because in 1988 you saw internal documents in which they understand from a physiological, a physical, not just some psychological idea, but that there was something physically going on in the bodies of smokers that they needed to fill with nicotine.
And they knew it in the ’70s, ’80s and into the ’90s.
You saw those men stand up in Congress and raise their right hand and say "Cigarettes are not addictive," just a few days after Albert Walker died. Obviously they had
been planning to do that long before Albert Walker died or long before that hearing.
So the Surgeon General in 1989 tells you age of initiation matters for addiction. That’s what we talked about so much when he started and how long he started, and nicotine addiction. So those two factors -- this is the Surgeon General, those two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice.
Mr. Abramson -- Dr. Abramson showed you some slides about Surgeon General reports from 1972, 1977, I think, and ’86 in which the Surgeon General used the word "choice."
That was what the Surgeon General said up until that time period. It wasn’t until there was a better understanding of the modern science of addiction -- and you heard Dr. Cummings tell you that the documents that were internal to the tobacco companies, the documents that had not been produced until the ’90s, despite being asked for, that those reflected a deep understanding and would have altered the Surgeon General’s conclusions about whether it was a choice or an addiction.
You’ve seen -- all right. So let’s get a little bit to this. We have talked about a bunch of these documents, and you’ll have these back in the jury room.
1953, the survey of cancer, that’s document 160, if you want to look at it further. 1958 visit, it’s an interesting document about all the things that they learned
when a group of scientist from British American Tobacco came to the United States and spoke with all the major tobacco makers, cigarette manufacturers. It was clear to them even then that it was really a consensus that cigarettes caused disease, yet they didn’t come forward with it.
No. 753, the optimum composition of smoke, 1959. Again, another admission of what’s going on internally. So this is about what did they know inside the tobacco companies and what did they not tell the American public. They had isolated aromatic hydrocarbons, a type of carcinogen.
1953, Exhibit 160, again, this is Claude Teague.
You heard all about Claude Teague. He was there for many, many years and speaks prominently about these issues.
They knew that they wanted to remove them in 1956, Exhibit 162. And this is 215, called "The Scant Document." The amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming, and the evidence challenging such indictment is scant. 1962, R.J. Reynolds knew this and, of course, they counter-blast it.
Remember, after the 1964 Surgeon General Report, they came out and said it was simply all false. There were press releases where they denounced the conclusions of Surgeon General, and that "we don’t know" statement and it’s not injurious to human health became a common refrain for 50 years.
So what did they do? What did they agree to do?
We talked about this. There was a telegram in 1953, this was December. The middle of winter in New York City. Let’s get together because Dr.’s Wynder and Graham and their publications in Life magazine are starting to have an impact. Our sales are going down. They get together in the Plaza Hotel. The Hill and Knowlton agency is working fast. By January 4th they announce the creation of an entity that’s supposedly going to do unfettered research. They are going to figure out what the problem is. But we now know, we have the benefit today of knowing that was a complete sham, and that’s not the kind of research that was done.
The Tobacco Institute, again, key documents that will be listed in the notebook, and I can write some of those down. I’m going to move a little quicker because I know I’m running out of time.
This is this concept again. This is 1953. It establishes the purpose of the conspiracy. There is only one problem. Confidence. The problem isn’t the truth apparently. It’s the confidence. We have to get people to believe it will be okay and keep buying our products because if they don’t, we are going out of business. Let the scientists do the worrying, and we will go about eating and playing, smoking, relaxing, riding in automobiles and living a good every day life.
So what did they tell the American public? We know it started it the Frank Statement, and we will show you that, in which they said, "We don’t believe our products are injurious to health, and we will cooperate. We will cooperate and we put our customers’ health as paramount above all other considerations."
When a company tells its customers that the products they make are safe, we are going to look out for you, we’re not going to do things that are dangerous, doesn’t a customer have a right to believe it, to rely upon it?
There is this series of documents in the public, Tobacco Institute press releases. You heard Dr. Cummings talk about these. There wasn’t any controversy on what happened and when it happened. You saw the images of people talking on the news shows of the day. There was much less news coverage, if you will, there were less channels. People watched the evening news, and so these were very prominently public statements that nothing is injurious to health. If there is something in this, we will take it out. We put our customers’ interests above all others.
You saw the 1990 -- actually that date is wrong, 1990 letter. That’s Exhibit 48 in evidence. And in 1990, the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is writing to children at an elementary school about, you know, their products, and they are saying, we have researched -- we spent hundreds of
millions of dollars researching the issue and there is just no link. In 1990. This is a few months before Albert Walker is diagnosed, they are still promoting to the public -- this is that omission I told you about, about relying on an omission. This is the position given to the public that’s everything is safe. They are telling this to the fifth graders of this country that everything is okay. There is nothing proven about it.
There is that April 16, cigarette addiction, irresponsible. That’s the press release that followed the issuance of the 1988 Surgeon General Report in which -- and you saw some of that, that the -- maybe it was "20/20" or it was -- I forget which show, in which one of the scientist that came on said, "We finally have an understanding of addiction. It’s a disease. Now, we can finally find a way to treat it."
So had the tobacco industry taken all of the money that they said they were going to spend, had they told the truth about what they knew about addiction and made it public earlier, the millions of Americans might not have ever taken up smoking, and certainly millions of Americans might never have died.
And we think those are factors as you look at the reprehensibility of the conduct of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, as you evaluate whether or not in this case punitive
damages should be entitled. We are not asking you at this day to tell us how much money should be awarded. That will be for another day, but are we simply entitled to -- is the conduct such that it is so reprehensible that a message should be sent to corporate America, should be sent to the executives of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company that this is not the kind of conduct -- of corporate conduct that should be allowed in this country.
The Frank Statement, we accept an interest of paramount to every other consideration in our business. They have never renounced this position until well after Albert Walker died. They never said to the American public during the time Albert Walker was dying, and for many years thereafter, that actually we really don’t; it’s not the truth; we have been in a conspiracy; we’re all working together; we are all keeping the same secret; we are sharing information, but we are not telling you.
1957, so the conspiracy is continuing. They issued a press release. This is that sort of press release. No substance found that causes cancer in human beings. There is internal documents that reflected deep understanding of the relevance of animal studies to humans, and that existed well in the ’50s and certainly is true today.
Friendly research. You heard in the testimony of Dr. Cook about this Larsen, Dr. Larsen at the Virginia -- the
Medical College of Vermont in which he was paid for by a grant that was funded by the American Tobacco Company and they needed friendly research. It was 1941, a long time ago, but it’s a start of a recognition that what we are going to have to do in order to continue going forward with our position that it’s not injurious, we are going to need friendly research. We need to rely on something. So they start in the ’40s.
Then you heard about this AMA, and Dr. Gentry, I believe, testified about how the AMA, how Dr. Haag’s presence on the AMA was able to forestall some action by the AMA to denounce cigarettes. And that was the most important factor in protecting them from the AMA, and so they continued to do that.
There is documents and we have shown them to you and we will show them to you right now. There are things that are bad in our files, we will change them, we can have documents rewritten.
Again, is this the kind of conduct that corporations in America should do? They told the public that they were doing studies to figure out if there was damage. Monograph 13 in evidence and the National Cancer Institute, Exhibit 123 at Page 70, there is no current evidence that tobacco companies conducted any biological or animal testing to test the hypothesis of reduction of risk. This is
actually talking about low-tar and filtered and low-yield cigarettes, but they didn’t do that. In fact, there is -- we will move on. Let’s see.
So internal documents about addiction, we have focused an awful lot in this case on the importance of addiction. It’s both an issue for purposes of class membership, but it’s also a cornerstone of the fraud, a cornerstone of the strict liability, the negligence, the unreasonably dangerous product, and it’s a cornerstone of the conspiracy. So we talked an awful lot about both what they knew about addiction, why addiction is so important, why they designed for addiction, created inhaleable products and, like I said, the series of pretty powerful documents that speak to that.
In 1962 we possess a knowledge more extensive than published in scientific literature. This is the period right before the issuance of Surgeon General Report in 1964 when President Kennedy said, "I just don’t know a lot. Let me learn more, and we will get a report." And they asked for the tobacco companies to produce what they had. And that green monster that you saw, that was produced, but it was incomplete. And a half lie is a lie. And, in fact, a half lie is probably worse than a lie because it’s sort of the wink and a nod. By giving them sort of the haystack and suggesting there might be some good needles in there, or
suggesting this is everything. Look how extensive our work is. We have done such a good job. We have put together this extensive book. You must have everything. When, in fact, there was volumes of data and information that was known to the tobacco companies that was not in the green monster and not in those supplements and didn’t come to light until the late ’90s when produced.
They understood the mechanisms of addiction. Not habit. Not choice, but addiction. Nicotine is connected with addiction. Nicotine is the key to addiction, 1963. Nicotine is addictive, 1963. We are in the business of selling an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms. Again, Brown and Williamson, again, a part of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. So when you see these various tobacco companies, recognize they are all a part of the same company.
High level of secrecy, this is that Swiss research that was done, Exhibit 77. Results have been kept at a high level of secrecy, 1962. This was the type of research that wasn’t provided to the Surgeon General.
Genetic means. This notion of roll-your-own versus the modern American cigarette. From very early days they were applying modern agricultural techniques to pick out the very best strains of tobacco, continue to breed those strains of tobacco to get whatever they wanted in order to get the
right level of nicotine. As you saw, nicotine was highly correlated with sales, and its an issue they tracked and studied.
Rapid transfer to the brain. They understood the concept of ventilation. They understood the concept of rapid impact and they designed for it.
Dominant specification should be nicotine delivery, 1972. Albert Walker is now smoking for some 30 years at this point. 1981, of course, this kind of information that the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery, and the theory and probably, in fact, that a given smoker on a given day has a rather fixed need. I showed you that chart and how it decomposes at an exponential rate.
Why did they do this? We know why they did it.
It’s all about money. And so they did it to protect themselves financially in 1963. And they carried that conspiracy forward. They wrote internally in 1963 about the -- this is sort of the let’s not tell the truth. This is what I call the irksome letter, 1963. We should be so vague and incomplete as to be irksome to the reader. That’s the half truth. We’ll say we are giving you something, but it’s really kind of a buried truth.
From a litigation standpoint, these were important considerations in 1963. 1980, prechoice. We can’t defend continued smoking is free choice if the person was addicted.
Albert Walker was addicted, and he is not someone who simply smoked as a result of free choice.
What did they tell? I guess that was one of the few interesting things that happened on C-Span April 14,
1994, the Surgeon General’s all raised their right hand and said nicotine is not addictive. Remember, I told you about cooperating with the public health, submission undesirable. 1963, again, they are actively making a decision. We are now eight, nine, ten years into this conspiracy that started at the Plaza Hotel in the Winter of 1954. And the tobacco companies are still withholding information from the American public and from the public health authorities.
1964, as a result of not having all the information they needed that they should have, the Surgeon General incorrectly concluded that cigarette smoking is a habit, not an addiction. A habit being something that doesn’t happen from exogenous sources. It is not a chemical. There is a chemical, and the chemical gets into the body through the blood/brain barrier. It’s so small. It’s one of the few chemicals that does that.
Designing for addition. There is all sorts of physical characteristics. There’s a chapter in the 2010 Surgeon General’s Report that talks about all the design features for addiction. These are the types of things that were talked about in this case. Flavorants, ventilation, pH
smoke, chemistry, reconstituted tobacco blends, and
Dr. Cummings, you saw him sort of pulled the tobacco apart to
give you a little sense of what that is.
1984, again, I bring this document up because, one, it occurred after 1982, Exhibit 146. And here they are in 1984 with strategies on how to sell their products. Here we are talking about Winstons, younger adult strength was a leading indicator of Winstons extended market share. They are marketing to the youth. Again, we offer this to you in the context of what should corporate defendants be doing with products they know are dangerous. Should they be marketing them to the youth?
We know if you don’t capture the smoker by age 24 you’re not going to get them. Five percent of smokers start after age 24. The tobacco companies understood this and studied it.
Pall Mall, big brand used by Mr. Walker. This is Exhibit 909 at Page 55. Pall Mall is a problem-solver. It is the compromise cigarette. It’s a bridge spanning the gap between opposite and often uncongenial characteristics. It’s the only cigarette that psychologically offers a middle ground between filter and nonfilter. The nonfiltered Pall Mall is that long, smoke either end, the long natural tobacco filter filters the smoke.
Of course, we saw about Mr. Walker’s use of the
gold Pall Mall in the packages. An outlet for smoking anxiety before the advent of the filters. Stopping, trying to stop, or cutting down smoking were the recognized outlets for cigarette anxiety.
Tensions and anxieties today are expressed by switching brands. This is that rational alternative that smokers were looking for, and they knew how to market. This document is like 150 pages long just on Pall Mall in 1961, studying everything they can about what it is that makes the Pall Mall a popular product and how to make it better, how to market it.
They studied the themes that would be powerful for smokers in order to best position the product. We know that they made their cigarettes more addictive because the Surgeon General concluded that in 2010, and it also made it more dangerous.
Let’s see here, here we have the 2010 Surgeon General at Page 17. The approaches included new filters, blends, ingredients, ventilation, and pH. These are not simply the irrational conclusions of Dr. Cummings, but are, in fact, supported by every major scientific authority that studied the issue in the world. Made cigarettes more addictive.
Additives, we have talked about that.
Advertising. Advertising is an important concept.
I do want to touch on it even though I’m running a little bit long.
Advertising is what encourages people to smoke.
It’s what encourages people to continue to smoke. The amount of money spent by the tobacco industry on advertising dwarfed every other industry in this country during the time when they could advertise everywhere. They were -- each of the companies were, respectively, sometimes one, two, and three in a row. Not just talking about versus General Motors.
They were just one, two, or three. $250 billion worth of advertising, Dr. Cummings told you.
1927, this RJR letter to sales staff. Let’s go after the youth market early on, and it continued, and those memos ’74, ’75, ’84 in which the tobacco manufacturers,
R.J. Reynolds included, are going after the young smoker.
FTC reports, those are really powerful documents. Take a look at them. They represent studies by the U.S. government. Nos. 177 and 129 are the 1967 -- Exhibit 177 is when the Federal Trade Commission talks about how anyone who can either read or write or understand the spoken word has been exposed to a cigarette advertisement.
The ads were beautifully done. Very well crafted and designed to sell a message. These are very early ads, of course, promoting doctors and doctors smoke cigarettes and physicians say it’s toasted, and here’s the Pall Mall box.
The gold filter that Mr. Walker smoked. Young smokers, this, again, goes to that concept about getting the young smokers. There are documents about wanting to talk them into assets.
There is a document -- and this is the research planning memo No. 176 and is a really interesting document in which they’re studying the fact that young smokers have no reason to smoke. They don’t need the nicotine, so how do we induce the young smoker to start smoking? So they have to give wholly irrational reasons. So that’s why the imagery in all this advertising is so powerful for.
Young vibrant men, beautiful women doing fun, exciting activities and not saying anything. If you remember, all these ads are really pictures meant to convey feelings and images. Designed, again, to get the young smoker, 14 to 24 age group, going after the young people in 1974 .
1978 -- that’s right, the Tobacco Institute in 1978 is writing and they are telling the subcommittee on health and the environment, again, we don’t do any studies. None of our companies are actually doing this. We are not going after children, and it’s a complete and total lie because we saw documents from ’74 and ’73.
How successful was the effort? This is that friendly research. It worked. Dr. Larsen is equipped. This is a whole other concept, a whole other concept. Not only
did they put out friendly research, but they tried to thwart anything that would be counter to their message. So they were able to forestall the publication on the favorable material to the extent that there were things in the file that they wanted to remove that they would. And there is a letter -- there is one letter from Dr. Senkus that the defendants put into evidence involving the Tobacco Working Group which said they are working on a safer cigarette. It’s the only Senkus document that the defendants have issued, and here Dr. Senkus is telling us they will remove sort of the dangerous reports and defend themselves in present and future suits. That’s Exhibit 377. Or they can simply rewrite them and change the facts to meet their theories.
And 1970, this is the denies. Denies the cause of disease. And, again, Philip Morris same thing. If there is this one study that they are doing is bad, we will just bury it.
CTR, we talked about how much money was spent on research that wasn’t real. It was set up as a shield. The lawyers quickly commented that keeping negative results quiet would cause tremendous problems in court actions should the fact come to light. The negative data was suppressed. We now know that.
Creating doubt without actually denying it. This is the 1972 Roper Proposal. I told you they were looking for
a new alternative, psychological crutch, out of business overnight if people didn’t want nicotine.
And then a larger bag of money. This is the structured creativity group, Exhibit 106 in evidence, 1992. 1992, again, an important date after 1984 -- ’82, and they recognized that they will just keep selling the product and all they will need is a larger bag of money -- larger bag to carry the money to the bank.
’88 Surgeon General, we talked about that and that press release. Let me see. I talked about comparative fault, and let me just show you real quickly the verdict form, and you’ll have a chance to look at the verdict form more closely in the jury room. The questions are on there.
We think we presented to the evidence that supports Albert Walker and Pauline Walker’s claim.
I appreciate all of your time and your attention. After this, counsel for R.J. Reynolds will speak, and then at the end Mr. Nealey will respond for a little bit, and that will be the last we will have a chance to talk to you.
So I thank you for your attention and your time, and thank you.



MR. NEALEY: Thank you, your Honor.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have 43 minutes, and I say that because we had time limits and we each had 20 hours.
When I hit 43 minutes, I will have gone exactly 20 hours in our case from opening to closing.
You have gotten an abbreviated story. It’s necessarily brief because, as you’ve heard, there’s already been an Engle trial with lots and lots of evidence.
Now, when you put the evidence that we think is important and defendant can put the evidence that they thought was important before you and we each had an opportunity to call witnesses and have them come here and we each had an opportunity to put documents up during the trial and to question witnesses about those documents and we had an opportunity to cross-examine each other’s witnesses to see if what they are telling is the truth, if they are saying it for money, if they really know what they are talking about, or if instead they are merely just a poster board for the lawyers to make arguments.
Ladies and gentlemen, when you look at the evidence
and when I go through this, I want you to ask yourself, did I hear that during this trial? Did I hear it discussed? Or was it merely something that the lawyer got up and said during closing arguments? Because, ladies and gentlemen, you were instructed repeatedly by the Court that what the lawyers say is not evidence.
What's evidence is what you hear from the witness box, and you believe it or you don’t. It’s what you are shown, the documents, and whether you believe them or not, what’s talked about. Did you assess the credibility of it. Did you believe somebody or not.
When you look at the evidence that's put on, I think you can really only draw one conclusion at the end of the case. Now, I say that because there was a statement made by counsel in his closing argument that, well, they didn't deny the conspiracy because there is an Engle finding.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are going to be asked whether the conduct that they engaged in was wrongful, wrongful to the level that it is deserving of punitive damages, if their conduct basically was that of wanton disregard for safety.
Now, if you kill somebody, that's classically wanton disregard. Ladies and gentlemen, this is at some level a murder case. Albert Walker died.
MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, that’s out of bounds.
THE COURT: I remind you, ladies and gentlemen, again, what the lawyers say is not evidence. Disregard that last comment. It’s inappropriate.
MR. NEALEY: Ladies and gentlemen, Albert Walker died because he smoked a product manufactured by R.J. Reynolds. Now, they did put evidence on at the end. We heard about the green monster and they spent half a billion dollars on this research, and you heard about what that research really was. They could have put evidence on. They made a decision not to put evidence on.
We heard about how Albert Walker believed in personal responsibility. And he did. No doubt about it. We also heard from John Redmond that Albert Walker at the end of his life was mad that he had been lied to. You heard the deposition that was read. I showed you where their own experts had excerpted the depositions. He believed that he had been lied to, that the advertisements had lied to him and that he had been misled. He also said that he did not know until he got sick that smoking caused lung cancer.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, Albert Walker accepted personal responsibility, but I haven’t heard in this entire trial one indication from RJR that they accept any responsibility for what they did over 50 years. That, ladies and gentlemen, is what this case is about.
Now, I want to remind you of something that I think
is very, very important. Dr. Gentry -- and you heard him on the screen. Nice gentleman from Reynolds, their chief scientist -- spent about 25 minutes talking about the fact that, well, addiction wasn’t the problem. It was the bad stuff in the cigarettes, because if you are addicted to something, that doesn’t hurt you. There is no problem.
Now, as long as Albert Walker believed -- and the evidence from his son and from John Redmond and from his conduct, ladies and gentlemen, is that he did believe that cigarettes were not as bad as everybody else was saying and believed that filters were going to help him. If he believed that, he’s simply the person that Dr. Gentry is talking about, somebody who is using a product that maybe isn’t so good for you, but isn’t as bad as everyone else says.
Ladies and gentlemen, they make it out that everybody knew and that Albert Walker was some crazy guy for believing their lies. Ladies and gentlemen, we showed you repeatedly the language in the Surgeon General’s Report, and I urge you to pull it and read it.
The language in the Surgeon General’s Report from 1989 in which the Surgeon General says that there are between 8- and 16 million Americans who are smokers as of 1989 and do not believe that smoking has bad health consequences. That’s not one person. That’s not two people. That’s not ten. That’s between 8- and 16 million people.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's the '89 Surgeon General’s Report. It’s in evidence. You can pull it yourself and look at it. Exhibit 572.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'll show you that one more time, because ultimately they spent a lot of time trying to convince you that everybody knew, everybody believed that cigarette smoking was bad and that the statements -- I mean, statements made by Albert Walker it was implied and then directly said in closing argument, which is not true, he really did believe. Well, if he didn’t believe, he’s between -- he's one of those between 8- and 15 million adult smokers who are still unaware of or do not accept important health risks of smoking. This is from the 1989 Surgeon General’s Report, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very, very important and powerful demonstration of how successful the fraud and the conduct actually was, because there were people who, like Dr. Gentry said, believed that they could keep smoking and they could keep smoking because the filters might help them. The filters took the bad stuff out or because the cigarettes were light cigarettes they had low tar.
Remember, Albert Walker smoked Pall Mall Golds 100s. You saw the advertisements. We put them up. Lowest tar in its category. Remember what Dr. Cummings said about the marketing messages for Pall Mall Golds? Light, light
color, white filter paper, the end is white, it’s clean, it’s healthier for you. They were health reassurance cigarettes, in the words of the defendant’s own documents. And a lot of people believed them.
Dr. Michel, I heard everything he said. I spent a lot of time trying to show you that Dr. Michel not only didn’t know anything, but at times he was saying things that were demonstratively not correct from what his own data was like, for example, we got the slide that he looked in the local paper and there were only 22 tobacco ads.
I showed you, ladies and gentlemen -- and he had to admit -- that in one year the very paper, the Pensacola local paper, had 11 ads for the very brand Pall Mall Gold 100s that Albert Walker was smoking. He wants to tell you there aren’t any ads.
Now, I don’t think what he was saying was correct.
I don’t think it was true, but there is one thing I agree with Dr. Michel. He told you that we have to judge conduct by the times, not by today.
If I lit up a cigarette in this courtroom right now -- I had a cigarette a second ago. Maybe I need a cigarette. If I lit this up, the bailiff would probably come tackle me. People now, today, ladies and gentlemen -- you heard about whether Albert Walker was a maladaptive personality, whether he had a maladaptive pattern of
cigarette use. Remember, Dr. Abramson, their paid $600-an-hour expert that came up here, in his deposition, when we put him under oath, he said he had a maladaptive pattern of cigarette use. Then he came into court and under questioning, he said, no, he’s not maladaptive, and I had to impeach him. Impeachment, that is a 180-degree switch.
People today take these cigarettes and if they smoke them, they have to go stand out on the curb. They have had to get out of the building. They would sit in little huddled bunches. We are down, as Dr. Cummings said and Dr. Burns told you, to about 15 percent of the population smoking. When Albert Walker started smoking, 80 percent of black men his age were smoking.
The percentage in the ’50s of Americans that smoked was around 50 percent. That number reinforces entirely the smoking habit and it set the kind of conditions where the tobacco industry was not hated by the public, but the tobacco industry was given a great deal of respect.
Did you notice the degree of respect that was given to the executives in the tobacco companies in the TV clips, the old ones? This is an eminent scientist. Here’s his lab. I mean, literally there was a fraud that was successful because not only was smoking so prevalent, but people really wanted the reassurance because addicts want the reassurance. That’s what the ’88 Surgeon General’s Report does and the ’89
Surgeon General's Report and the 2010 Surgeon General's Report says.
Ladies and gentlemen, the defendants spent $250 billion in advertisements over the last 50 years.
Now, Reynolds would like you to believe that nobody believed any of that stuff. They spent half a billion dollars on what the evidence is unrebutted with mostly fraudulent research that was either 90 percent was on something designed to just look like they were doing something and the 10 percent was that special projects research to develop things that they thought would help them in litigation or would confuse things.
Remember the guy walking down the steps and citing to studies, and remember how he learned those two studies that he was doing were paid researchers? That's what they were doing. They are trying to claim credit for things they did in furtherance of a fraud.
Ladies and gentlemen, advertising works.
Statements work. Especially if you have people who are addicted, who are looking for it. Now, the only thing they can say about the effect of this on Albert Walker, they can't deny that he kept smoking, they can't deny that nobody ever said anything, they can't deny that when he got cancer he said he didn’t think he was going to get it.
They can't deny what Alvin told you was the
response when he gave him the book report. They can’t deny what John Redmond says. All they can say is they put a quote up that said, well, he did not specifically say that he made a specific switch to filters at a specific time because he felt it would be safer.
Ladies and gentlemen, that’s just simply not how the memory works. It isn’t. People remember what happened and the impact of them, and that testimony is clear and unrebutted.
Now, I would like to point out one thing. RJR kept saying we didn’t do, we didn’t do, we didn’t do. Ladies and gentlemen, when you go back, look at the instructions.
You’ll be given a copy and the Court is going to read them.
On Page 12 and 13 of the instruction there is an instruction on conspiracy, because R.J. Reynolds is responsible not just for what they did. They are responsible for what all of the tobacco companies together did. They are responsible for all of the documents, all of the conduct because they got together -- and we showed you the foundation memos. We showed you the documents that have survived from Hill and Knowlton. And ladies and gentlemen, when we showed you documents, do you remember the documents about hide this research, we are prepared to destroy this. What we have shown you is what we picked out of what survived over a period of 50 years. That’s just what survived, ladies and
gentlemen.
Now, you’re going to read the Engle findings. You can go back and read them. They are on Page 8 of the preliminary instructions. The Court will give you a copy of them. You can read them because this is what the Engle jury found and read them carefully, ladies and gentlemen, because this is what the much longer trial was about, and they are very, very, very important.
Now, I would like to -- I’m not going to spend much time on the evidence because I would like it go through the verdict form, but I would like to make one small, little point. When you look, ladies and gentlemen, you’re going to see all the documents about efforts to create denial, reinforcing the belief of the public. Remember, I showed you the end of it where there was 8- to 15 million smokers in American in 1989 who didn’t recognize it was either dangerous or they didn’t believe it was dangerous.
Look at Exhibit 86. Okay, our goal here is to create doubt and denial. Look at what Philip Morris said in 1970. Let’s face it, we are interested in evidence that we believe denies that cigarette smoking causes disease. That’s Exhibit 69. This is the CTR research, ladies and gentlemen. This is what they are trying to get credit for. Read it.
Exhibit 69, this is what they are claiming should mean that everything they did was great. That’s the research
they were doing. Look at the foundation document for the conspiracy. It’s Exhibit 389. It talks about all of the groups they set up were a shield.
”CTR has helped our legal counsel by giving advice and technical information which was needed in court trials. CTR has supplied spokesmen for the industry at congressional hearings. Remember, you heard where the warnings came from, didn't you? Do you remember what Dr. Cummings told you? He told you that the warnings were written by the cigarette companies and given to Congress to pass to try to help them.
Ladies and gentlemen, look at the '89 Surgeon General’s Report. There is a whole section in there which we discussed about the effectiveness of the warnings, and it says the warnings were never effective.
Now, the one small example I want to give, if you remember, ladies and gentlemen, we talked a lot about Ebony magazine. Do you remember that? It’s in evidence. Pull it and read the article. And you know how they talked about air pollution? Oh, smoking. It was, you only got sick if you were smoking and you had heavy exposure to air pollution. Do you remember that article, ladies and gentlemen?
This is the purported notice that Dr. Michel talked about. Well, I direct you to Exhibit 83, because you know what Exhibit 83 is? This is an article in 1974. Exhibit 83 is an internal document from 1972. So two years before this
article came out, and it’s entitled "The Roper proposal.”
It’s from RJR, and it talks about the goal that they were going to do was creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it.
Pull this document and look at it because you will see in here, ladies and gentlemen, that right there they talk about what they’re going to promote, because if you are going to deny something, you have to have a theory. What’s the theory they want to sell the public on? It says, "The multifactorial hypothesis. As science advances, more and more factors come under suspicion as contributing to the illness for which smoking is blamed." Air pollution.
Ladies and gentlemen, a large part of the fraud was putting forward an alternative hypothesis for lung cancer.
It was acting in combination with smoking. Read Exhibit 83. Read the Ebony magazine which is in evidence, and you will see that the fraud that the defendants were perpetrating, that they were selling their hypothesis and they spent a lot of money to put it forward, ends up being what’s written in Ebony magazine, which we do know that plaintiff read.
So when he, as a person who was looking for information, read this article on cancer, he would read in the very magazine delivered to his house, that’s targeted at him, he would read, as I showed you when Dr. Michel was here, that "smoking in combination with heavy exposure to air
pollution can be hazardous to your health.” This is just one.
Ladies and gentlemen, we don’t have time in 20 hours to link up hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of documents. That’s what was done with more time in Engle, and that’s why those finding are binding, but this is one example. They say this is notice to him. This is the kind of notice, quote, that he was getting.
I would like to run up through, ladies and gentlemen, the jury instructions. I would like to put the evidence in the context of those jury instructions and in the context of the verdict form, because at the end of this case, everything we have done for 20 hours and everything they have done gets put onto one verdict form. It’s a piece of paper. The Judge will give it to you; and when you go out, you’ll be instructed to pick a foreperson.
The foreperson’s job is to do deliberations and then at the end, sign and return the verdict form, and there are a series of questions and I’m going to quickly run through them and explain them.
The first question you’ve got, ladies and gentlemen, to address is, "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Walker was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?"
Well, ladies and gentlemen, it’s undeniable that
cigarettes had nicotine. You’ve been given that. Then it’s a question of whether he was addicted by a preponderance of the evidence.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would direct you to a couple of things. First of all, look at the death certificate. It’s Exhibit 2. The very doctors who said, diagnosed him, Dr. Tan, writes that the cause of his death was tobacco use for 50 years. A persistent pattern of tobacco use.
Ladies and gentlemen, this gentleman, whose family didn’t like smoking, smoked over 5 million of these things.
He smoked a pack, and then as we heard with the last witness, Dr. Abramson, he went from a pack to a pack and a half. His smoking went up, and he would light these things. He would spend about five to ten minutes smoking one of these things and then put it down. About 15 minutes later he would smoke another one and put it down. Then 15 minutes later. In the 43 minutes I've got, he would have smoked two cigarettes and he’s starting his third.
They want to say he's not addicted?
Now, ladies and gentlemen, you heard the testimony. Dr. Burns wrote the book. He says, as a medical doctor, he’s addicted. They can’t challenge Dr. Burns. He literally wrote the book on diagnosing addiction for purposes of medicine.
Dr. Cummings worked on the section of the Surgeon General’s Report on how you diagnose this. Look at the 2010 Surgeon General’s Report, Exhibit 237, and you will see in the section that we discussed that the test that is used by Dr. Burns is there. Okay. Both of them said that Dr. Burns [sic] is addicted.
Their very own expert had to admit that Mr. Walker had a maladaptive pattern of use of cigarettes, and we went through the factors. Ladies and gentlemen, he might fence with me, okay. The book says that 80 to 90 percent of regular smokers are addicted. That’s what the psychiatric book says.
Okay. This is an important point, okay? The book says that, right? I showed you the book. He says, from the witness stand, oh, it’s really 50 in some article. Where is the article?
If what that gentleman had said, being paid $600 an hour, was really true, don’t you think we would have heard from the guy who changed his statement? Don’t you think we would have seen the article?
Why is it that when people are challenged they say, oh, well, it’s really something different. And why was it that he didn’t walk you through the criteria in his direct? The reason why is, as I showed you, if you look at those criteria, Albert Walker clearly fits the criteria of
addiction. And as Dr. Cummings said and Dr. Burns said, he was, in fact, heavily addicted.
Instead, their own expert, Dr. Abramson -remember, he came in and said, I got this test, and he put it up on a nice little square. Ladies and gentlemen, what did he say on cross-examination? I had to drag it out of him, but he said, well, that criteria, it’s not found in any article. It’s not found in any book. It’s one that I use.
This gentleman, their $600-an-hour expert, literally made up his own criteria because no person applying the DSM or any of the criteria found in the Surgeon General’s Report would have found that Albert Walker was not addicted.
We believe there is only one answer, and that is yes. One thing I’ll point out in specific, this gentleman got lung cancer in 1990, and he was able to taper himself down to a quarter of a pack of cigarettes. He was not even able to quit when he’s under chemotherapy. And they are saying he’s not addicted? That simply defies any common sense.
I agree with counsel, you should use your common sense. A guy who can’t get off cigarettes when he’s getting chemotherapy, which is blowing his body apart and killing cells and he becomes basically disabled -- the guy is in wheelchair at one point -- and he can’t get off smoking? He can only taper himself down, and they want to say he’s not
addicted?
Now, ladies and gentlemen, the second question, "Do you find by a preponderance of the evidence that Albert Walker's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of his lung cancer?"
Well, we know that his lung cancer and death was caused by smoking. That’s not disputed, ladies and gentlemen. There is no medical expert who came in and said it was anything else. The death certificate says what it was. And, then, we know that he’s addicted. So addiction equals persistent use. Persistent use over 50 years equals lung cancer.
That's not only, ladies and gentlemen, what the death certificate says. Metastatic lung cell cancer as a result of tobacco use over 50 years. The death certificate itself says that; but, ladies and gentlemen, it’s also what the 2010 Surgeon General’s report says. This is Exhibit 257 [sic], and it’s at page 105.
Ladies and gentlemen, nicotine addiction, past and present. They say, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products and this persistent tobacco use attributes to many diseases described in this report, which is, of course, lung cancer.
Ladies and gentlemen, if you're not addicted, you're not going to voluntarily breathe smoke into your lungs
over 5 million times and you’re certainly not going to do it when you have lung cancer.
Ladies and gentlemen, that takes us to the next question, which is question 3. "From a preponderance of the evidence, do you find that negligence on the part of defendant was a legal cause?"
Well, ladies and gentlemen, we have shown you that they made cigarettes. The cigarettes contain cancer-causing products. They not only didn’t take them out, but their actions actually made it worse.
The nitrosamines, the cancer-causing substances went up. The lights, like Pall Mall Golds and the filtered cigarettes like Winstons, didn’t protect people. In fact, they smoked more as a result of them. We saw that with Albert Walker. He went from a cigarette a day to a cigarette and a half a day according to their own addiction expert. So that is a -- that’s negligence. They marketed them the way that people would buy them and get sick. That is negligence. Reasonable people would not have done what they did.
Then the next question is, "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant’s placement of cigarettes on the market were defective and unreasonably dangerous?"
Now, the Engle finding is that the cigarettes are unreasonably dangerous; and when you look through the
instructions -- I urge you to read the instructions carefully. Read through them. Read through them once, read through them twice. There is lots of interesting stuff in there, but you will see that you are instructed that the cigarettes have already been found to be dangerous and the defendant’s conduct has already been found to be negligent.
The question is whether it affected Albert Walker. Well, Albert Walker smoked these cigarettes that were defective and smoked these cigarettes that were put on the market because of the defendant’s negligence and smoking them gave him lung cancer. This is a very, very easy question, ladies and gentlemen.
If the cigarettes aren’t bad, he doesn’t get lung cancer. So bad cigarettes equal lung cancer.
Now, that takes us to question No. 5. "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Walker relied to his detriment on the defendant’s concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, that such reliance was a legal cause of his death?" Yes or no.
Well, that’s really a question of whether he behaved in a way that he would not have behaved and he would not have done the same things if the truth had been out there. Because the defendant spent $250 billion and they did a 50-year conspiracy, we have to construct a world in which
in 1953 they had said there is cancer-causing substances in our cigarettes and they had come clean about the fact that there was addiction, that the cigarettes were addictive -and remember what Dr. Burns said. He said, if the Surgeon General would have said that cigarettes weren't a habit, but they were addictive in 1964, as the defendant’s knew, the whole world would have been different because medical professionals would have treated it very, very, very differently. If it wasn’t for the controversy, people wouldn’t have kept smoke them at the rate they did.
What did Albert Walker say at end of his life? He said, I believed -- I didn’t know how dangerous they were. I believed the filters were better. I listened to the ads, ladies and gentlemen. He was one of those 8- to 15 million Americans, according to the Surgeon General in 1989, that either didn't know how dangerous they were or didn't believe how dangerous they were.
It’s a lot of people, ladies and gentlemen. And I really think it goes -- that figure really goes to say what a different era it was. You could smoke everywhere, as Dr. Burns said, up until really the '90s.
Now, the only thing they can say is, well, they can't point to a specific advertisement, but read the instructions and read the question. The question isn’t is there a specific advertisement that Albert Walker looked at.
The question is, is all of the information that they put out there and the information that they didn’t -- they had affirmative misrepresentations for the lies they put out.
That Ebony magazine, that’s a classic example; that is a false statement that made its way into Ebony magazine because they sat down in 1972 and decided that they were going to get that message out, and they got it into Ebony magazine that Albert Walker reads. That’s just one exam. If I had 20 months, I could come up with more.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, that takes you to the next question, which is, "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that" -- I’m sorry, I have to go to the next page.
"Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Walker relied to his detriment on an act taken in furtherance of the defendant’s agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes?"
Now, it’s the same question, but it is broader, because you’ll read the instruction that the defendants are responsible for everything in the conspiracy. And basically it’s the same question. Everything done by any of the defendants that affected Albert Walker and kept him smoking, if it helped to keep him smoking, it’s important.
I want to say one thing here, ladies and gentlemen.
When you look at these things, it’s not 100 percent or 100 percent. The instruction that the Court will give you is what we call a substantial contributing factor instruction; and you can turn to it, ladies and gentlemen.
It says, on Page 8 of the instructions -- and you’ll see it elsewhere, but it says, "Addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death."
Now, that language is repeated over and over in these instructions, and you’ll read it. You’ll see that it’s two things that kept Albert Walker smoking, and one of them was what the defendants did and what the conspiracy did.
Then that is causation.
So that takes us to the comparative fault. Now, you heard all about he should have quit smoking and he should have done this and should have done that. Ladies and gentlemen, that doesn’t have anything to do with whether he’s addicted.
The Surgeon General’s Reports from ’88 and 2010, they don’t say it’s a choice. That was the old language that was part of the fraud. The new language in ’88 and forward isn’t a choice. It’s an addiction. The question of whether he should have quit, whether he should have done something
only comes in here (indicating).
Read the instructions, ladies and gentlemen. See if the instructions from the Court say anything about choice. See if the question says anything about choice. It doesn’t talk about choice. It talks about addiction.
Where choice falls, if it falls anywhere, is in weighing the relative responsibilities of the party.
Ladies and gentlemen, the first argument is he should have quit. Well, you don’t quit if you don’t think something is bad. And then when he did get lung cancer, he tried to taper down and he would have what we called constrained choice.
The second argument is he should have gotten treatment earlier. Well, you heard from Dr. Tan that he was terminal; and Dr. Tan even said, as did Dr. Burns, in hindsight, he made pretty good choices. He didn’t get debilitating radiation because he was going to die anyway, and he actually lived longer.
I’m not really sure how that’s comparative fault. He was going to die one way or another. If he died six months earlier, the defendant's probably ought to be happy because the period of time that Pauline was suffering, dealing with her husband for lung cancer, is smaller.
Then we get some arguments here about some forms that you never saw during the trial about something with the
VA. Did any witness talk about that? Did they show that to Dr. Burns? Did they bring in a witness?
Gee, if what they put up on the board at the end about something at the VA, if that was true and it was me, I would be talking about it in opening statements, I would have a witness here to explain it, I would have put it forward with the kids.
Remember, things that people say in closing arguments aren’t evidence. You didn’t hear about it during the trial. In fact, there was lots of things we didn’t really hear about during the trial.
Now, then the next question is No. 8. It deals with damages, ladies and gentlemen, and that is simply a question of Pauline Walker’s loss of companionship and protection, for her mental pain and suffering as a result of Albert Walker’s injury and death is.
Ladies and gentlemen, we leave that to you. You heard the testimony. You know what happened. This is a woman, her husband was the breadwinner in the family. He died. She took care of him for three and a half years while he had lung cancer in a debilitated state. You heard what happened a couple of years later. Her son comes back and the house is falling apart, she’s depressed, the grass is overgrown and pretty soon the sheriff comes and takes away the house because the breadwinner is gone. She has to go
live with her daughter.
Now, we wish Pauline was here. Unfortunately, as you heard, she broke her hip and she can’t be here; but I hope you listened to what her children said and the effect this had and understand for her what the loss of her husband is and what she had to go through as a result of her husband’s death 16.7 years earlier than he normally would have died.
You’ve got to ask, the period of time when her husband was sick, when he died, and then the period of time for 16.7 years, which after the lung cancer diagnosis -- his death was in 1994, would have taken us to about 2008 -- what that would have been for them in their retirement years.
Then we get to punitive damages, ladies and gentlemen. This is a very, very important question. We put the evidence on because we wanted to show you that what happened was not an accident. It was intentional decisions. Read the instructions and you will see that intentional decisions, ladies and gentlemen, that you know is going to harm entitles you legally to punitive damages, because when people do things intentionally, with a knowledge that people will be harmed, and that’s their conduct, then we say it’s punitive.
The only question is, do you approve, ladies and gentlemen, of what the defendants did or what the defendants
didn’t do. That is this question. All this question asks is do you approve of their conduct, or do you not approve of their conduct? When you read the instructions, you will see that. You are the voice of the community. You either say, you know, what they did was fine, or what they did wasn't fine.
Ladies and gentlemen, the only real thing I heard there was, well, we did this 50 million -- $500 million of CTR research. We heard about that. But clear and convincing, ladies and gentlemen, what evidence did they put on that they didn't know that people were going to die, that they didn't know they were killing people, that they didn't know that their conduct was likely to result in death and it harmed people? They didn't put any on because they don't have any.
That takes you to kind of an odd question at the end, which defense counsel didn't talk about because he probably doesn’t have anything to say, which is, "Should Albert Walker have known before he got his diagnosis for lung cancer" -- in fact, like five months before he had his lung cancer -- "that he had been injured?
Well, ladies and gentlemen, he went in and he got diagnosed with lung cancer. He got diagnosed in August, August 10th, and look at the first note in the medical records because you will see that Albert Walker had no reason
to know; and, in fact, the first record in the medical record says that the sign he got in August when he went into the doctor was weight loss and he had an episode before of weight loss, gone and got it checked out and they found nothing. First medical record, ladies and gentlemen. First visit into the thing.
There is simply no evidence in the record that Albert Walker did not exercise reasonable care. He got his lung cancer treated.
Now, the defendant’s argument is a different one, which is, well, he should have done some extra care once he got the lung cancer and that five-year period of life might have been a tiny bit longer than that five years.
But, ladies and gentlemen, Albert Walker was told when he went in that he had an 85 to 90 percent chance of dying, of not surviving the five years, okay, and he was told that he had 6 to 9 months to live with treatment. He lived for three and a half years. Dr. Tan said he made a pretty good judgment.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, when you go back, I want you to think logically about the case; I want you to think logically about the evidence we have put on; I want you to think logically what witnesses said from the witness stand was truthful, whether you believed it; and I want you to put what you heard in this courtroom in the context of the
documents and the evidence you’ve seen of 50 years of denial.
I think at the end of the day you will say that, unfortunately for him, Albert Walker was one of those people who listened to the tobacco companies and he listened to all of that advertisement. He listened to all that money spent. He listened to all those experts. And in his own way, he continued to smoke their cigarettes until after 50 years of persistent use and clear addiction, he got lung cancer, which was untreatable.
We ask you to return a fair verdict and we ask you to tell the defendants and RJR that their conduct, what they did, what you’ve seen, was not something that you approve of.
