MR. PERSONS: Thank you, your Honor.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
We have been together now for a week, counting last Friday. When we began on Monday, we began by thanking you and I want to end by doing that. Thank you for your service to the community and to this country.
Jury service is probably second only to military service in terms of Level-1 service to his or her country. I say that for this reason, because it’s embodied in the Constitution of this country, trial by jury, and trial by jury wouldn’t be possible without citizens like you. So we are deeply grateful to you. It’s an inconvenience. It’s a tremendous imposition when you get home and you see that jury summons and then you know you have to disrupt your life to render service, but we do thank you for that.
I told you on Monday that this case was not about millions of smokers but about Albert Walker, and I still maintain that. That’s what the case is about. This is Albert Walker’s widow’s case, not millions of other smokers’ case but Albert Walker’s widow’s case. So that’s why we spent a lot of time talking about Albert Walker, our witnesses, and we put on defense experts and they talked about Albert Walker.
We talked about what his family members had to say about him, what his friends had to say about him, what his doctors had to say about him, the people who knew Albert Walker in life.
One of the great things about this country and embodied in the Constitution is the right to bring a lawsuit, and that’s fine; but it doesn’t give you a sense of entitlement, because you’ve got to have proof. When you come
into a court of law like this Court of the United States, District Court for the Middle District of Florida seeking money damages, you’ve got to prove your case and you’ve got to prove it by a preponderance of the evidence.
The evidence can’t be -- it doesn’t consist of speculation, it doesn’t consist of anger, it doesn’t consist of prejudice. It consists of proof. In the next hour or so, I’m going to demonstrate to you how the plaintiff has failed to meet that burden of proof.
One of the ways to look at a preponderance of evidence, is it more likely than not, and you’ll draw your conclusions about that; but I submit to you that it’s far less likely than not that Albert Walker was addicted and that addiction drove him to smoke himself to death.
Now, in many ways the plaintiff is asking you to suspend reality, because by their definition anyone who is a heavy smoker, who smoked for a number of years is addicted.
If the time of the first cigarette is in the first 30 minutes in the morning and they smoke two packs or more a day over a sustained period of time, that constitutes addiction and automatically they are entitled to money damages. That’s not the fact. That’s just not the law.
Now, plaintiff -- let’s see if I can get this to work -- spent the whole case reproving the Engle findings.
The Engle jury heard about these internal documents and the
campaign of doubt, all of these things that they paraded in here. That was decided by the Engle jury, but the Engle jury did not hear any evidence about Albert Walker, and that’s your job, to determine whether there is a relationship, a causal relationship between those findings made by the Engle jury and Albert Walker. We will demonstrate to you that there is none.
Now, here are the issues that you have to decide:
No. 1, is Albert Walker a member of the Engle class? That’s the threshold question. That’s the first thing that has to be determined.
How do you determine that?
Was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? That’s No. 1; and if so, was his addiction to nicotine a legal cause of his death. We are not talking about medical cause; we are talking about a legal cause, and I’ll explain some of that in a minute.
Secondly, were the actions of R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of Albert Walker’s death? What was it that R.J. Reynolds did that the Engle jury found, what was that -how did that constitute a legal cause of Albert Walker’s death? And I’ll get into a definition of legal cause in a minute, but a shorthand way thinking about it is a but-for cause. But for something that R.J. Reynolds did, would Albert Walker have died? That’s the shorthand way of looking
at it.
Thirdly, is Pauline Walker entitled to money damages because Albert Walker chose to smoke cigarettes for over 50 years without trying to quit even though he knew it was dangerous? The plaintiffs have already admitted that he knew it was dangerous. They have already admitted he didn’t make enough attempts to quit. He didn’t try hard enough to quit. That’s why they are saying he’s partly at fault.
But the evidence will demonstrate he’s a hundred percent at fault because Dr. Cummings told you when he was sitting on the witness stand that the smoker is 100 percent responsible for making the decision to quit. No one else can make that decision for the smoker. He or she has to make it for himself.
There are a lot of things we don’t know about Albert Walker, and it’s not R.J. Reynolds’ responsibility to come in and fill in the gaps. That’s the plaintiff’s burden. The plaintiff has the burden of proof and has to demonstrate these things.
We don’t know why he started smoking. You heard a lot about initiation. You heard a lot about targeting young smokers 14 to 24 years old. None of that applies to Albert Walker. Albert Walker started smoking in Fitzgerald,
Georgia, Ben Hill County, family farm, raising tobacco, pulling rabbit tobacco in the fields and rolling his own.
Jessie Hardy, his older sister, testified to that. That’s his initiation. Why he started that, we do not know. How long he smoked the roll-your-own, we do not know. The first report that we have of Albert Walker smoking a commercial cigarette is when he’s 24 years old, in 1951. We don’t know why he chose Pall Mall, but we do know the evidence has demonstrated it wasn’t because of any advertising that he chose to smoke Pall Mall or Winston or Camel cigarettes.
Plaintiff cannot meet its burden of proof without evidence, and the evidence does not establish that Mr. Walker started to smoke because of advertising.
Dr. Cummings, when he was on the stand, no witnesses testified that Mr. Walker tried cigarettes because of advertising. He had to admit that.
Mr. Walker started to smoke because -- there is no evidence that Mr. Walker started to smoke because of any controversy or any conspiracy. Dr. Burns was asked and testified that no witnesses in all of those depositions he look at testified that Mr. Walker tried cigarettes because of a tobacco company statement or a statement by the Tobacco Industry Research Committee or the Council for Tobacco Research or the Tobacco Institute.
There is no evidence that Mr. Walker started to smoke because of any controversy or conspiracy.
Dr. Cummings, no agreement to conceal caused Mr. Walker to start smoking. He admitted that. These are plaintiff’s expert witnesses who came and testified in this case on Monday and Tuesday of this week.
Mr. Walker was unable to -- no evidence that Mr. Walker was unable to quit smoking because of anything R.J. Reynolds said or did. All the credible evidence is to the effect that Mr. Walker never tried to quit and that he, in fact, enjoyed smoking.
Some additional things we know about Albert Walker: We know that he was warned about the dangers of smoking the entire time he smoked. Dr. Michel was in here yesterday and had the literature going back to the 19th Century and just an abundance of literature in the ’20s, ’30s, ’40s, ’50s, ’60s, and ’70s about the dangers of smoking, about the addictive nature of tobacco.
Evidence came in about how Paula Walker when she was a young child, as early as 7 years old, and the warnings came out on the packages of 1966 and urged her father to follow the advice on the warnings that this can kill you.
We know about the book report -- I won’t belabor that -- that Alvin Walker wrote in 1966, two years after the warnings have come out, two years after Mr. Albert Walker is told by an Air Force doctor when he has a throat infection, you need to quit smoking; but the plaintiff would have you
believe that he was ignorant of these things when the record belies that. The proof belies that. It’s to the contrary.
Had Albert Walker quit smoking before 1975 when he was 48 years old he would not have developed lung cancer. He was in complete control of his destiny, because all of the witnesses, the plaintiff’s experts both say that any smoker can quit. And had he quit in 197 5, he wouldn’t have developed a lung cancer that brought about his tragic and untimely death. It’s completely within his control.
Now, the Engle findings do not answer the issues you are here to decide, and let me share something with you. Mr. Lantinberg got up here and said that, well, R.J. Reynolds didn’t do anything to challenge or dispute or refute the Engle findings. Well, that’s because we are bound by law not to challenge them. They are unchallengeable. They cannot be challenged. They are the law. They apply. But they only apply in this case if Mr. Albert Walker was a member of the Engle class.
Remember, I said that on Monday. They only get the benefit of the findings if, in fact, he’s a member of the Engle class; and the Engle findings can’t be used to determine whether there is punitive damages entitlement for Albert Walker’s widow. Those things cannot be applied absent class membership. You have to have a nexus between that conduct and Albert Walker. I submit there is none.
The Engle jury heard no evidence about Albert Walker, as I said earlier. The Engle findings do not establish that he’s a member of the Engle class. The Engle findings do not establish that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of Albert Walker’s death. The Engle findings do not establish that R.J. Reynolds’ conduct is a legal cause of Albert Walker’s death, and the findings cannot be considered until you determine whether Albert Walker is a member of the class. That has to be done in order to get the benefit of the findings.
Now, here’s how they prove class membership:
No. 1, got to prove that Albert Walker was addicted to nicotine and that, in fact, the addiction was a legal cause of Albert Walker’s death. Addiction.
There’s Dr. Jack Abramson who testified this morning and said Mr. Walker was not a nicotine addict for the following reasons: He was not distressed about his smoking, and they put up the DSM and you remember that and that was one of the terms in the DSM, that someone is distressed or significantly impaired. That was the language.
He never told anyone he was addicted. No doctor ever diagnosed Mr. Walker as addicted. He never complained about his smoking. He never expressed a desire to quit smoking. He never tried to quit smoking. He was able to function when he refrained from smoking. In fact, he loved
smoking. He chose to smoke and was always in control of his smoking. He did not meet the medical diagnostic criteria for nicotine addiction.
He was never described or diagnosed as a nicotine addict before this lawsuit got filed. He never said he was addicted, never felt compelled to smoke. No one ever told Albert Walker he was addicted and his doctors never diagnosed him as such.
Plaintiff’s witnesses did not prove addiction.
They didn’t bring you a medical doctor who specializes in the treatment of addiction. They brought Dr. Burns in here, and he’s renowned. I don’t take anything away from that.
He’s published all of these hundreds of articles, but how many patients has he seen treating for nicotine addiction or any addiction to any other substance? Was he board certified in addiction psychiatry? No. He’s a pulmonologist.
K. Michael Cummings comes into court. He has a master’s degree from the University of Michigan -- fine institute -- but it’s in public health, not psychiatry or psychology. He’s got a Ph.D., but it’s in public health. That’s not to take anything away from him, but that’s not a medical doctor specializing in addiction medicine.
They didn’t use any medically accepted diagnostic criteria to assess addiction. This heaviness of smoking
index is not a diagnostic tool. Dr. Abramson told you that.
The plaintiff’s witnesses equate daily smoking with addiction; and under that heaviness of smoking index, you can not smoke at all and be addicted. And if you smoke one cigarette a day and that’s your favorite cigarette and you smoke it in the first 30 minutes of waking, then you can be deemed to be heavily addicted on that scale.
That’s how crude that instrument is, and you can see why it’s used for research and not for diagnostic purposes and the treatment of patients.
I would submit to you the first question that you are going to have on the verdict form is, "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Walker was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" And the answer is no.
Even if they were able to establish that he was addicted, they still have this hurdle to get over. They have to prove addiction causation. They have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of Albert Walker’s death.
This instruction that will be on pages -- starting on Page 7 and going over to Page 8 in the instructions that you are going to have with you in the jury room, "In order to prove that addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of the decedent’s deaths, the plaintiff must prove that such addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed
substantially to producing such death so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, the death would not have occurred.
"In order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. Addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause if it contributes substantially."
We submit to you that it doesn’t contribute substantially because it did not prevent him from quitting.
We know that between 1955 and 1965, 17.6 million smokers quit smoking. We know that between 1964 and 1979,
30 million Americans quit smoking and we know that as of today, in 2012, there are 60 million ex-smokers. There are more former smokers than there are current smokers in the United States today. We know these things.
We know that even addicted smokers can quit. We know that because Dr. Burns even conceded that millions and millions of smokers, including heavy smokers, quit smoking in the ’50s, ’60s, ’70s and into the ’80s. Dr. Cummings admitted that millions of heavily addicted smokers have quit, including millions of heavy smokers -- heavily addicted smokers have quit, including millions of heavy smokers in the ’50s, ’60s, ’70s, and ’80s. We know that between 1964 and 1979, 30 million people quit and the majority, 90 percent, of
them quit cold turkey.
Dr. Cummings, plaintiff’s expert, acknowledged that an individual must make the decision to quit. Someone else can’t make that decision for him. He said that heavier smokers are more resistant to try to quit, but once they make an attempt, they are as likely to succeed as lighter smokers when other factors are kept constant.
So it comes down to this essentially: Was addiction a legal cause of Albert Walker’s death? Did Albert Walker have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking? Or, did nicotine addiction control Albert Walker and leave him no choice, no matter how hard he tried, but to continue smoking until his death? Was he robbed of choice by smoking such that he could not quit even though he made repeated attempts to quit?
I submit to you the evidence will show that he had the ability to quit but chose to continue; and because he had the ability to quit and chose to continue, then addiction cannot be a legal cause of his death.
Nicotine addiction doesn’t prevent smokers from understanding the risks of smoking, and Albert Walker was no exception. The evidence has demonstrated that any brain changes caused by addiction to nicotine do not prevent smokers from quitting.
Dr. Burns admitted this, Dr. Cummings admitted
this, and Dr. Abramson told you this morning that there is nothing about addiction to nicotine that prevents a smoker from quitting, that even addicted smokers can quit.
Dr. Cummings says any smoker can quit, and that’s what he tells people when they call the hotline in New York, the quit smoking hotline and gives them the literature. It says that any of you can quit. It doesn’t say that, well, anyone can quit except those who are addicted or anyone can quit except those who smoke three and four packs a day. Any smoker can quit.
But what do we know about Albert Walker’s quitting history or attempts? We know that throughout the 1940s there is no evidence of any quit attempt. In the 1950s, no evidence of any quit attempt. In the 1960s, the same thing; no evidence of any quit attempt. 1970s, no effort to try to quit. 1980s, no quit attempt. 1990s, no quit attempt. Not even an effort, not even picking up the phone and calling the hotline.
One of the advertisements or announcements, placements in that newspaper, the Pensacola Journal, there was something for a smoke-ender, smoking cessation. There is no evidence that he ever picked up the phone and called those people or went down there to just get some literature about it.
The first step starts with you, the smoker. No one
else can do that for you. Even if you don’t succeed, first you must try. There is no evidence that he ever made a try, that he ever tried, but they want to fault R.J. Reynolds for what happened to him, when had he made an effort to quit, it could have been prevented.
There is no credible evidence that he ever tried to quit. How do we know this? Because we know that Pauline Walker who was married to him for 44 years said he never even talked about quitting, much less made an attempt to quit.
We know that Alvin Walker, the plaintiff in this case, who has been here throughout this trial, testified on the witness stand yesterday that he never made an attempt to quit.
Jessie Hardy, his older sister, who is now 91 years old, was deposed last year, her long-term memory is intact, said she knows of no time that he ever made an attempt to quit and that when she would get after him about smoking, he would say something smart-allecky or walked off, but never made an attempt to quit smoking.
Charles Walker, his older son, who came and testified in this courtroom -- I believe it was on Tuesday -came here from California, said at no time does he know of that his father ever made an effort to quit.
Joyce Walker, Charles Walker’s ex-wife, former daughter-in-law of Albert Walker, said the same thing. John
Redmond, the brother-in-law, the brother of Pauline Walker, testified to the same effect, known him all of these years. John Redmond, born in 1935, meets this man in 1951 when he is 16 years old and is with him in 1994, shortly before his death. All of those years, some 43 years, and no time during that period did he ever express a desire to quit or make an effort to quit.
But what’s on the other side of ledger? Pauline Walker Williams, someone who hadn’t come into the courtroom. They talk about Reynolds not bringing people to court. Well, where is Pauline Walker Williams? This is the person upon whose testimony their experts, their addiction experts rely for the quit attempts, the unsuccessful -- the two implausible and unsuccessful quit attempts in a 50-year history, but she doesn’t even cross the threshold to come into this courtroom and they want you to award them money damages? That’s not carrying the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. That’s no evidence.
Paula Walker Williams, their own experts found that her testimony was not credible, nor possible. She testified in her deposition that her father tried to quit smoking twice before 1973, first with the gum and then with the patch.
Dr. Cummings said that even he was troubled by her testimony, and he said her testimony on the patch and gum was not credible. In other words, he didn’t even believe her.
Dr. Burns had this to say about Paula Walker Williams’ testimony in her deposition to the effect that her father tried to quit smoking using these devices. He said what Paula Walker Williams described was impossible. So there you have it. Impossible and incredible.
Now, let’s talk about Dr. Cummings a little bit.
He says not all smokers smoke because they are addicted, and it took some effort to get Dr. Cummings to admit that. We had to go back and forth with prior testimony, and there was a stack of documents, the prior testimony from prior depositions, prior trials that were almost a foot high, and he had to be confronted with his own testimony before he would admit it, even testimony that he had given as recently as March of this year in the Pickett case in this courtroom.
Your memory can’t be that faint, but his memory had to be refreshed. He had to be chastised by the Court for not answering questions directly, but finally we got him to admit that not all smokers want to quit. And Albert Walker was one of them.
Some smokers enjoy smoking and they want to continue smoking, and there is nothing wrong with that.
There is not a thing wrong with it. But then you have people who come in and they said, well, we are going to file a lawsuit. In the case of Dr. Cummings, yes, we are going to use litigation to put the tobacco companies out of business.
Do you think that’s what the founding fathers had in mind when they said that there would be right to trial by jury? What you can’t accomplish by Congress that you come into the federal courthouse and try to persuade a jury to do? To punish us to the point that we are no longer economically feasible? That’s an absurdity, but he sat right there and had the temerity to say, yes, I want to put them out of business. Cigarettes ought to be illegal.
Well, they are not illegal. They are a legal product; and if somebody wants to go out and purchase them and they want to use them and they want to abuse themselves using them, they have a right to do that.
Since when in this country do we baby-sit people? You have a right to do things. Some of them are harmful. I enjoy a cold beer as much as the next fellow, and I know alcohol has some adverse effects, but I’m not going to blame somebody, blame Budweiser because you had too much beer?
Dr. Cummings said Mr. Walker had a constrained choice. He used that term, "constrained choice.” You won’t find it anywhere in any of the books psychiatrists use. You heard Dr. Abramson this morning say, well, that’s just not a term that we use. And he treats people, unlike Dr. Cummings, who goes around and just testifies in courtrooms. This is someone who actually treats patients who are trying to get well. He says a smoker does not know whether he can stay off
cigarettes if the smoker does not try to quit.
You won’t know whether you can successful -- can be successful in quitting if you don’t try. Even Dr. Cummings admitted that.
Albert Walker was in control of his life. This is an individual who started out in rural Georgia, born October 24th, 1927, in rural Georgia, joins the Air Force. There wasn’t even an Air Force in 1945 when he joined in September. We had an Army Air Corps, carryover from World War I when they first started using airplanes in warfare and World War II, and then we had a United States Air Force created by an act of Congress in 1947. So his basic training was at an Army base in Fort Bennings, Georgia.
He joined the service and saw the world. His service to our country took him to California, it took him to Morocco, took him to Japan, took him to Alaska. He didn’t just settle for where he was. He had the ambition, he had the intelligence, he would the resolve to do better, and those things we applaud.
He was an intelligent man. They want to poo-poo how smart he was. But, no, he’s plenty smart. He started with that 8th grade education when he joined the service; and like so many people who joined the service during that era, he got his GED. He even took some college-level classes in management and he rose through the ranks in the United States
Air Force to become a technical sergeant.
You’ll have -- one of the documents you are going to have out there with you is an evaluation that the supply officer for the Air Force Base -- I think it was Eglin -signed off on Albert Walker in which he described him as a voracious reader, as one who stayed up on current events. That’s in evidence, and that will be back there with you to see for your own and with your own eyes. He did that evaluation -- that was in 1964 -- describing Albert Walker.
Albert Walker had a job that -- he had a lot of responsibility in that job, because what he was responsible for were the parts, aviation parts, and you know how expensive these fighter aircraft are. These airplanes, they run between 90- and a hundred million dollars apiece, so you don’t just entrust to anybody the responsibility for supervising other NCOs and enlisted personnel with keeping up with the inventory and maintaining these parts, but that was Albert Walker’s job in the United States Air Force.
Another trait of his, he did what he wanted to do. His best friend, Bennie Baily, said he was like a man’s man, a guy’s guy. Even John Redmond said that about him, and he would tell you in a heartbeat if he disagreed with something that -- if you disagreed with something he was doing, that I’m a grown man. That’s what he told his sister when she got on him about smoking. I’m grown.
Alvin Walker testified yesterday, when people would say things to him, tried to get him to do something he didn’t want to do or tried to change his mind, I’m grown. That’s what he would say. And smoking was something that he wanted to do.
He was not an involuntary smoker. He always had the ability to quit. Plaintiff admits that Albert Walker is at fault for not trying to quit. Albert Walker decided how he wanted to live his life. Paula Walker Williams testified he loved smoking. Charles Walker testified that Albert Walker smoked because he wanted to smoke, and smoking is something that his wife Pauline didn’t get after him about. She got after him about drinking, but she didn’t get after him about his smoking.
Now, he’s not an Engle class member for several reasons. He loved smoking, never said he wanted to quit or was trying to quit, and we have out next to these things the witnesses whose testimony support this.
He never said he could not quit. Never said he felt addicted or that smoking was a bad habit. He never said he was tormented by smoking or that he hated smoking. He was not someone who desperately wanted to quit. Alvin Walker talked about that. He never tried to quit. All of these people say that with the exception of Paula.
So the question on the verdict form will be "Do you
find from a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Walker’s addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of his cancer and death?" The answer is no.
Now, the plaintiff, even if they were able to establish class membership -- and I respectfully submit they can’t because they can’t prove addiction and they can’t prove addiction causation, because in order to do that they have to demonstrate that he had no ability to quit and he was compelled by his addiction to cigarettes to smoke until he died. Can’t do that. But assuming they were able to do that, they would have to make a link or bridge between those Engle findings of negligence, defect, concealment, agreement to conceal and Mr. Walker’s death. So they have to have a bridge of causation. Remember, we talked about that on Monday. There has to be some connection between those Engle findings and the death of Albert Walker.
I was told it’s not in here, but I’m going to put it on the ELMO. That’s fine. Technology is working.
Thank you, Madam Clerk.
The legal cause of someone’s death, including the legal cause of damages resulting from someone’s injury or death, conduct that directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such death or damages so it can reasonably be said that but for such wrongful conduct, the death or damage would not have
occurred."
That’s a key phrase. "But for such wrongful conduct, the death or damage would not have occurred."
I want to walk you through some of the evidence as it relates to these findings and demonstrate that there is no causal connection between the findings and Mr. Walker’s death.
Now, one of the claims that the plaintiff made is that Albert Walker died because the dangers of smoking were unknown to him. We asked the question, were the dangers of smoking a secret? No.
Dr. Burns said that it has been known for centuries that smoking can cause disease and can be difficult to quit. Dr. Cummings said the media have publicized that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive for about 100 years now. So their experts admit that this information has been out there.
We know, going back to 1845, that people knew that tobacco was addictive. John Quincy Adams said in 1845, "In my early youth I was addicted to the use of tobacco and two of its mysteries, smoking and chewing." So we know that people knew back then that nicotine was addictive.
And you know, going back to Cummings and Burns a minute, they both admit -- in the case of Burns, he said centuries -- that smoking can cause disease and can be difficult to quit. That’s addiction.
The media have publicized the dangerous and addictive nature for 100 years. Well, you know what? That predates these secret internal documents that plaintiff’s counsel have been parading up here during the course of this trial.
There was no meeting at the Plaza Hotel 100 years ago. That was in 1953. There wasn’t a Frank Statement a hundred years ago. There weren’t these documents that they were showing up from 1955 and 1960s and 1970s. This predates all that. They knew it without having to look at company documents to know that cigarettes were dangerous and addictive.
We look at the -- this is back in 1918. Good Health magazine. Evidently nicotine is a very deadly poison and the smoking habit is a form of drug addiction which does not differ essentially from the opium or the cocaine habit or any drug habit. There are comparisons between nicotine and cocaine and opium being made in 1918, nearly a hundred years ago.
In 1926, the year before Albert Walker was born, Good Health magazine, "Every smoker is accelerating his pace toward the cemetery. Every cigarette is a nail in his coffin." In popular parlance, it’s called coffin nails.
Georgia school book, 1936, we saw this, and I’m going to move right on through this. But here’s Dick and
Jane and Spot, and in the book they talk about tobacco contains a very poisonous substance called nicotine. It is habit-forming. You are telling this to nine years old in fourth grade in Georgia.
Tobacco does no one any good. It does some people a great deal of harm. It will harm them in many ways, affecting the heart, lungs, nerves, digestion, eyes, and throat.
Here’s Reader's Digest. 1920s and ’40s. "Tobacco is injurious to the human body. It lessens resistance to tuberculosis and other diseases. Its use sometimes induces cancer. It probably shortens life." This is in the ’40s and this is around the time that Albert Walker starts to smoke.
Now, Albert Walker knew smoking was dangerous and addictive. Dr. Cummings testified that everybody heard and knew that smoking is dangerous as of in 1954. Plaintiff admits Albert Walker knew smoking was dangerous and addictive. You heard during opening statement that they said, well, we are not going to deny that he knew that it was dangerous, that he knew it was addictive, and that’s why we accept part of the fault for what happened to him.
So what on earth does all this information about internal documents, these secret documents, what does that have to do with Albert Walker? You can’t conceal something from someone that they already know.
Then here are all the Reader's Digest; cancer by the carton, all of that. Nicotine, the smoker’s enigma.
Facts behind filter-tip cigarettes. All of it is in the ’50s and available to the public, because we know these scientists would do the research and they would be published in scientific journals that lay people don’t read, but Reader's Digest would pick it up and people would have access to it.
This is back when very few people had a television in the home and so the source of information for so many people were newspapers and magazines like the Reader's Digest. That was the No. 1 publication in the United States in the ’20s, ’30s, ’40s, and ’50s. One out of every four households in the United States had Reader's Digest, and so this information was out there. It was no secret.
Even the health officials were satisfied that the public had been informed. Dr. Leroy Burney who was the Surgeon General -- this is in 1957 -- said "Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and TV."
Dr. John R. Heller, director of the National Cancer Institute, said, "Newspapers, radio, TV and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem. And a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public."
We look at Stars and Stripes because we know
Mr. Walker was in the military and this is a publication for servicemen and women. Even above the banner itself, "Report confirms cigarette cancer tie. A distinguished panel of medical scientists decided to return the unanimous verdict that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer." That is January 13, 1964. Some six months later, in July of 1964, he goes in to see an Air Force doctor and is told to quit smoking.
We know that in 1966 this warning label was placed on every pack of cigarettes, "Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
Now, someone who kept up on current events, according to his commanding officer, a Lieutenant Colonial Molder in that evaluation that I was telling you about, he would know these things. It wouldn’t be any secret to Albert Walker.
Daniel Horn, 1968, says, "You can stand on a rooftop and shout ’Smoking is dangerous’ at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know."
1970, the warning changes. "The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
Let me make a point here. In the ’60s and ’70s, especially the ’60s, there were very few products that
contained warnings. It wasn’t like it is today where there is a warning on a hair dryer that tells you you shouldn’t put in the tub with you, as though you would. Obvious things. Warning on an aluminum ladder, those stepladders, don’t get near power lines, that kind of thing. That just wasn’t done. So this was very significant that a product would bear a warning because we just didn’t have warnings on things.
People used their walking-around sense, as my grandmother would say. They didn’t need to be warned about obvious dangers; but here’s a warning, and that makes it even more significant because this is one of the first products to have a warning on it.
The public information campaigning worked, and I won’t belabor this and go through all these things, but you can see the rise in the number of people who are quitting in relation to the public campaign, this public information campaigning about the dangers of smoking.
People wouldn’t be quitting in these kind of record numbers if what the plaintiff says is true that they were encouraged to smoke even more by the advertising. But this worked. This had some effect. These warnings labels that they put on, putting warnings and advertising, all of these things have had an effect.
Then in 1975, you have, Dr. Burns said, more Americans knew smoking was dangerous than knew the name of
the President of the United States, who at that time was Gerald Ford.
Again, here is some more information. This would be in Pensacola. In 1967 he moves to Pensacola, he’s living there, and he takes the Pensacola paper. By the way, he’s a daily subscriber. Mr. Walker takes the paper every day, and everybody said that he read the paper. I think Alvin was the only person who said he read everything except the lifestyle section and the comics, but he read everything else. His son Charles said he read it cover to cover. Pauline said he read it cover to cover. So he would have had access to this information that it’s never too late to kick the habit, that it shortens your life, that there is a cancer risk associated with it and the story about other people who quit. So he would have had this information.
He had these personal warnings. Beginning back when he was a child on the farm, he was disciplined when his parents found out he was smoking roll-your-own cigarettes.
His wife was an L.P.N., and she would have been exposed to information on the risk of smoking.
Albert Walker’s doctors told him to quit in 1964. Alvin Walker’s school report is mentioned there, the health merit badge is mentioned there, and then we have Paula saying she warned her father about the warnings on the pack and told him in no uncertain terms that smoking would kill him.
So that makes it highly unlikely and implausible that he would have been having a conversation with John Redmond in 1994 saying that he was unaware of the hazards of smoking. After all, he had been diagnosed in August of 1990 with lung cancer; and I’m sure when the doctors told him that, they said it was smoking cigarettes, so why would that be a surprise in 1994? Then there is some other evidence we are going to share with you that just belies that whole position.
Now, Mr. Walker was warned every time he picked up a pack of cigarettes, not only had warning from family members every time. Now, if he smoked one pack a day from ’66 when the warnings went on until 1994, that is 7,300 times a year he’s warned for a total of 204,000 times. If it’s two packs a day, that’s 409,000. If it’s three packs a day, like Paula says, between three and five, he had 613 [sic] times that he was warned about the dangers of smoking.
Now, Albert Walker could have prevented his death. He had all these personalized warnings before 1975 that we have gone over and shown you; and according to Dr. Burns, if he had quit by 1975, he would have prevented his death.
Now, they talk about being defrauded by the tobacco company, by R.J. Reynolds. Well, in order to be defrauded by something you have to rely on it. Not enough to just have information concealed or information misrepresented. You
have to have reliance. You have to reasonably rely on it, and there is no evidence that he ever relied on anything that R.J. Reynolds said or did for that matter. He never said that he didn’t have enough information about smoking or relied on anything from R.J. Reynolds.
Albert Walker never said he relied on tobacco industry statements. There is no evidence in this case that Albert Walker was reassured to continue to smoke based on any statement by R.J. Reynolds or any other tobacco company. Albert Walker never told anyone that he smoked filtered cigarettes because he thought they were safer than nonfiltered cigarettes.
There is no evidence that Albert Walker ever changed his smoking behavior because of a statement by the tobacco company about the health risks of smoking; and as Dr. Cummings said, a smoker cannot rely on something they haven’t seen or heard.
Did concealment of information cause Albert Walker’s death? We are talking about legal cause. Did concealment by R.J. Reynolds prevent the public health community from warning people about the dangers of smoking? No. Did concealment by R.J. Reynolds prevent the media or the public from warning people about the danger of smoking? No.
Did concealment by R.J. Reynolds prevent Albert
Walker’s family from knowing that smoking was dangerous? No. Did concealment by R.J. Reynolds prevent Albert Walker from knowing that smoking was dangerous? No, it did not. Did Albert Walker try to quit when he was warned about the health risks of smoking? No. Were the risks of smoking known or knowable to Albert Walker? Yes, they were.
Now, plaintiff has failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that concealment of information about the dangers of smoking was a legal cause of Mr. Walker’s death.
You’ll have these questions on the verdict form. Questions 5 and 6. "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Walker relied to his detriment on the defendant’s concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, that such reliance was a legal cause of his death? No.
"Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Walker relied to his detriment on an act taken in furtherance of the defendant’s agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes and if so, that such reliance was a legal cause of his death? No.
"Plaintiff failed to prove that the negligence of R.J. Reynolds was a legal cause of Mr. Walker’s death."
Let’s talk about advertising a little bit.
There is no evidence that advertising played any role whatsoever in Mr. Walker’s smoking choices. Albert Walker never told anyone why he smoked or switched to any brand. He never told anyone he thought smoking was safe. He never told anyone why he smoked filters or that he switched to filters because he thought they were safer. The 60 million smokers in this country today who quit, including people who are like Mr. Walker, were all exposed to advertising. Then the people who never smoked were exposed to advertising. There is no evidence that Albert Walker’s choice to begin smoking or to continue smoking was influenced by R.J. Reynolds.
Now, here we had some testimony that was attributed to Mr. Redmond. John Redmond was the brother-in-law of Albert Walker. I’m just summarizing, but he said the way they -- and he’s talking about Mr. Walker now. The way they put the ad, he talked about being misled and lied to. We don’t know what ad he’s talking about. We don’t know whose product that is. I mean, it could be Prince Albert tobacco, for all we know, which is a roll-your-own. It could be Marlboro. We simply don’t know, because he didn’t say. He didn’t say when it was or what it was, except he just said it was an ad.
What we do know in terms of Mr. Redmond’s testimony
about Albert Walker’s action is this: He said that Albert Walker did not say that he switched to smoking filtered cigarettes because he thought they were safer. He never told him that, and he never told John Redmond why he switched to filtered cigarettes.
Remember, John Redmond is the one who said he talked to him when he’s on his death bed and all this. Interestingly enough, another thing he never said to John Redmond when he’s supposedly on his death bed is that he blamed R.J. Reynolds or any tobacco company for his condition or that he wanted to sue R.J. Reynolds. He never said anything like that.
Mr. Walker was not confused by anything the tobacco companies said or did. Did Mr. Walker hear, read, or see any statements by the tobacco industry? There is no evidence of any of that in this case. Did he see, read, hear about the Frank Statement? Any evidence of such? No. The Council for Tobacco Research statements that they showed you? No. The Tobacco Industry Research statements? No. The Tobacco Institute statements? No. Any press releases from the tobacco industry, any white papers, any interviews like the one they did with that man Heimann that was on -- that you saw yesterday? Or Cullman who was on "Face the Nation"? No evidence he ever saw that.
The tobacco company statements about smoking and
health? No. Tobacco company statements about smoking and addiction? No.
Lost the picture. Well, I’m going to continue until that comes back on because I don’t want to just keep you waiting.
Yesterday, you remember they had Dr. Michel up there and they talked about the advertising in the Pensacola News-Journal, and how many of those ads were tobacco ads, and he looked at a 30-year period and did a sampling.
THE COURT: Just so you can figure out what’s wrong, I still have it on my computer. Just want to let you know that.
MR. PERSONS: We don’t have that on the big screen.
THE COURT: I understand that. That may help explain what the problem is.
MR. PERSONS: Here we go.
All right. I’m trying to describe what I was going to show you next, and I don’t know if I did a good job of it or not. Here’s what I was trying to talk about. He looked at 2,274 ads and out of that, 22 of them were for tobacco. This is in the paper that Mr. Walker took on a daily basis.
The question No. 3 on the verdict form is: "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that negligence on the part of the defendant was a legal cause of the death of Mr. Walker?" And the answer should be no.
Plaintiff failed to prove that any defect in R.J. Reynolds’ cigarettes was the legal cause of Mr. Walker’s death.
I want to talk about cigarette design for a minute. We know that natural tobacco is addictive and that it’s dangerous. There is no question about that. That the roll-your-own cigarette is a dangerous cigarette. We went over that with Dr. Cummings. Remember, I talked about a study from Uruguay and another study that was from Norway about people who smoke roll-your-own cigarettes and they had a higher incidence of disease, including lung cancer, than the people who smoked a commercial cigarette.
We know for a fact cigarettes -- there is no way you can make them safe. It’s an unsafe product, but society, this country, we have decided that people have a choice whether or not they want to use that product even though it’s dangerous. It’s a dangerous product. There is no question about that, but some people choose to use it, and Albert Walker was one of those. There is no way to make them safe. There is a way to make them less hazardous, but no way to make them totally safe. Absolutely none.
R.J. Reynolds has worked hard to take the carcinogens out of tobacco. Even Dr. Cummings admitted that, but it couldn’t be done. I think he used the term, you remove one and another one would pop up. I mean, even he
admitted that. There is just no way to make them safe.
Nonfiltered cigarettes, filtered, full flavor, light, additive-free, all of those cigarettes were dangerous and addictive. There is just no way around it.
There is no evidence that the cigarettes that Mr. Walker smoked that were any more dangerous or addictive than any of the other brands. If it was up to Dr. Cummings, here’s what the tobacco companies would do: They would remove all the nicotine from cigarettes and then nobody would buy them and then they would go out of business, but then that would achieve his objective, which he admits that’s what he wants to do, is to put them out of business. But fortunately, it’s a legal product, and that has not been -they haven’t been mandated that they be nicotine-free and that they, tobacco companies, go out of business.
Some of the things we know about cigarette design, the public health community has not agreed that additive-free cigarettes are any safer than those that contain additives. The use of reconstituted tobacco does not make cigarettes more addictive and actually has less nicotine than natural tobacco. We got that admission out of Dr. Cummings on the stand the other day.
The use of expanded tobacco, porous paper and burn accelerants does not make cigarettes more addictive. That use does not make the cigarette more addictive.
Let’s talk about filters and lights. That ought to be a nonissue because nobody has said why or how often Albert Walker smoked a filtered cigarette. Albert Walker never told anyone that filters were safer. There is no evidence that Albert Walker changed his consumption level or smoking style when smoking a filtered cigarette. In other words, no evidence of compensation. There is no evidence that when he was smoking the Pall Mall Gold that he smoked more than he did when he was smoking the Pall Mall nonfiltered in the red pack. None whatsoever. No evidence to that effect. No evidence that Albert Walker smoked a light or low-tar cigarette.
Albert Walker knew that smoking was dangerous and he knew it was addictive. And so the filters and lights debate, that might have something to do with a plaintiff in another case, but it doesn’t have anything to do with Albert Walker.
Question No. 4 on the verdict form: "Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant’s placement of cigarettes on the market that were detective and unreasonably dangerous was a legal cause of the death of Albert Walker?" No.
Let’s talk about allocation of fault. They have admitted that they bear some fault. I submit to you that’s a ploy, because if you listen to them, what they want you to do
is this: Well, you know, they have taken a reasonable position. They have admitted some fault. So, you know, there ought to be some fault, just to be fair, on the part of Reynolds.
Well, no, that’s not how it works because we are talking about legal cause and we are talking about but-for causation, and but for choosing not to quit, but for failing to quit he would still be alive or he certainly wouldn’t have died of lung cancer. If he would have quit in 1964, they said his risk would have been comparable to that of a never smoker. He would still have some risk. More than a never smoker but comparable; but had he quit in ’75, he wouldn’t have developed a disease. When you are talking about allocation of fault, keep those things in mind.
But here are some additional things I want you to be thinking about. The assignment of fault relates only to the actions that were a legal cause of Mr. Walker’s death.
So it doesn’t help to get back there and look at these things that he never saw that were the secret documents that didn’t have anything to do with his decision to smoke, his decision to continue to smoke and not follow his doctor’s advice.
R.J. Reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of Mr. Walker’s death. And I share this with you. One of the things that Reynolds can’t being faulted for was Mr. Walker’s drinking. We know from
Dr. Burns who testified that a person who is a heavy drinker, an alcoholic -- that was the term he used to describe Mr. Walker -- who smokes, has a fourfold increase in the risk of lung cancer than someone who does not engage in those two activities, that you enhance your chance of getting lung cancer when you drink heavily and you smoke, because heavy drinking facilitates heavy smoking. That’s a lifestyle choice. I’m not passing judgment, but then you don’t come in here and ask for money damages.
Plaintiff admits that Albert Walker’s conduct was a legal cause. We talked about that. Now, what does this mean? This means that Albert Walker knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke. It means that Albert Walker had the ability to quit smoking, and it means that he had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death. That’s what this partial admission of fault amounts to.
Now, why do they admit that Albert Walker was at fault? Well, Dr. Burns says quitting has immediate health benefits for smokers of all ages. It’s never too late to quit. A middle-aged smoker who quits can avoid 90 percent of risks related to smoking, and of course we talk about the 1975. Here’s a public service announcement that he likely would have seen.
(Video played.)
MR. PERSONS: And of course, those public service announcements were on TV. Some may recall the Yul Brynner ad that he did. He died of lung cancer; and when he was in the throes of that disease, he did a public service announcement that came on TV. Some may recall Yul Brynner.
I think yesterday there was one, Larry Hagman, who was on Dallas. JR was up there talking about the need to quit smoking.
Actors and sports figures weren’t just used in advertising tobacco products, they were also used in public service announcements like that.
Now, these plaintiff’s witnesses -- Dr. Burns and Cummings -- they admit that smokers are fully responsible.
Dr. Burns said smokers, including addicted smokers, are responsible for their smoking behavior, including quitting. Dr. Cummings said a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit.
Here are the choices that he made. Chose to start, chose to continue, chose to ignore the warnings, chose not to make a single quit attempt. Those are choices that he made.
You know, there was a famous football coach by the name of Lou Holtz. He coached at a number of places and most famously Notre Dame. One of the things that he said was that a person’s life is a compilation of things, including the people you meet, the activities you engage in, and the
choices that you make. And these are just some of the choices that Albert Walker made in life.
So many warnings over so many decades, and now the plaintiff wants to point the finger at somebody else, like it’s their fault. But, you know, something about Mr. Walker that came through loud and clear yesterday when Alvin was on the stand, I asked him, your father believed in personal responsibility, didn’t he? And he said yes. In fact, he instilled it in all of his children? He said yes.
Back there in the jury room, think about this. Albert Walker believed in personal responsibility. He never blamed R.J. Reynolds for what happened to him. He never blamed his choice to smoke on R.J. Reynolds. But now you have people coming in and they want to portray him as a victim. I submit to you, there is nothing in anything that we know about him from what we have been able to read through all the documents and everything to indicate that he perceived himself as being a victim.
A victim doesn’t leave Fitzgerald with an 8th grade education and see the world. These people want you to believe he’s a victim.
All right. We talked about the alcohol use and how that increases the risk of lung cancer. People who drink tend to smoke more heavily because the two go hand in hand.
I don’t know how that’s Reynolds’ fault.
In conjunction with cigarette smoking, drinking alcohol increases the frequency with which an individual will develop lung cancer. You are already at risk if you smoke for lung cancer. This increases the risk if you drink and smoke. Albert Walker’s medical records show a history of heavy alcohol use and alcohol consumption consistent with alcoholism. That’s just the reality of it. That’s not to disparage him, not to criticize him, but that’s the evidence, and we have to look at the evidence and weigh it and the evidence points toward alcohol. That was of his own choosing. He chose to imbibe it.
He also chose to refuse certain kinds of treatment. You heard from Dr. Tan, and plaintiff got up here and said you didn’t hear from any medical doctor about medical cause other than Dr. Burns.
The Judge is going to instruct you that you are to take into account the depositions that you saw on the screen and give it the same weight that you would if the person appeared live. So witnesses don’t necessarily have to show up at the courthouse for their testimony to be considered.
It should be considered if it’s by deposition, whether that deposition is read or shown on the screen. So Dr. Tan talked about Mr. Walker’s noncompliance. And I want to say a thing about that.
Mr. Walker, the doctor recommended a certain course
of radiation and certain type of chemotherapy, and he didn’t want to do that. He wanted to do something else. After his cancer went into remission sometime in December of 1990, he became absent and wasn’t following up with the doctor. We know that the lung cancer was a death sentence, but Dr. Tan said that the odds of giving him a five-year survival rate would have been better had he been in compliance, had he followed up. That would have helped him, and that he enhanced his odds of recurrence by not getting the cranial radiation. You remember Dr. Tan saying that in his deposition. So this is part of this cause of death at the time that he did die.
This medical record said he had a long history of relative medical noncompliance. The patient was initially seen by Dr. Boatright in 1991 for right lung nodule that was eventually diagnosed as a small cell lung carcinoma and treated to a complete remission and then lost to followup.
Because of his pain, he refused any new treatment. The patient subsequently refused further radiation therapy to the chest or prophylactic cranial irradiation and was lost to followup for two years. Mr. Walker’s choices are the only legal cause of his death.
There is nothing R.J. Reynolds could have done that would prevent Mr. Walker’s death. Only Mr. Walker had the ability to prevent his death, and Mr. Walker is 100 percent
responsible for the choices he made.
Any damage award must be just and reasonable in light of the evidence, and I’m not suggesting to you that there should be any damages awarded; but if they are awarded, they have to be reasonable in light of the evidence that you heard in this courtroom.
Now, the plaintiff isn’t asking for damages related to lost wages, medical bills, funeral expenses, and they can’t get damages for the pain and suffering that Albert Walker endured.
What they are asking for are the damages suffered by Pauline Walker as a result of her husband’s death, but they are now trying to inflate that award by asking you for a huge amount of damages. They spent almost as much time, if not more, talking about why they ought to get punitive damages as they did talking about Pauline Walker.
We heard very little evidence in this case about Pauline Walker’s pain and suffering or about Pauline Walker’s loss of her husband. They talk about losing the house, but they had lost the house in California when Mr. Walker was still living. Remember? That’s why Pauline left and took the four children -- Alvin, Joanne, Paula, and Melvin -- and moved to Pensacola. And Mr. Walker followed.
They lost the home in California, regrettably.
Money was always a problem, and part of the reason money was
always a problem was because somebody had a drinking problem, frustrated at him about drinking, felt he spent too much money on drinking. You heard Alvin say that yesterday on the witness stand. But no one -- no one should be made a millionaire because her husband chose to smoke cigarettes for decades without trying to quit despite knowing they’re dangerous. You can use your reason and common sense in the jury room. You don’t have to leave them outside, but no one should be entitled to compensation for that.
You shouldn’t be able to just go down to the corner bar and find somebody who has been sitting there all day for 10, 20, 30, 40 years and because they smoke two or three packs of cigarettes a day, drink two six packs or more a day and develop a disease and come into court and say, well, I’m entitled to money. Because I smoked so much, obviously I’m addicted, and because I’m addicted, I’ve lost all control and so it’s somebody else’s fault. That’s not how it works. So, please, do use your common sense and reason when you get back there.
Now, the plaintiff’s lawsuit is another attempt to get money from Albert Walker’s lung cancer. Now, here’s a document that Albert Walker himself signed under penalty of perjury on September the 28th of 1990. Now, mind you, he had been diagnosed with lung cancer in August. This is September. He says, "I have now come down with cancer in my
lungs and throat. I believe this cancer is due to exposure to radioactive waste.” In 1962, stationed in Japan, he claims he was exposed to radioactive waste. That’s what he believed caused his lung cancer and his throat condition, not R.J. Reynolds.
After Albert Walker had passed away -- he passed away on Easter Sunday, April 3rd, 1994. Here we are in September. Pauline Walker, completing a VA claim, under penalty of perjury -- she’s an L.P.N. -- she blames his lung cancer on Agent Orange. She says in the form, "Are you claiming that the cause of death was due to service? Yes.
Not due to smoking." That form was signed 28th of March, 1996.
She wrote a letter to the Department of Veteran Affairs in Washington, and she said how he was exposed to ionizing radiation and thereafter they found a spot on his lung. Nothing in that letter about cigarette smoking.
You’ll have these back there in the jury room with you to look at and to study.
This is yet another attempt to get money.
Yesterday, on the witness stand, Alvin Walker, we talked about his parents’ marital difficulties being a result of money problems. He said there never seemed to be enough money, and he’s testified he believes this lawsuit will provide monetary assistance to his family and help them with
their goals. It’s all about the money.
We talked about the Engle findings do not establish that the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. I can’t emphasize that enough. They do not. The reason why you were shown a lot of those inflammatory documents that were written by people, many of whom just did stupid things, said stupid things, and God bless the dead. Many of them are gone. But you were shown that so that you would be angry; and when you are mad, you can’t think clearly. But the verdict can’t be based on being mad. It can’t be based on being angry or incensed. It’s got to be based on evidence and evidence that relates to Albert Walker. Please don’t lose sight of that. Not that you will, but it just bears repeating. Please remember that.
Now, they are saying they are entitled to punitive damages; but in order to get punitive damages, there is a different standard. It’s not preponderance of the evidence. It’s clear and convincing evidence. Clear and convincing evidence. And we will take a moment to talk about that.
Punitive damages are warranted if you find that the plaintiff has proved by clear and convincing evidence that, one, the conduct causing the death of Mr. Walker was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct; or, 2, the conduct showed such an entire lack of
care that the defendant must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences; or the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public; or, four, the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights.
We will talk about why the evidence in this case doesn’t meet that standard; but, first, let me talk about what is clear and convincing.
Clear and convincing evidence differs from a preponderance of the evidence. This is what the Judge is going to instruct, and you’ll have the instructions on Page 19. This is what it says: "As I’ve already instructed you, preponderance of the evidence means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that a claim or contention is more likely true than not true.
"In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is more compelling and persuasive. It is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue."
Without hesitation.
So if there is any hesitation whatsoever, they haven’t met the burden of proof by that standard of clear and
convincing evidence because it should create all hesitation. Not all doubt, but all hesitation. There shouldn’t be any hesitation. That’s clear and convincing.
Now, should R.J. Reynolds be punished? I respectfully submit they should not.
The Council for Tobacco Research funded $500 million worth of research, thousands of studies have been published. The Surgeon General relies on it and its reports 600 times. Research funded by the Council for Tobacco Research.
The CTR has funded multiple Nobel Prize winners and they funded -- and this is very important -- they funded the Knapp Study in 1963, and it was reported in the American Journal of Psychiatry -- and I went over this during Dr. Cummings’ cross-examination -- in 1963, and here’s what it had to say:
"Nicotine is an active agent. It appears to have addictive qualities. Heavy cigarette smokers, thus, appear to be true addicts." This is out of this literature now.
"Our subjects also showed a compulsion to continue to smoke in increasing amounts." Then they acknowledge that this research was supported, in part, by grants from the Council for Tobacco Research. Of course, the tobacco industry disagreed with these findings but didn’t stop funding the research, and the research was put out there in
the peer-reviewed literature.
This in 1963 and it’s 1988 before the Surgeon General says, oh, nicotine is addictive. Somehow that’s the fault of R.J. Reynolds. So that was a secret until 1988.
It’s in the published literature.
I showed you the green monster and the supplement by Larsen and Haag and Silvette. They denigrate them. Plaintiff’s counsel denigrated that research, said, well, it was just selective, just a few things. Well, there were over 20,000 articles that were summarized and there were chapters on smoking-related disease and death, chapters on cancer, including lung cancer and diseases of the respiratory tract. And this material was what the Surgeon General relied upon in producing the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report where they established the link between smoking and lung cancer.
In that Surgeon General’s report in 1964, they said this: "The committee" -- Surgeon General’s committee -"however, does acknowledge with gratitude and deep appreciation and with sincere apologies to any individual inadvertently omitted, the substantial cooperation and assistance of the following: The Brown and Williams Tobacco Company, P. Lorillard Company, Philip Morris, Incorporated, and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company."
Should R.J. Reynolds be punished for working to make a safer cigarette? Is that reckless conduct? Is that
conscious indifference to the consequence? I submit it is not.
R.J. Reynolds worked to reduce carcinogens in cigarettes, and you heard on videotape Dr. Cook and you heard Dr. Gentry talking about these steps that all this research that they are doing to try to make a less hazardous cigarette while acknowledging there is no such thing as a safe cigarette.
Reynolds implemented design features that were recommended by the public health community. The Surgeon General has found that many of the design features implemented by the tobacco companies reduce tumorgenicity in animals in research.
The tobacco industry worked with the public health community and independent scientists of the Tobacco Working Group from 1968 to 1978. The members included representatives of the National Cancer Institute, tobacco company representatives from R.J. Reynolds. The Tobacco Working Group worked with the National Cancer Institute for ten years trying to develop a less hazardous cigarette.
They funded research on cigarette design, modification, and safety. And it was only abandoned in 1978 when the government decided that they didn’t want to do it anymore, not because the tobacco industry didn’t want to do it.
Should R.J. Reynolds be punished? No.
Cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. R.J. Reynolds has not disputed the dangers of tobacco for over a decade. Punitive damages are not needed to prevent R.J. Reynolds from concealing the dangers of smoking. That’s out there. Concealing these old documents, some going back 50-some years, they are all on the web page now.
"Do you find from clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted?" The answer should be no.
Now, Plaintiff’s case -- and I’m getting into the home stretch now -- defies common sense. Everybody heard and knew that smoking could cause disease by 1954, and Albert Walker was no exception. Anybody can quit. Albert Walker could have quit. He never tried to quit, never wanted to quit. All smokers are responsible for their smoking choices, and plaintiff admits Albert Walker is responsible, in part, for his death.
As Dr. Koop said, "The choice to light up is always yours." And, you know, maybe this doesn’t appear in the Surgeon General’s report anymore, but it’s common sense and it’s consistent with what Dr. Burns said in his testimony and what Dr. Cummings said in his testimony and what we heard Dr. Abramson say this morning in his testimony.
Ultimately, you are the one that has control over
your behavior. The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth. So you wake up in the morning, you are concerned about your health. You got a smoker’s cough.
Or you know that smoking is bad for you.
What effort does it take to pick up the phone and call the hotline? What effort does it take to put away your ashtrays, throw out your cigarettes? How much effort does that require of you? How much effort does it take to go and get a prescription for the nicotine gum when it comes out in 1982 -- or ’84?
Just drive to the drug store. Go to the doctor, get the prescription. You got VA benefits. Go to at least one smoking cessation clinic. Before you come into federal court and seek money damages, shouldn’t you do at least one of those things?
Here’s what a verdict for the plaintiff will do in this case. It would send the wrong message. A plaintiff verdict would send a message that it’s okay to engage in a known risky behavior and then blame somebody else.
A plaintiff’s verdict would send a message that it’s okay to knowingly ignore safety warnings and then blame somebody else.
A plaintiff’s verdict will send the message that you can make choices without personal responsibility for those choices and come into a court of law and collect money
damages.
That’s what a plaintiff’s -- that’s the message that a plaintiff’s verdict would send on this record in this case. There might be -- there very well could be a deserving plaintiff in a case, but that’s not the case that we tried in this courtroom. That’s not the case that you will deliberate over. You’ll be deliberating about this case; and on the record in this case, the plaintiff should take nothing.
It’s been a pleasure to be with you over the past week, and I trust that you will do the right thing and find in favor of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
I thank you for your kind attention.
