MR. BARINGER: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court, Mr. Ward,
Counsel, good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Before I get started with the substance,
I want to join Mr. Gustafson in expressing our gratitude. We do know that this was a sacrifice. We do know that it's intruded on your life, and we very much appreciate, especially some of the conditions that we had to work through that you had to put up with, that we appreciate your patience with us.
And we especially appreciate the fact that it's obvious that you've paid very close attention to what's going on and take your role very seriously. And you have all our gratitude from all of us.
Ladies and gentlemen, during opening I told you that this case was ultimately about one thing and one thing only, and that is Mattie Ward and the choices she made about smoking.
It really still does come down to: Why did she start to smoke? Why did she continue? Why did she quit when she quit? And I asked you to pay attention to that, using that as your focus throughout the trial as you listened to it, to see what does this evidence have to do with Mrs. Ward. What did the testimony have to do with it? What did
the documents have to do with it?
And what I'm going to do in my closing is talk to you about how I think those things affected or if there is evidence that they did or didn't affect her and affected the decisions that she made because that is what the plaintiff's ultimate burden of proof is, to prove to you that Reynolds did something wrong that actually changed what Mrs. Ward would otherwise have done.
This whole concept of legal cause that we'll talk about in greater detail ultimately boils down to: Did it make a difference to Mrs. Ward.
I told you in opening that it's not just Reynolds that views smoking as a personal choice behavior. And, yes, you've run your pencils probably into the ground by the time I'm done talking about choice because that is what this case is about. It is about choices and what kind of choices she could make and what kind of choices she did make.
And Mrs. Ward viewed smoking as a matter of personal choice. You heard plenty of testimony. She didn't like people telling_
her not to smoke.
She didn't like it from her husband.
She didn't like it from her kids. She didn't like from it her friends. And she didn't like from it her doctors because it was her choice. And most of those people eventually gave up talking to her about it because it was her choice, and that was clear to everyone.
And her daughter Annette in particular admitted that it was her mother's decision to quit or keep smoking.
And she just made those decisions, didn't she, because ultimately it was her decision; isn't that right?
ANSWER: To quit or keep smoking.
It was her mother's choice. One of the doctor's records makes the same point pretty clearly, September 21, 1995.
Also, we had a long talk about encouraging her to quit smoking once again.
I have begged her on several different occasions to stop, that this would probably make her blood pressure go down and she could get off her medications, but she refuses. I
like it too much.
It wasn't that she was unable. It was she refused. And when you refuse to do something, you are making a choice.
You also saw statements from the Surgeon General. And we'll talk about these very briefly. You saw this in opening.
The United States Surgeon General and the Public Health Service has characterized it as a choice, just like you're hearing in this courtroom.
Cigarette smoking represents a category of health problems that can be called personal choice health behavior.
1982: Again, personal choice.
1986: Cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
Now, does nicotine and addiction have an effect? Of course it does.
Does it make it difficult for some people to quit smoking? Of course it does.
Does it prevent people from making a choice about whether to continue smoking or
not? Of course it doesn't.
If that were true, what Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both told you couldn't be true.
And they said, any addiction can be broken, any addiction: Nicotine, heroin, cocaine, alcohol.
And the unchallenged evidence that you heard in this case was that tens of millions of smokers, most of them addicted, according to Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, successfully broke their addiction.
And remember what Dr. Burns said. Number nine. He talked about their ability to break the addiction.
And they had enough control to do that, didn't they?
Yes, sir, they did.
Despite their addiction?
Despite their addiction.
Despite the difficulty?
Despite, they were able to overcome that difficulty, yes.
That's why it's called a choice.
And Dr. Burns went further. Dr. Burns said, not only is it a choice, but the smoker
has responsibility for their own behavior. Completely free or not, quitting is a choice exclusively in the hands of the smoker. No one can quit for a smoker. Only that smoker can make that choice.
Now, you heard a lot during Mr. Gustafson's closing about unfettered free choice. And he constantly talked about it's not an unfettered free choice and suggested that that's what I was going to tell you it was.
I told you in opening that's not what I was going to say. None of the witnesses that I cross-examined, did I ask them if it was an unfettered free choice.
What I asked them was, is it a meaningful choice. Because all of the -- all of the statements from the Surgeon General saying it's a personal choice behavior make no sense if it's not meaningful.
It would be -- It would be a completely futile gesture. It would be like saying, I'm going to hold you responsible for something that I know you can't do.
Surgeon General doesn't do that._
Surgeon General doesn't tell smokers they have a choice if the Surgeon General believed that because they were addicted they didn't.
Is it constrained to some extent? Of course it is. Does that mean it's not a meaningful choice? Absolutely not.
I want to talk about the whole subject of Mr. Gustafson saying that Mr. Ward accepts some level of responsibility on behalf of Mrs. Ward.
And he talked about it. And he said, well, she should have tried harder. Well, what does that mean? Is he saying she should have tried harder but she couldn't anyhow?
Why would they accept responsibility if they didn't think it would have done any good? Why would they tell you, she accepts that part of the cause of her developing COPD and lung cancer was her fault if they didn't believe that she could have and should have quit sooner? Why would they do it?
If they don't mean it, if they don't mean that she could have, if they don't mean that she should have quit sooner, it's just -- it's just a gesture to sound
reasonable.
And remember also what Dr. Burns said.
He told you that if she had quit in the 1960s, in the 1970s, and even in the 1980s, if she didn't already have lung damage, she would most likely not have developed COPD and would not have died.
And what does that mean? It means that for them to accept responsibility, what they have to be telling you is, she should have and could have quit soon enough that she wouldn't have developed COPD and died. If that's not what it means, it's meaningless.
Now, she's accepted responsibility. At start it's 100 percent because they have the burden of proof to you to tell you that there's some reason her level of responsibility should shrink from 100 percent.
And there's only one way they can do that. And that is if they prove to you that Reynolds did something wrong -- other than just sell cigarettes, but they did something wrong and that they deserve a piece of that fault. So it starts at 100 percent for Mrs.
Ward, and only to the extent you decide they proved something wrong should that number come down.
And remember that that number cannot come down based on sympathy. Everyone understands and everybody sympathizes with Mr. Ward's loss of his spouse. That's not an issue in this case.
Everybody -- Everybody sympathizes when someone loses someone they love. But that can't be a legal element of what you decide in terms of what should happen with respect to the legal claims that are brought in this case.
Now, I want to talk about burden of proof because that -- You heard a little bit about it from Mr. Gustafson. And he talked about the scales.
And he talked about the fact that they bear the burden of proof, but they put on all the evidence. And he said, we didn't call any witnesses.
And it's true. I decided not to call witnesses because my judgment is we didn't need to do that. The issues are set in front
of you. And my argument is entirely that they didn't meet their burden of proof, and I didn't need to bring someone to do that. And we will accept your judgment based on the merits of what you heard.
But I don't need witnesses of my own to make those points because all of the evidence that I'm going to ask you to consider came out of the mouths of their witnesses, particularly their experts.
Now, you saw the verdict form, and I want to see if we can pop that up just real quick. And this is what it's sort of going to look like (indicating).
But the point I want to make is that in every one of the questions that you're going to be asked to answer about the wrongful conduct of Reynolds, whether it's concealment or whatever it may be, comparative fault, every one of those questions is going to include the legal cause requirement.
So what is legal cause? Legal cause means that Mr. Ward must prove that but for Reynolds wrongful conduct, Mrs. Ward wouldn't have developed COPD and died.
Simply put that means if Reynolds hadn't done what it did, without Reynolds conduct, it wouldn't have happened. It would have turned out. And that, on every one of the claims they talk about, is their burden.
They have to say and they have to give you evidence to establish that if you take that away, the outcome would have been different.
To the extent you ever find yourself in the jury room having to guess: Well, did it matter? Do I know if it really mattered? It might have. It might not. If you find yourself in the position of guessing or speculating, it is an absolute sign that Mr. Ward was unable to sustain his burden of proof.
I want to talk about the findings for a minute. The most important part for you to remember is the instruction that you're going to get from the Court.
The Engle findings do not establish that R.J. Reynolds or Liggett are liable to Mr. Ward, nor do they establish whether Mattie Ward was injured by the conduct of either, or
the degree, if any, to which their conduct was the sole or contributing cause of Mattie Ward's death. The findings establish only what they expressly state, and you must not speculate or guess as to the basis for the findings.
And all that is saying is if -- You're going to see -- You saw the findings on negligence, design, on concealment. None of these findings establish that you should check off the box on the verdict form and find Reynolds liable and award money. They have to prove that whatever the wrongful conduct was actually affected Mrs. Ward. That's their burden of proof.
Mr. Gustafson talked for a couple minutes about legal product, and I want to talk to you about it again very briefly.
Mr. Gustafson is right. The mere fact that Reynolds manufactures and sells a legal product does not mean that you can't hold them liable if you find they did something wrong.
The point of it being a legal product is you cannot impose liability simply for the
fact that they manufactured and sold cigarettes if they did nothing wrong, if they weren't negligent, if it wasn't designed...
They have to tie that together for you.
And the reason is, the United States Congress decided the issue of whether cigarettes should be legally sold in 1965.
And remember what I told you in opening. It wasn't because Congress didn't think they were dangerous, and it wasn't because Congress didn't think once people started to smoke it could be very difficult to quit.
The Surgeon General in 1964 found both of those things. It found that it caused lung cancer and it caused chronic bronchitis and was associated with emphysema. It found that it was habituating, which meant it was very difficult to stop.
That question has been answered. There is nothing on the verdict form that asks you should cigarettes be legally sold and manufactured in the United States.
And I do mention that because of Dr. Cummings. And we'll talk about Dr. Cummings later, when he talks about Reynolds should
have manufactured an uninhalable cigarette which is called a cigar, or it should have manufactured cigarettes with no nicotine that he knows no one would smoke.
So that's the frame of reference that I want you to keep in mind, just with respect to the whole legality issue.
I want to talk to you about class membership. Remember that there are two elements to class membership. Was Mattie Ward addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And two, was her addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of the death of Mattie Ward? Two separate questions.
And that gives me an opportunity, I think, to talk to you about something that you saw and you heard Mr. Gustafson talk about.
He said that I told you in opening that there were some stupid things that were written in documents a long time ago. And then he went on to talk about whether it was an accident.
And I never told you in the opening or
anywhere during this trial that anything was an accident. I told you some things were stupid.
And this is a perfect example because Mr. Gustafson -- not once but twice -- put up a document from the '60s where someone wrote, if a smoker is addicted, we can't defend these cases, essentially.
Well, that's a perfect example of stupid because it's wrong. That's not true. And this question ought to tell you all you need to know about that.
You could find that Mrs. Ward was addicted to cigarettes. Does that mean you go straight to the verdict form box where it says how much should Reynolds pay?
No. Because that is not enough to establish liability. You have not only on class membership was it the legal cause of her death, but in the other counts you still have the legal cause requirement.
So that's an example of stupid because it's not true. And you cannot take from what Mr. Gustafson said to mean that if you decide that she was addicted that means Reynolds did
something wrong and Reynolds is liable.
When you see the verdict form and read the instructions, that will be obvious; but I want to make sure you understand right now. This question, number one, on class membership, does not decide that Reynolds is liable at all.
So the critical question is, in terms of was she addicted... I told you during opening that the way you're going to have to decide this is to use your common sense because you saw Dr. Cummings had some definitions, Dr. Burns had some definitions. There were a lot of things talked about.
But the important part is not some technical definition. It's common sense.
And I think the easiest way to frame the question is: Did she control her smoking or did her smoking control her? Did she smoke because she had to or did she smoke because she enjoyed it or because it calmed her nerves and she used it that way? That's what you have to decide on this question.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both suggested -- You can take that off. Dr.
Burns and Dr. Cummings both suggested that really this is all about withdrawal, that the only reason smokers smoke is to avoid withdrawal because it feels bad when you go through withdrawal.
But there's more to it. And you saw from the evidence in this case that that's not what was necessarily true for Mrs. Ward. She had other reasons for smoking, and she wasn't bashful about talking about those reasons. And we'll get to them.
But first of all, with respect to control. And this isn't definitive for them or us. It's just something for you to consider.
You saw lots of evidence with respect to Mrs. Ward's ability to control her smoking behavior. You heard, for example, she was at school all day working. She only smoked twice.
She smoked on the morning break and afternoon break. And she was able to do that. You heard that she... she would... she didn't smoke during church. She didn't get up and leave.
You heard she could go to a restaurant that had nonsmoking sections and didn't get up and leave. You heard Mr. Ward say that sometimes she left during a movie.
You heard three or four other witnesses -- or at least two or three other witnesses -- say, no, she could make it through a movie. The whole point was, she had some level of control on when she smoked and when she didn't smoke. She was able to control it. It didn't control her.
But I also want you to think about what you heard about how Mrs. Ward used smoking with respect to calming her nerves. She told her husband that she used it to calm her nerves. She -- And he told you -- Well, here it is:
Didn't she say that one of the reasons she liked cigarettes was because it calmed her nerves?
She might have said that, yes, sir.
She was a nervous person. Mr. Ward told you that. Her son described how she always had to be doing something. She always had to have something in her hands. She'd empty
waste baskets two or three times a day. Everything in the house had to be in its place. That was just her nature.
And she told Mr. Ward that she used smoking to help her deal with that. But she didn't all -- just talk to Mr. Ward about it.
Let's take a look at a medical record from one of her doctors. This is in 1993.
I worry about things I cannot control.
I worry about my grandchildren for no real reason.
It was a problem. Nerves were not a small issue with her. It was an issue in her life.
You also heard Mr. Ward tell you on the stand that she wouldn't even watch the news. Why wouldn't she watch the news? Because all news was bad news, and she didn't like dealing with bad news.
She also in 1995 went -- Can we have 193, please? In 1995 she filled out an anxiety questionnaire. She reported feeling nervous and anxious, afraid for no reason at all, upset or panicky a good part of the time.
Now, Mr. Ward said he thought that that was all of her nervousness, all of these things were because of her smoking.
But you can see from the medical records alone that it wasn't all about smoking. Her grandchildren had -- worrying about her grandchildren had nothing to do with her smoking.
Feeling this anxiety and panic and being afraid for no reason at all, no one tied that to her smoking. But we do know that she used cigarettes to help her with that. That wasn't because she was addicted. It wasn't that she was avoiding withdrawal. That was what she used it for. And what else did she say? She said that she enjoyed smoking.
Dr. May's records reflect the same thing. It's not just that she told her husband that she enjoyed it.
Let's see what she told Dr. May.
September 21, 1995.
Also, we had a long talk about encouraging her to quit smoking once again. And I think you've seen this.
I have begged her on several occasions.
She refuses. I like it too much.
She didn't tell Dr. May, I can't deal with withdrawal. She didn't tell him that, you know, I feel compelled to do this. She said, I like it too much.
You ultimately have to decide where that all nets out. Was she smoking just to avoid withdrawal or did she use smoking? Did she want to smoke because it helped her with her nerves and she enjoyed it? Did her smoking control her or did she control her smoking?
The second question that we get to on class membership is... If you decide she was addicted, the second question is, did her addiction cause her COPD and death.
You can take that down.
You don't reach that just because you decide she was addicted. That's why there are two separate questions. If addicted was the answer, we wouldn't get to question number two.
And it's a different question than did smoking cause her COPD. That's not in dispute. Smoking cigarettes for 45 years caused her COPD. But did she smoke those
cigarettes for 45 years because she was addicted or because she made the choice to?
And I think it's -- I think the easiest way to frame the question is like this. Can we see 23? Did Mattie Ward have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking or did nicotine addiction control Mrs. Ward and leave her no meaningful choice, no matter how hard she tried, but to continue smoking, causing her death?
That's really what this question boils down to. Did she have the ability and choose not to or did she have no meaningful choice and had to?
Remember that addiction does not mean that a smoker cannot quit smoking. Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both told you smokers, addicted smokers, even heavily addicted smokers, have the ability to quit. All of them can. Not all do, but they have the ability.
You heard the evidence. Between -- As of now, between 55 and 60 million people have quit smoking. And according to both Dr.
Burns and Dr. Cummings, most of them, 80 to
90 percent of those people were addicted but they quit. You also heard with that number there are now more former smokers in the U.S. than current smokers.
And what they told you about, you remember seeing the circles that they put up with the illustration and they called it the cycle of addiction?
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns admitted that those people that we're talking about, the 55 or 60 million people, were able to break out of that cycle of addiction.
Dr. Burns even said -- Can we see 26? Doctor, you agree that even heavily addicted smokers have the ability to quit, right?
Sure, heavy smokers quit.
And actually, of the 60 million people that we've talked about that have successfully quit, many of them would have been heavily addicted smokers?
ANSWER: Yes. I answered that question yesterday when you asked it.
And then I talked to him about... I think we've got -- Can we see the next line?
We don't have the right one.
But Dr. Burns said, when I asked him about that same demonstrative, that same chart that they showed you, I asked him, were those tens of millions of people able to break out of there?
And his answer was, yes.
And one of the things I want you to remember is what Dr. Cummings told you about Mrs. Ward specifically. We know that she quit in 2000.
And Dr. Cummings told you that she was no less addicted in 2000 when she was able to quit than she had at any time before in her life.
Mrs. Ward quit smoking in the year 2000.
ANSWER: That's right.
And there's no evidence to suggest she was any more or less addicted when she quit than any other point during her life; is that right?
That's right.
What does that mean? It means that she had the same ability all through her life that she had in 2000 to quit. It wasn't a question of ability.
And whatever withdrawal she went through -- She was in the hospital for a few days -- you heard that -- when she had pneumonia. And she got out.
But remember the two quit attempts that you heard about where she had quit for a week on one case and at least two weeks on the other?
In those situations, she -- she had experienced with withdrawal. She had gone through what Dr. Cummings talked to you about. Within 48 to 72 hours the nicotine was gone. Maximum withdrawal, he told you, occurs within three or four days of when you quit and lasts a couple weeks. She had experienced that.
But she went back to smoking then, but she didn't in 2000. And it's not because she was any less addicted in 2000 than she was when she made those other attempts.
The difference was what Mr. Ward told you. He told you that for the first time she really had -- He called it a purpose in quitting. We can call it motivation. We can call it whatever we want.
But according to Mr. Ward, who knew her better than anyone, that was the first time she really had a purpose in quitting. That's what it took for her. It wasn't the -- The nicotine addiction was no different any other time. The difference was her. It was within her exclusive control.
We talked to Dr. Cummings about what it takes to quit. And I want to take you through this very briefly.
Remember that he said -- He basically put this together for the American Cancer Society. It was based on what he did with all the nonsmoking clinics that he ran when he was up in Buffalo, New York.
And he asked three questions. And it's:
Do you have what it takes to stop smoking?
And here the three questions. Do you want to stop smoking? Are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? Are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping?
And if you say yes to all three, he says, you can quit.
The first question, do you want to stop
smoking, that's motivation. And that's the difference. That's the question that Mrs.
Ward would have answered differently in the prior quit attempts from 2000. That's when she really wanted to stop smoking. And that comes from Mr. Ward.
The second one is: Are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? And that's whether or not you're willing to do what it takes.
But the third one, are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? That's withdrawal. That's what Dr. Cummings told you it was talking about.
And he -- And remember, he told you that that maximum withdrawal that you experience is three or four days. After the nicotine has left your system, that's when it's maximum.
Now, he did say cravings continue after that. But what did he tell you about cravings? He said, they can be very intense but they usually only last a minute or two.
And the frequency of when you get them diminishes over time. And he also told you
that they tell smokers that your body will adjust.
Now, I asked him about nicotine receptors and whether or not they return to normal, which is Dr. Benowitz's theory. And that's not his area of expertise, but Dr. Cummings did say, at least, that the body returns to normal over -- over a period of time.
And he gives people techniques on how to get through withdrawal and those uneasy moments. And obviously Mrs. Ward did, too, because in 2000 she did. And she never relapsed.
Now, Dr. Cummings said -- He told you when he was on direct, he said, well, you know, over time, after about seven -- seven years, he said, 50 percent of the people that quit relapse. And he -- he talked about that.
And on cross-examination, I showed him two studies from Roswell Park. And he was the co-author of both of those papers. And what did those papers say?
The one said that over a 13-year period,
from 1988 to 2001, the relapse rate of the subjects was 18 percent or 1.6 percent of former smokers relapsed each year, hardly 50 percent over seven years.
The other one was a -- The other study was an eight-year period from 1993 to 2001. The relapse rate was 15.4 percent, not 50 percent.
It's all very academic in a way because we know Mrs. Ward did not relapse. The decision to quit was based on her finally having a purpose.
And remember what Dr. Cummings said. It was not because she suddenly became aware of Reynolds' positions or Reynolds' statements.
And there's no indication that at the time she quit it was because she, for example, had received any copies of any previously secret Reynolds documents, right?
And no evidence she received any previous secret Reynolds' documents.
And it means more than just that literally. It means it wasn't new information. It wasn't something that she found out. It wasn't some fact that they say
was concealed from her. None of that happened. But she quit.
One of the other things Dr. Cummings admitted was there's some people that do not want to quit smoking. He admitted that people often feel pressured into saying they want to quit.
Their friends pressure them. Their family pressures them. Their spouse pressure them. Their doctors pressure them. And they feel pressured into saying, yes, I want to quit, when Dr. Cummings told you they really don't.
And if they really don't, they're not going to succeed. He even said some people go so far as to say, I want to quit, and I'll actually try and quit, and then fail so that my loved ones will stop nagging me. Sound familiar?
Mrs. Ward's family had been telling her for a long time that they wanted her to quit. Annette Smith said that her father stopped complaining about his mother smoking -- or her mother smoking because she was going to have to make up her mind herself if she was
going to quit.
And Mrs. Ward did say -- Mr. Ward testified, Mrs. Smith testified, others testified that she said, I tried. I can't.
I'm hooked. She did tell her family that.
But what did she say to her friends?
Mrs. Mattheiss on three separate occasions talked to Mrs. Ward about saying you should quit.
And what was Mrs. Ward's response to her? The first two times she just laughed it off. The last time she acted offended, and Mrs. Mattheiss never brought it up again.
Her doctors. What do we know about what Mrs. Ward consistently told her doctors about quitting?
Continues to smoke despite warnings, and is smoking at least a half pack a day.
She had no intention of trying her patches and did not. She did not even try the Ativan. She just has no intention of trying to change her behavior habits.
You heard a lot during the testimony about being prescribed patches, being prescribed gum, and giving that -- given that
medication.
And everybody said, oh, she tried real hard. She got those things, and she used those. This is the doctor that prescribed them.
And what did she tell the doctor that prescribed those to help her quit? She had no intention of even trying to use them because she had no intention of trying to change her behavior.
That's her choice. It's not a criticism. It reflects a choice she had a right to make. She had a right to decide whether to take the medicine and use the patches or not.
She had a right to decide whether to change her behavior. And she was very blunt with her doctor. No intention of trying.
She also says continues to quit -- or continues to smoke. Will not quit. It was a constant theme. She was very frank with her doctors. She didn't want to quit.
And remember, when you're thinking about whether or not her addiction led to her COPD and death or whether her choice was what led
to her death [sic].
We have established -- Dr. Burns and Cummings -- she had the ability to quit. And it's not theoretical. She did quit. We know she could. We know that she was no more addicted or no less addicted when she quit than she was before.
She had the ability to quit sooner. And we know that if she had quit sooner, she wouldn't have developed COPD and died. It was exclusively within her control.
Dr. Burns told you in the '50s, '60s,
'70s and even into the '80s, if she had done that, she would not have developed COPD and died.
Let's turn to the statute of limitations. We talked about this. This, again, number 41.
Did Mrs. Ward have COPD before May 5, 1990, and did she know or reasonable care should have known before 1990 that she had COPD?
Now, this whole issue comes down to whether or not she had -- is there evidence to suggest that she had COPD before 1990?
And remember that the symptoms are shortness of breath and a chronic cough. These are the what the doctors told you are the common symptoms.
In 1978, Janet Ballard said she had a smoker's cough. Mrs. Smith said she had a cough for years. She said she had a constant cough.
Dr. Cummings, when he was testifying, said that Mrs. Ward had health concerns related to cigarette smoking in the 1970s. Mary Mattheiss remembers Mrs. Ward having bronchitis regularly in the 1980s.
Now, Mr. Ward testified numerous times in his deposition that she had breathing problems in the '70s and '80s, but you understand -- you saw him testify -- that there's confusion about whether or not it was the '80s or whether it was the '90s. And that's... You know, we all have areas that we get confused about.
But when I was asking him about that and I was asking him when it started, he said that the breathing problems -- everything started after she started seeing Dr. May.
But let's take a look at the medical records from the very first time Mrs. Ward saw Dr. May.
This is August 25, 1993. She does get SOB, shortness of breath, with exertion, probably caused by long cigarette history.
Early COPD, tobacco use.
By the time Mrs. Ward ever saw Dr. May, she already had COPD. She already had shortness of breath on exertion. It didn't start long after she started seeing Dr. May.
The medical record is what it is.
Now, Drs. Hanline and May, who treated Mrs. Ward, both said, it is possible that Mrs. Ward had COPD before May 5, 1990.
This is Dr. May: Can you rule out the fact, sitting here today, that Mattie Ward did not have COPD going back prior to 1990 or '91?
I can't rule that out, no.
Dr. Hanline: If Mrs. Ward were having breathing problems either in the '70s or '80s and seeing a doctor with respect to those breathing problems, that could likely be related to COPD, correct?
ANSWER: It could be.
Neither one of them say she definitely did. Neither one of them treated her before that. And there are no medical records from Dr. Douglass that we understood that she saw before. But there is the possibility it can't be ruled out.
Now, let's talk about the second part of the question, about awareness. Should she have been -- With reasonable care, could she have been aware that she had COPD and it was caused by smoking?
Well, there's no question on linking it to smoking. In 1964, the Surgeon General had concluded that smoking was the cause of chronic bronchitis and was related to emphysema, and she certainly had access to that information.
The warning labels that were on the packages of cigarettes in 1985 had a specific warning about emphysema. If she was smoking and had a pack in there, all she had to do, if she would have satisfied the second requirement, smoking is linked to emphysema.
And we know that she discussed them. We
know that she discussed them with her daughter. We know that she discussed that with other people as well.
Her daughter said that her mother acknowledged smoking was bad for her health in the 1980s, when her lungs got bad. 1980s.
Mrs. Mattheiss, as I said, said she had bronchitis every year back in the 1980s.
She also had two family members that in the '70s and '80s died of emphysema that were heavy smokers.
There's plenty of information that was available for her to link the breathing problems and the chronic cough to cigarette smoking. There's no question about that.
You should check yes on both of those questions.
Your Honor, I don't know where we are on timing, but I'm finished with that section, if you'd like to break.
THE COURT: This is the appropriate time. Go ahead and take about a ten-minute break.
(Brief recess.)
(The following transpired in open court, jury not present:)
THE COURT: All right. Ready for the jury?
MR. BARINGER: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: Call them in when they're ready, please.
(The following transpired in open court, jury present:)
COURT SECURITY OFFICER: Your Honor, the jury's in the box.
THE COURT: All right. Thank you.
Please continue.
MR. BARINGER: Thank you, Your Honor.
We talked about the statute of limitations.
The next question that you'll be asked is, as you recall from Mr. Gustafson showing you the form, was whether or not smoking Reynolds cigarettes was the legal cause of Mrs. Ward's death.
And one thing I want to bring to your attention, through inadvertent error, the jury instruction that you were shown by Mr. Gustafson was incorrect.
You obviously -- The Court -- The only instructions that matter are the ones that you will ultimately get from the Court, and those you'll be given later, and they will be accurate.
But the point of it is -- And when you see the correct instruction, what you will find is, it is still the plaintiff's burden of proof to show that smoking Reynolds brands was a significant contributing factor to Mrs. Ward developing COPD and dying from it.
In other words, they have to show you that there was enough usage of that, in terms of her overall usage, that it was a significant contributing factor.
And that's why all the concern that you've seen during the course of this trial about what brands did she smoke and how long did she smoke them.
Of course, nobody knows precise dates, and nobody's concerned about precise dates, of what year, what day did someone start and how -- you know, what day did they quit.
That's not the point.
But as Dr. Burns testified -- And I
asked him about how you determine the relative contribution of different brands to developing COPD.
And he said he needs two pieces of information in order to be able to do that.
One is the amount, how many packs per day; and the duration. That's how he can do it.
And he said, if you'll recall, that he couldn't do that for a single brand in this case. And he read everyone's deposition. He read Mr. Ward's. He read Mrs. Smith's. He read everyone that had been deposed. And he came in and said he couldn't do it, there wasn't enough information to do that.
Now, when we talked to Mr. Ward -- oh, there are two things I do want you to remember, though. I want you to remember the general impressions that Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings had after reading all of the information that was available about Mrs.
Ward's smoking history.
Dr. Burns: But in terms of Mrs. Ward's choices, she was perfectly happy to smoke whatever was cheapest at the time. She wasn't devoted to some brand, and she
wouldn't consider switching, right?
ANSWER: As I understood the depositions, she was not primarily brand loyal.
And that's vintage Dr. Burns, if you'll remember. That's how he speaks. But the idea was, she didn't have a particular brand. She didn't -- She wasn't brand loyal. There wasn't one -- or that he could identify, that he was able to, once he read all off the depositions.
Now, Dr. Cummings, same sort of concept.
And what did he say? What did he say? We don't have it? Okay.
Dr. Cummings, if you'll recall, when I asked him about it, he said, she smoked whatever she could get her hands on. That was his impression, that she smoked virtually everything.
And you'll recall that we sort of had a long exchange about that. And it was about getting the proper context of the question.
And it boiled down to, after he read all the depositions, and he saw all the discussion of the 26 brands that were
identified, his impression was she smoked whatever she could get her hands on. So we know that there are a tremendous number of brands, but we don't know how long.
Now, Mr. Ward doesn't remember how long for a lot of them. And that's understandable. And it's not anyone's fault.
But what are we left with? What do you know? What evidence has actually been presented to you?
She smoked Chesterfield, but no one knows how long she smoked Chesterfield. We know that she smoked -- For whatever reason, we know with remarkable precision that she smoked Marlboro for three months.
And remember Mr. Ward's explanation was: That was a long time for her to smoke a brand. That's why he remembers it. What does that tell you about the other brands?
He also said that she smoked Virginia Slims for several months. Beyond that, we don't know much more about that. But he remembers those two Philip Morris brands.
If you take where we are now and what we know after Mr. Ward's testimony, and what the
general impression was from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, do you think if Dr. Burns walked back into this courtroom today and I asked him the same question:
If I give you the same list of brands, could you tell me the proportional share of the proportional contribution of a single brand in this case? And I think you know the answer. He still couldn't do it.
The ambiguity created by the lack of memory, the lack of specificity, is -- It's not that there's something wrong with that.
But the problem is plaintiff can't sustain his burden of proof with that.
They are the ones that have the responsibility to bring the clarity and certainty to the issue because they bear the burden of proof, and they haven't met it.
I want to talk about we -- Mr. Gustafson said on the verdict form the next thing you come to is comparative fault. And that's sort of a catch-all.
It doesn't -- It doesn't single out negligence or design or anything else. It just says, how much fault do you establish or
do you assign to each of the people that are parties that are listed there?
And what I want to do here is remind you that the only way any number gets -- other than zero gets entered on that form for R.J. Reynolds is if plaintiff proves to you that Reynolds did something wrong that caused Mrs. -- excuse me -- Mrs. Ward to develop COPD and die.
So what I'm going to try and do here is, I'm going to talk to you about some of the topics, some of the themes that they said were wrong.
And the first one is I want to talk to you about advertising and initiation, the whole idea that they were trying to get kids to start to smoke that weren't otherwise smoking. And I want to talk about that in general, and I want to talk about it with respect to Mrs. Ward.
Now, Dr. Cummings talked about cigarette advertising was everywhere, and they spent a lot of money on cigarette advertising. And what was the effect? It made it seem like it was normal.
And he showed you ads from the 1940s and 1950s, and it showed movie stars smoking. It showed sports people smoking. It showed smoking in all kinds of contexts. And he said, it made it look normal.
It was normal in the 1950s. Mr.
Gustafson has told you it was normal. He said it was a different time. In the 1950s people might be sitting in this courtroom smoking. It was normal at the time. It wasn't a fictional portrayal of a different world. It was normal at the time.
And what better evidence from Mrs. Ward to think it was normal than to see it? You know, she wasn't isolated in a box somewhere. She lived. She was out. She saw. She saw the same things that they went to great length to tell you existed. It was normal.
And then they wanted to talk about -They said, well, let's talk about some Reynolds documents and the importance of youth.
And one of them was a document by Dr. Teague that you saw. And if we can bring up LP-400.
This is a document that they showed you. And they were talking about this was evidence that they were trying to get kids to start smoking.
What does this document say? At the outset, it should be said that we're presently and I believe unfairly constrained from directly promoting cigarettes to the youth market, that is, to those in the approximately 21-year-old-and-under group.
Remember, this is a -- this is -- their whole theory about all these documents is that these were deep, dark secrets that were never going to be exposed to the public, so they were free to write whatever they wanted.
And we had a whole discussion, Dr. Cummings and I, about whether I could walk into some place, General Motors or Coca-Cola, and walk in and ask for documents.
No business just lets their records out -- you know, everyone have access to them.
But their theory is, these were never supposed to come out, and so these people were free to write what they want.
And what did Dr. Teague write? He said, we shouldn't -- we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start smoking.
Dr. Teague was talking about the younger part of the market, of people that already had made the decision to start smoking.
There isn't a word -- You can look at it in the jury room. Find in there where there's anything that indicates that he was trying to convince nonsmokers to start.
The second document he showed you was the very same thing. Diane Burrows, LP-2628. Younger adult smokers. Younger adult smoker was defined as 18 to 24.
But the important part of the document is what it was about. And I asked Dr. Cummings what it was about. And what did he say?
Well, let's take a look at the next slide first. RJR's consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free, informed, adult choice, which the company does not seek to influence.
Next slide. Next slide. The whole point in this whole thing was -- No. You can
take that down.
The whole point was, this document, as Dr. Cummings admitted, was talking about young smokers. And remember it said, existing smokers? They had already started?
And Dr. Cummings admitted that what was going on here was Diane Burrows was talking about the tremendous opportunity with young people who had already decided to smoke, about what would be their brand of choice because there was a tremendous switching opportunity. That's what the whole document's about, not how to get kids to start. It was about their brand choice.
Can you take that down?
And then the next piece was, I asked Dr. Cummings: When someone is offered their first cigarette, do they ask for a brand? I mean, if a kid has never smoked before and one of their friends are out there, and the kids says, hey, do you want to try smoking?
How many kids do you think say, well, is it a Marlboro? That's not what happens. Dr. Cummings admitted that they take whatever they're handed. That's the decision to start
smoking. The whole Diane Burrows document was all about what brand to choose after you were already a regular smoker.
So what do we know about Mrs. Ward? Connecting this to Mrs. Ward. What do we know about why she started to smoke?
Now, there's only one piece of evidence in this case that sheds any light on that at all, and that was her discussion with her friend Mrs. Mattheiss.
And what did Mrs. Mattheiss say? She said that we talked about it. She said that it was the accepted thing to do, and her brothers smoked, and that it was the influence of her brothers that led Mrs. Ward to start smoking.
And I asked Dr. Cummings about that.
And what did he say? Peers and siblings are the most important factors. Now, he says advertising leads kids to smoking, but he said that those factors are the most powerful in what leads kids to start smoking.
And in this case we know Mrs. Ward specifically told people that it was because of the influence of her brothers that she
started smoking.
So let's talk about advertising, the other piece that you heard a lot about, and that was about filtration and low tar.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both talked to you for a long time about Reynolds and the other companies introducing filter cigarettes in the 1950s and the big shift in the market.
And why was that happening? Well, first of all, remember, that was a time of tremendous public concern, really for the first time, about smoking and health.
Why? Remember you heard about those the big four epidemiological studies that came out in the 1950s, statistically associating smoking with cancer?
Then there was Wynder, with the mouse skin painting, where they showed the mouse having, you know, tar painted on his back, featured in Life Magazine.
And it's the whole reason -- Dr.
Cummings and Dr. Burns both admit the whole reason this whole Plaza Hotel meeting ever took place was because of the public concern about the health effects of smoking. So that
sets the stage.
And then Dr. Burns and Cummings say, well, so the companies started putting filters on cigarettes, and the market changed.
What did you find out, though, on cross-examination that you didn't hear word one about, not only in the direct testimony of Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, but you didn't hear a word out of the plaintiff in closing today about it? What was going on back then?
Dr. Burns told you and Dr. Cummings both told you that the independent scientists and the public health community at that very same time were actively encouraging smokers to switch to filter cigarettes.
It wasn't just the ads came out about something nobody heard of. Scientists were saying, the American Cancer Society was saying, the National Cancer Institute was saying switch to filters.
Remember the Reader's Digest article in 1957, All About Filters? We have 60.
This is 1957. And this is -- This is an example. Dr. Wynder, who did the mouse
painting experiments, he recommended a 40-percent reduction in tar would be a significant reduction in cancer risk from filters. And this got -- You can take that down. This got a tremendous amount of publicity and coverage.
Remember that Reader's Digest at the time was in one quarter of all homes in the United States. Twenty-five percent of all homes had Reader's Digest. And we know that the Wards at some point had Reader's Digest.
It was very popular back then.
And remember, we talked about Consumer Reports. At the same time it wasn't just Reader's Digest, but Consumer Reports. Remember Dr. Burns and I talked about it. They had routine publications about not only recommending, but remember they published ratings on all the cigarettes. They tested them and published those and made recommendations.
And remember, they even did that -Remember the little gadget that I showed Dr. Burns, the thing called the ventar that punches holes in the cigarette?
And it was all about whether ventilation was a big secret or not. And Consumer Reports tested one. They had punched holes in cigarettes, had people smoke them with blindfolds.
And what did they find out? They smoked them differently. That was the whole phenomenon compensation. But that was all in the popular press.
Deitrich Hoffman, who Dr. Cummings said was a giant in the field of smoking and health, said that it credited a Reader's Digest article for having a significant impact on consumers' move to filter cigarettes.
It wasn't just the tobacco companies advertising filters. The public health community was leading the way toward that.
Now, they criticized Reynolds and others for putting filters on because they said they gave reassurance; they gave smokers an excuse not to quit; they gave them an alternative to quitting.
And I asked Dr. Burns about that. And Dr. Burns said, the public health community
and scientists did exactly the same thing.
They gave them the same alternative.
Do we have 61?
And the public health community in the 1950s encouraged the public to switch to filters, didn't it?
It did.
And then I asked him specifically about the contribution from the two different sources.
And here's what Dr. Burns said: I don't think it's possible to go back and identify the contribution of either or both of those factors, the cigarette ads and the public health community recommendations. He said, you can't separate it out. You can't figure out what the contribution was.
Well, what does that mean to this case? The plaintiff has the burden of proof to tell you which one had a contribution.
If one was significant and one wasn't, it was all one or it was 50-50, they have the burden of proof of telling you.
Which one was it. Was it because Mrs. Ward saw ads or was it because she saw
Deitrich Hoffman or was it because she heard the National Cancer Institute or the American Cancer Society or read articles in Consumer Reports?
We don't know. And why don't we know? Because they haven't proven to you what the source was. And that's their burden of proof.
Yes, there were ads. Yes the public health community was intimately involved and had a significant effect. And they can't tell you from Mrs. Ward which one had any effect, if any. And that's their burden.
We also know that during this period even after the filters, we know that when it moved on from filters to the whole low tar concept, we know the public health community led the way again and again made recommendations.
If we can take a look at the American Cancer Society in 1967. The less tar and nicotine you inhale the better. And it's a list of all the brands with the tar and nicotine numbers put out by the American Cancer Society. It's not a tobacco company
ad for any individual brand. It's the ACS.
Go to the next one.
This, the Department of Health,
Education and Welfare. Choose a cigarette with less tar and nicotine.
The next one. Remember, we showed you in. Go ahead and play this.
(Clip, as follows:)
SPEAKER: Cancer experts said today that the new low tar and low nicotine cigarettes are safer than regular cigarettes, although people who smoke these cigarettes still have far higher death rates than people who don't smoke at all.
This news comes at a time when Americans are smoking more cigarettes, more than 600 billion of them last year. Brian Ross has more on the story.
MR. ROSS: Low tar and nicotine cigarettes now account for 11 percent of all the cigarettes smoked in the country. And sales have grown in the belief such brands are less likely to cause lung cancer and heart disease.
The American Cancer Society says today's
report is the first solid proof that low tar and nicotine cigarettes are safer.
NEW SPEAKER: Tar and nicotine is being further reduced. And it is far better that people don't smoke, but if they're going to smoke, as many people are just plainly going to do, then they're better off smoking the cigarettes with low tar and nicotine than with high tar and nicotine.
I am hoping that people who never smoke anything but the low tar and nicotine cigarettes, by the time they reach 40, 50,
60, that they will not have the death rate of cigarette smokers of my generation.
MR. ROSS: The cancer society report is based on a 12-year study of tens of thousands of smokers. Low tar and nicotine cigarette users had a 26 percent less chance of lung cancer and a 14 percent less chance of heart disease than those who smoked high tar and nicotine cigarettes.
But the study also found that smokers of low tar and nicotine cigarettes had a death rate much higher than those who don't smoke at all. Brian Ross, NBC News, New York.
(End clip.)
MR. BARINGER: That was an example. It was the American Cancer Society. That was the message that was being delivered to the public at the time.
It wasn't just ads, cigarette ads, for a low tar brand. This was part of the landscape, part of the wallpaper, part of the environment.
And it didn't stop. That was in 1976.
You saw it during Dr. Cummings' testimony that it continued. The Surgeon General in 1981 reported filter tip cigarettes produced lower rates of lung cancer than do high tar cigarettes.
1982 Surgeon General's Report: Filtered low tar cigarettes smokers have lower lung cancer risk compared to non-filter higher tar smokers.
1990 Surgeon General's Report: Lower risk of lung cancer observed for smokers of filter cigarettes.
And I want you to remember one thing. You saw the results of some of those epidemiological studies. And Dr. Burns
talked about that.
And remember that all of the evidence, the evidence that the lung cancer rates were lower for smokers of filter and low tar cigarettes, were the result of epidemiological statistical studies.
And I asked Dr. Burns: Who did those studies? Was it the tobacco industry? Was it Reynolds?
No. It was outside scientists with absolutely no connection to the tobacco industry.
Dr. Burns said, well, they weren't designed right.
Well who designed them?
The outside scientists designed them.
The outside scientists conducted them. The outside scientists reported the results to the American public.
It wasn't the tobacco industry. But the health -- the public health community was intimately involved in the entire process.
And just like with filters on low tar, did Mrs. Ward smoke low tar because she saw a particular ad or was she aware that the
Surgeon General, the ACS and everyone saying the results are in; they're safer; switch to those?
Did she find that out before she went and said, okay, it sounds like a good idea; and then looked at ads to say, well, which one will I try? We don't know the answer to that question. Why don't we know the answer to that question?
Because the plaintiff can't sustain his burden of proof to tell you the answer to that question. You can't decide that there was something wrongful about the advertising that led her to take action if you don't know that was the source. You don't know what role the public health community played in her decision because they can't meet their burden of proof.
But what do we know about Mrs. Ward with respect to these products? Well, we know that if a cigarette -- if she bought a cigarette that she didn't find satisfying, if she didn't get enough -- Mr. Ward called it taste and then strength -- what did she do?
Did she say, well, I know it doesn't
taste as good. It's not as strong as I'd like, so -- but I'm worried about my health so I'll keep smoking it? Is that what she did?
No. She switched. Dr. Cummings said there were times she switched from lower tar to higher tar.
I want to show you something that Dr. Cummings put up during his testimony. Do we have that? This is a slide that they used in Dr. Cummings direct. And it was about behavioral factors. And they were talking about addiction.
But here's what Dr. Cummings put down. Mattie preferred stronger cigarettes and did not find low tar cigarettes satisfying.
That's Dr. Cummings.
What else do we know? You can take that down.
So we know that if she didn't get what she wanted, she switched. So it didn't matter. She wasn't willing to make that sacrifice for the supposed health advantages of the cigarettes. She either liked it or she didn't. She may have tried it for that
reason, but if she didn't like it she didn't stick with it. Even Dr. Cummings admits that.
What else do we know? We know from Mr. Ward and the testimony that price was very important to her. If she was smoking a cigarette -- Let's say she was smoking Vantage, whatever it was that they want to say she was smoking, what do we know would happen if she could get a better deal on another cigarette?
What did she do? She bought the other cigarette. If she had a coupon, she brought the other cigarette because price at times was a more important consideration, again, than her health.
So they want you to think that this entire thing about filtration and low tar was all falsely reassuring and it made her continue smoking instead of quitting. And the evidence about Mrs. Ward doesn't establish that at all.
They can't attribute why -- if she did, why. They can't tell you public health community, science, Surgeon General, or ads.
And then they can't tell you that even -- it really even made a difference in her behavior because the taste and the satisfaction and price, those all outruled whatever the supposed health benefit was. She liked smoking. She liked smoking cigarettes that she liked.
Let's talk about this whole thing about engineering cigarettes to make it more difficult to quit. This is Dr. Cummings telling you all about nicotine and all about how R.J. Reynolds should have made non-inhalable cigarettes because it's inhalation that leads to addiction or he should have -- or they should have taken all the nicotine out because you need nicotine. Smokers want nicotine in cigarettes.
And I told you it boils down to this:
The whole non-inhalable issue. Non-inhalable tobacco products are on the market, and always have been, and they're called cigars.
If Mrs. Ward would have smoked a non-inhalable product, she could have switched to cigars. But from what you know about her behavior, was she going to switch
to cigars? Of course not.
Was she going to smoke a cigarette with no nicotine? Of course not.
So, you know, it's interesting about how we take a look at the question of how did it affect her behavior?
I want to talk about the documents they talk about because they make this implication that Reynolds was the only one out there that knew about the role of nicotine, and that it was a deep, dark secret and they exploited it that they talked about.
And they showed you a document by Dr. Teague, and it was in 1972. And let's see. LP-448.
And here -- You heard about this even in closing. Dr. Teague in 1972: If nicotine is the sine qua non of tobacco products and tobacco products are recognized as being attractive dosage forms of nicotine... And then it goes on.
And what was the whole point? Reynolds knew all about this, and they knew how to exploit it, and it was a nicotine delivery device.
The interesting thing about it was, when I cross-examined Dr. Cummings, which you didn't hear a word about earlier, what did Dr. Cummings say?
I showed him a Reader's Digest article from 1950, 22 years before this document was written. Nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco. It is what makes tobacco tobacco and not just another weed.
This is in the public domain. Everybody has access to this, not just Claude Teague 22 years later. And the idea was that nicotine is the essential ingredient.
And Dr. Cummings agreed that this in Reader's Digest is exactly the same concept that Dr. Teague was talking about 22 years ago.
And then I said, well, what about this idea that the cigarette is like a dosage -you know, how you administer it?
Can we see Johnston, please. This was written in 1942, 30 years before Dr. Teague wrote his memo. On the assumption that smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine, just as smoking opium
is a means of administering Morphine. And it goes on and talks about it.
And what did Dr. Cummings tell you about it? That's the exact same concept that Claude Teague was writing about 32 years earlier.
Was that a secret? Was it something that nobody else knew? Do you think the Surgeon General didn't know?
Remember, in 1964 the Surgeon General's Report concluded that nicotine was a drug, that it had an effect on the brain, that it was -- that it led to habituation, which meant difficulty in quitting. 1964. They knew essentially -- You can take this down.
They knew essentially all about that -- about nicotine.
And we'll talk about how much farther back that knowledge goes. But nothing Teague was talking about in here was a secret about the role of nicotine.
And I went further with Dr. Cummings and I said, isn't it true that at this time the public health community was recommending that they try and deliver more nicotine to smokers
and less tar? And Dr. Cummings agreed with the concept.
The concept was: Remember, he said, well, the carcinogens are in the tar? And I talked about Russell, who Russell said they smoke for nicotine but die for tar.
The public health community's concern was lowering disease, was lowering risk for smokers.
So what did they recommend that the companies do, and what did they suggest for research? They essentially said, find out as much as you can about nicotine because we want to give the smokers the nicotine that they want, but we want to do that and give them less tar along the way because it will reduce the risk.
And that is exactly what these documents that you've been looking at from Reynolds are doing. They're learning as much as they can about nicotine because the public health community said, nicotine is not the problem. Tar is the problem.
Break the tar-to-nicotine ratio.
Increase pH. Use additives. Figure out as
much as you can because if we can find a way to make smokers get what they want without the risk, we're benefiting the public health.
Now, Dr. Cummings was very critical -Mr. Gustafson said -- He made a dramatic show about how low can we go, and that that was some horrible thing that R.J. Reynolds was doing, and it was a secret, and they were exploiting people.
I asked Dr. Cummings about that. And I asked him: If it wasn't true that the Surgeon General was specifically recommending research on that very issue about how low can we go.
And let me see if I can find the threshold. This is from the 1981 Surgeon General's Report. It's important to determine the lowest ratios that still produce a satisfying cigarette.
Next one. That's all we have. Okay.
There also was discussion about satisfaction, that Dr. Cummings admitted that the 1981 Surgeon General's Report also said we should do research on how to make cigarettes with the nicotine more satisfying
while driving down the tar.
The whole idea was it was a public health community advocating that you do adequate nicotine and reduce tar.
I want to talk for a minute about pH because pH became an extraordinary issue in this trial. Dr. Cummings talked about it a lot.
And remember that whole discussion? Remember when Dr. Cummings said, well, they raised the pH to increase free nicotine, and it's just like free-basing cocaine.
And I talked to him about that. And remember the whole idea was, cocaine is a powder. And the whole idea of free-basing it is to make it into an aerosol to get into your lungs. That's the whole concept of free-basing cocaine.
And I asked him about free nicotine in cigarettes. Remember, cigarette smoke is already inhalable without the pH being up.
What happens when you raise the pH? I asked Dr. Cummings -- And you heard him testify that when you get free nicotine, it's absorbed in the mouth and in the throat.
And then I asked him: What gets to the brain faster? The stuff that gets to the lungs or the stuff that is absorbed in the mouth and throat?
Seven to ten seconds from the stuff in the lung. He said I think at least twice as long, maybe longer, from the mouth and the throat. So it's exactly the opposite of the whole free-base cocaine idea.
If you increase pH, you lower the overall amount of nicotine that gets to the lungs, and you feel it in the mouth and throat. And that's what's called kick, and just -- You feel it, but it has nothing to do -- If anything, it's less addictive. So the whole concept of pH manipulation in that context was just nonsense.
And I want you -- I want you to remember that Dr. Cummings -- Mr. Gustafson talked for a long time about all of these things, the additives, the use of reconstituted tobacco sheet, the use of levulinic acid, the use of ammonia, all of that.
He says it's to try and make them more difficult to quit, another way of saying more
addictive.
But remember what I asked Dr. Cummings at the very end of all that? Are cigarettes today more addictive than they were in the 1950s? After all these things that they showed you, after all the things that they tried, are they more addictive?
And what was Dr. Cummings answer? No, they're not.
So for all of the talk about this, for all of the talk about being irresponsible and what they should have been doing, it didn't turn out that they're any more addictive than they were before.
So let's go back one last time. Non-inhalable. You raise the pH. You use whatever tobacco. You create a star.
Indeed, let's talk about this whole idea of taking nicotine out of tobacco and producing cigarettes that way, genetically altered tobacco with no nicotine in it or use a process to take it out.
In the 1964 Surgeon General's Report they said, denicotinized tobacco has not found public acceptance as a substitute.
What else do we know? 1981 Surgeon General's Report. Research studies using tobacco cigarettes virtually free of nicotine shows these to be rated as aversive by smokers. They didn't like them. They wouldn't smoke them.
The whole idea is, denicotinized cigarettes have been tried a long time ago, and nobody used them.
Now, Dr. Cummings says, well, if, you give someone a cigarette, if you take a Reynolds customer like Mrs. Ward that was smoking Vantage, and you take all of the nicotine out of it, she'll quit.
Really? All the other manufacturers out there, everybody's going to take all the nicotine out the same day?
Well, what if they don't? What if there's a manufacturer -- Dr. Cummings admitted that there are like a hundred or two hundred cigarette manufacturers in the United States. What if some of them don't do that? What would Mrs. Ward have done?
And remember, Reynolds is only responsible for Reynolds behavior. It can't
tell everybody else to take all the nicotine out of tobacco.
Do you really think that Mrs. Ward would have quit smoking instead of switching to another cigarette? That's what they have to prove to you.
It's not just that Reynolds could have taken it out. They have to prove to you it would have made a difference in Mrs. Ward's behavior. They have to tell you that if they had taken it out she would have quit smoking.
Of course, the interesting thing is she could have quit smoking any time she wanted to, whether there were nicotine in Reynolds cigarettes or not.
So the idea that she would just put them down and stop, as opposed to going and buying another brand? She switched brands when she couldn't get enough, let alone none. The whole concept of this non-inhalable or nicotine-free cigarette is ridiculous.
The public health community advocated doing as much as they could with nicotine to try and make it satisfying at a low level to try and reduce the risk of smokers.
Let's talk about concealment. Once again, they have to prove but for whatever was allegedly concealed something would have been different and Mrs. Ward wouldn't have continued smoking, wouldn't have developed COPD, and wouldn't have died.
That information... Mr. Gustafson basically said, well, I'm not talking about taking Claude Teague's document and mailing it to her.
Well, it's the concept that's important.
And they can't dismiss it. They have to show you that had she had the information that was allegedly concealed, she would have changed her behavior.
And what do we know about that? Let's talk about what they say was concealed. The addictive nature of nicotine. That's one they want to talk about.
They say, well, you know, Reynolds denied that smoking was addictive all during Mrs. Ward's life.
Well, that's absolutely fascinating because when I talked to Dr. Cummings about it, first of all, he admitted -- and Dr.
Burns admitted as well -- it has been common knowledge in this country for over 100 years that once you start using nicotine products, tobacco products, it is very difficult for some people to quit.
That's been known long before any of us were here. It was common knowledge. For centuries it's been known that once you start using nicotine it can be difficult to quit.
We showed you popular -- You know, we talked about popular articles that Reader's Digest and other popular publications talked about the role of nicotine for a long time.
That wasn't a secret.
Those articles were in the '50s. They were in Time. They were Newsweek, Dr. Cummings admitted. There's no evidence whatsoever that Mrs. Ward wasn't aware of that particular fact.
But when did this -- when did this denial happen? When did Reynolds say no to addictive.
You heard about the '94 Congressional testimony today again.
I asked Dr. Cummings when that started.
And when did it start? Let me show you a time line because Dr. Cummings confirmed everything on this time line.
Back from the 1700s, when there were writings about nicotine. It actually goes farther than that.
I asked both of them: Isn't it true that during that period up until 1964, when people were discussing the behavior, the fact that it's difficult to quit, they applied different labels. Some called it addiction.
Some called it habituation.
That didn't come to a head until 1964 when the Surgeon General's committee decided they should decide whether or not it is an addiction or whether it's a habit.
And you heard that there was -- the definition that was used in 1964 included an intoxication component.
So in 1964 the Surgeon General said, well, nicotine. Cigarettes are intoxicating, so we're going to call it a habit.
But remember I showed you that the Surgeon General's Report said specifically calling it a habit does not mean it's not
difficult to quit. That's not what they meant at all. That was just the label that they attached to the behavior. So that changed in 1964.
The next time was 1988. The Surgeon General reconsidered it. And what did the tobacco company do at the time? They said, well, we don't agree with the change in definition because they equate it to cocaine and heroin. And right, wrong or indifferent, that was the debate.
But I asked Dr. Cummings about this whole period before. Did the tobacco companies deny that it was difficult to quit? Ever?
His answer was, no.
Did they argue about calling it an addiction before 1988?
No.
They tell you that the companies denied this up until that point, and their own expert tells you they never denied it until 1988, and they never even then disputed the fact that it was difficult to quit.
I asked Dr. Cummings about the 1994
Congressional testimony. Mr. Johnston of RJR was one of the people standing there in that row. You saw the video. He got cut off, as Dr. Cummings admitted and said, well, they were using the old definition.
But the point was, I asked Dr. Cummings in those hearings, did Mr. Johnston of R.J. Reynolds acknowledge the fact that it was difficult for smokers -- for some smokers to quit? And Dr. Cummings said, yes, he did.
There may have been a debate about the label, but there was never a debate, there was never a denial that it was difficult to quit. Never.
Let's talk about the other part. They say that Reynolds concealed the health effects of smoking. Now, I don't want to belabor this.
Mr. Gustafson said that when we introduced our evidence, he counted the number of articles that we submitted, the number of Reader's Digest articles and the number of other articles -- newspaper articles. And I hadn't even done that because the number of them isn't the point.
The number -- You know, I didn't go out and figure out how many can I bring in, how many big boxes can I bring in. That wasn't the point.
They were brought in because they were discussed with Dr. Cummings, and the concept with Dr. Cummings. And they aren't meant to represent anything more or less than that.
And I asked Dr. Cummings, in the 1940s and 1950s, was there information about the health hazards of smoking?
Yes.
Was it in the popular press?
Yes.
Was it in Reader's Digest? Was it in Time? Was it in Newsweek? Was it on television? Was it on radio?
Yes. Yes. Yes.
And overwhelmingly through that period of time we found out that more and more information came out.
I asked Dr. Cummings about... I won't go into the specific articles, but it covered the epidemiology. It covered mouse skin painting. It covered all that sort of stuff.
And what was the result in the 1950s?
If we can see 97. This is where we were. In 1954 90 percent... 90 percent of the American population had heard about smoking causing lung cancer.
It's true it doesn't say whether they all believed it or not. And Dr. Cummings and I discussed that.
But the question of the health effects themselves, was that a secret in the 1950s? Hardly. None of that information was concealed. It was in the public domain. So that part of it clearly is not reasonable.
I want to talk about even, for example, the '64 report. I want to show you a brief clip that you saw before. Harry Reasoner in 1964, with the release of the Surgeon General's Report.
SPEAKER: This is a CBS news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's Committee.
MR. REASONER: Almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced they were attacked. But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's_
report by the Surgeon General's Committee.
This in summary is what the committee says: Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way.
Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important part of chronic bronchitis.
Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases.
Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not proven that smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters, the committee says, there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibilities that an effective filter might be developed.
In short, the committee says, if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early.
The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
The Surgeon General's Committee
presented its report at a news conference in Washington.
SPEAKER: Out of its long and exhaustive deliberations, the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the United States to warrant remedial action.
This overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease categories.
More specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and I quote, in view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate.
MR. REASONER: In this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good_
for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Good night.
(End clip.)
MR. BARINGER: Remember when you heard about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, it was one of the biggest stories of the year.
It was front page news all over the country.
It was on magazine covers. Television coverage. It was a major event.
And how did Dr. Cummings describe the effect that the '64 Surgeon General's Report had? Remember he said, it was historic. It really changed people's views about smoking and health and helped lead to changes in behavior and reductions in disease caused by tobacco.
That was the publicly available information about the health effects of smoking. That was the impact that it had.
And we also know that the '64 -- Keep in mind the '64 report concluded smoking causes lung cancer, caused chronic bronchitis, was associated with emphysema, and it was
habituating, meaning it was difficult to quit.
Four years later Daniel Horn, who was with the Smoking Clearinghouse for the federal government, played a statement that we talked about.
Can we see 135? I talked about this with Dr. Cummings. You could stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they didn't already know. Dr. Horn's point was by 1968 virtually everyone knew all about this.
Dr. Cummings told you that as a result 60 million people had quit. And we'll talk about that 60 million number. You may recall that exchange. And we'll talk about that in a few minutes.
But keep in mind that all of this information that was available in the public domain, in all of the sources that everyone was exposed to, wasn't the only source of information Mrs. Ward had.
She also -- Remember, she had family members talking to her about the risks,
encouraging her to quit. Her doctors were doing it. She was receiving it, even -- I even showed you the textbooks from 19 -- from the 1940s in Alabama that were mandatory in Alabama, that talked about nicotine being habit-forming and damaging to your lungs.
There was a tremendous amount of information available.
So it's not that the health effects per se were concealed. That's not what plaintiffs are really talking about, but it's part of the environment. And you have to understand what that environment was when you think about what they're talking about.
They said that Reynolds and the other companies knew that smoking caused lung cancer and didn't say so. And that's what they're really talking about.
They tried to make you -- make it seem like when they met at the Plaza Hotel in 1953 that the companies had already decided that smoking caused lung cancer and that the whole thing was a farce.
But I asked Dr. Burns about it. And I asked him about one of the documents that
was -- Do you have the background memo? Okay.
This is -- Remember Hill & Knowlton with the public relations firm that was hired at that time? And this was a secret document. This was Hill & Knowlton's private stuff. It wasn't meant for publication.
And it talked about what the industry -what they -- their discussions with the industry. And you saw some different parts of it from plaintiff.
But this one says, the industry is strongly convinced that there is no sound scientific basis for the charges that have been made.
So it's clearly -- And Dr. Burns admitted that he wasn't -- he had no evidence that the CEOs didn't believe this in 1953.
It wasn't a lie that that was what their honestly held belief was.
So what else did they try? Well, they tried Dr. Teague's memo in 1953. And Mr. Gustafson said something about, you know, here we go again, that I asked the question in cross-examination of whether that proved
that Reynolds believed it was proved that smoking caused lung cancer.
Well, that's interesting because I asked both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings whether this document establishes that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in 1953 believed that smoking caused lung cancer.
And both of them looked at you and said, no, that doesn't prove that. It says what it says.
The one piece that they read to you today said, well, the clinical data tends to confirm. And from that they say it was all a big lie, that the Frank Statement and everything else was a big lie because this proved that their scientists believed that it caused. And Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns said that proves no such thing.
Then they talked about a 1956 document from Dr. Rodgman. And I talked about this one with Mr. Cummings.
Do you have 141?
This was another one that supposedly showed that Reynolds scientists believed that smoking caused lung cancer. The current
controversy concerning the influence of cigarette smoking on the increasing incidence of cancer has not yet been settled.
Dr. Rodgman didn't write that it had been proven that smoking caused lung cancer.
Then they talked about the Tripp report, these British scientists that came over. And they said, well, we went out and talked to everybody, and so you have a secondhand report from British scientists that are interpreting what they heard from everyone that they talked to.
But there's a problem. The document itself isn't even consistent. This is what -- They showed you the part where it said everybody we talked to agreed if it's meant by... any part of the process.
The SAB of TIRC and the group we met at the National Cancer Institute Bethesda broadly take the view that causation is likely to be indirect. Several hypothetical means by which this could occur were proposed, but with no experimental evidence to support any of them.
Let me show you another piece. Others,
including the Saab of TIRC, and a group at the National Cancer Institute, do not accept that a case has yet been made that tobacco smoke is directly carcinogenic to the human lung.
They said that they have millions and millions of pages of industry documents. And out of those millions of pages that were never supposed to see the light of day, that no one was ever else to see, did they show you one that actually said what they say it does, that they believed that it caused cancer?
The Tripp report, the British guy, secondhand report, is the closest they came here. These documents were -- weren't supposed to get out. So where is it? It wasn't here.
Now, they talk about... They say, well, these denials, smokers were uniquely vulnerable, and they were looking for a reason to rationalize, and they were looking for a reason to deny that their health was in danger, and so they would latch on to these statements.
Well, the interesting thing was, I asked Dr. Burns about statements from non-industry sources. And let me just show. I'm not going to go through them all again. We went through them with Dr. Burns. And I read what they said about not being proven and all that.
And this is the list. And these are the people that were saying the same things that they accuse the industry of. And that is that it hadn't been proven that smoking caused lung cancer.
National Cancer Institute; Hueper National Cancer Institute; American Cancer Society; American Cancer Society; U.S.
Surgeon General; U.S. Surgeon General; chief of Cancer Control Program, U.S. Public Health Service; AMA; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; American College of Chest Physicians. All of these people were making the same statements in publicly available places: Newspapers, magazines, television.
So the question is: If Mrs. Ward doubted -- And there is no direct evidence of that whatsoever, none. They want you to
infer, they want you to guess, that maybe she doubted and maybe that had something to do with her smoking, but there's no direct evidence of it.
But then the question becomes: If she did doubt, was it because something that one of these people said? Or was it because something that Reynolds or a TI publication said?
That's their burden of proof. They have to tie it to what it was that she supposedly is relying on. It's not enough to say it's all out in the environment and that she was exposed to it.
Remember I talked about, like, advertising. Everybody's exposed to advertising, but at the worst point in history, 50 percent of people never started smoking. Advertising didn't do it to everybody.
Same thing with this issue. Yeah, it was part of the environment. Did it have an effect on her? And do you know which one had an effect? Both pieces were part of the environment.
Was it the non-industry scientist piece or was it the tobacco industry statement?
It's their burden of proof to show you which one it was.
And remember, we talked about... What else was -- Well, let's talk about the source credibility issue. We know something about how people reacted to various sources of information back then.
We have polls that say, which did you find reliable. This was in 1959. Who would you be most apt to believe if one of these organizations said there was no connection whatsoever between lung cancer and cigarette smoking?
American Cancer Society, A.M.A., Department of Health. Tobacco industry?
Only three percent would have looked to them for a reliable source of information saying not proven.
Next slide. 68. Now, this time it's which would you find the most reliable on information? AMA, ACS, medical schools, government agencies. Tobacco companies, five percent.
Roper, 1970. American Cancer Society,
62 percent, tobacco companies 3 percent.
1980 Roper survey. 68 percent, ACS. Tobacco companies, 3 percent. The Tobacco Institute, 5 percent.
The point being, if people were looking for information, where would they look for it? Which one would they find more reliable?
But let's talk about what else was happening in general during this period.
They talk about these tobacco industry statements being part of the wallpaper. What was happening to peoples' belief about smoking and health while these denials were going on?
Let's take a look. This is comparing smokers to all adults. They said there was a huge gap. This is a seven percent gap.
Can we go to the... Go ahead. Go to the next one.
In general, we'll look at polls in a minute. By 1965, 17 million Americans had already quit smoking. This is during the period of time when they're talking about the industry denying causation, the early part of
it.
By 1979 the campaign they talk about is continuing. Now we're up to 30 million had quit. And today we're up to nearly 60 million smokers have quit.
So all during this period, the amount of people that are smoking has gone up, up and up.
Do you have 151? Okay.
Do you have the belief polls?
All right. You saw them. I can -- I can summarize in general what -- And I showed them to you during the trial.
But the point was that over that period of time the percentage of people that believed that smoking did cause lung cancer went up repeatedly all through that period of time.
And remember I also showed you the ones that talked about that people believed that it would affect their health, not just someone else's. Those levels of belief went up all through that period of time as well.
This is -- Okay. Here we go. 1957 it was 50 percent. 1969 it was 71 percent.
1977, 81 percent. 1987, 87 percent.
And keep in mind this is going up steadily all during the period of time that they're talking about the industry denying that it had been proven that smoking causes cancer. All the way through that was the effect.
So ultimately what you have to decide is, why not Mrs. Ward? I mean, that's what was going on. They talk about the effect of the environment.
We know what the effect overall was in the environment. Belief and awareness constantly went up, and the number of smokers quitting constantly increased. I even showed you during the trial that the quit ratio specifically for women went up all through that period of time. Why not Mrs. Ward?
Mr. Ward during that era quit. Why didn't she? Was it because she doubted? Did she latch onto a statement? Well, if she did, where did it come from? That's their burden of proof. Every piece of that is their burden of proof.
Let me talk to you real quick about...
You heard about constituents as well. One of the Dr. Rodgman documents talked about identifying -- said that they had identified eight carcinogens, PAHs.
Remember that discussion about chemicals and the thing in the -- in the paint, in the mouse skin painting, the tar that caused it?
And there was an issue about whether or not Reynolds had made public the fact that they had identified those carcinogens.
Dr. Cummings actually said, to be fair, Reynolds did report all the constituents that had been identified to the Surgeon General.
But they were publicly available, too.
I mean, we -- Remember that the mouse skin painting experiments themselves got a lot of press.
And we also know that in 1959 -- I think it was just a week after the Dr. Rodgman document that they showed you -- we found out that Reader's Digest published a list of the same eight PAHs.
Number 89. The carcinogenic cancer-causing factor in cigarette smoke is much less a mystery than it was a few years
ago. Scientists are convinced that the primary carcinogens are higher polycyclic hydrocarbons formed by the combustion of tobacco at high temperature, about 880 degrees Centigrade in the cigarette ember. They have identified eight carcinogenic polycyclics in tobacco smoke and are on the trail of others.
It was no secret that tobacco tar contained carcinogens, and the number and names aren't the point. It's the fact that it contained them. That was the issue.
And Dr. Cummings agreed that Reynolds is responsible for identifying nearly half of the constituents. The seven or eight thousand that we've identified today,
Reynolds has identified almost half of them. Reynolds invented the technology on how to identify part of them.
Now, there was an issue about whether or not Reynolds was able to take them out. Remember there was a footnote in the one Rodgman document where it says, well, we're not going to be able to get to zero on PAHs.
And there was a big deal made out of it
that you promised in the Frank Statement or -- and elsewhere if you could identify what it was that was causing the problem, you'd take it out.
And I talked to them about that. I talked to both of them. And what did they say? Reynolds tried a lot of different ways. They tried to eliminate PAHs. They did experiments on eliminating phenols. They did experiments on eliminating ciliastats, all of these.
Now, they didn't ultimately get to zero on any of them, but they did the research.
And the Surgeon General was aware of the research. And the Surgeon General published information about what they were able to accomplish.
But Reynolds didn't just do that and say, oh, we aren't going to be able to get to zero. And remember what we talked about on zero? Is zero really -- That may be optimum.
But remember Dr. Cummings saying the poison is in the dose? And one of the problems is, you don't know how much or how little will have an effect?
And Dr. Wynder -- Remember that the article from Dr. Wynder that talked about a 40-percent reduction in tar levels would significantly reduce lung cancer risk?
So what did Reynolds do? Did it sit back and do nothing and say, ah, we made a promise. We're not going to do anything about it? No. They entered into all kinds of research on general reduction.
And remember I showed you the chart from the Surgeon General that talked about reconstituted tobacco. It talked about porous paper. It talked about a number of innovations, and it showed which ones reduced carcinogens or tar overall. And there were pluses all over that chart. And those were innovations that they tried.
And remember what the Surgeon General said. And it was 30 years later it said that the tumorigenicity, the ability to cause tumors, from the tar of cigarettes at that point, after all these innovations, was significantly less likely to cause tumors than the tar they were looking at back in the '50s when Wynder published his mouse skin
painting experiments.
So it was not as if nothing was ever done, and it was not as if there was ever an issue about the public not being aware that there were suspected carcinogens in cigarette smoke and in tar.
That was the whole point. That was one of the big reasons the public got concerned in the first place. And they made a lot of effort over the years to try and reduce those.
THE COURT: Mr. Baringer, would this be a convenient break point?
MR. BARINGER: That would be a great break point, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Let's take about ten minutes.
(Brief recess.)
(The following transpired in open court, jury not present:)
(Discussion held off the record.)
THE COURT: Call in the jurors if they're ready, please.
(The following transpired in open court, jury present:)
COURT SECURITY OFFICER: Your Honor, the jury's in the box.
THE COURT: All right. Thank you.
Please continue.
MR. BARINGER: Thank you, Your Honor.
This hopefully may well be the most welcome thing I have said all afternoon. I'm just about done.
I want to conclude the discussion of this concealment idea with one thought for you to keep in mind. The overall concept is, either by creating doubt because of the not-proven statements or creating doubt by fillers, that it enabled Mrs. Ward to continue smoking, and in the absence of that she would have quit. That's the basic theory.
There are two examples I want you to think of, actually three, that I think belie that theory. One is, in 1993, when she saw Dr. May, she was diagnosed as having COPD caused by her smoking.
If there was any doubt about the link, if there was any doubt that smoking the filters she was smoking were going to protect
her, they were dispelled right then, if they even existed.
And if plaintiff's theory of the case is true, what should have happened in 1993 is, she should have quit smoking then. If it was the information, if it was the doubt, if it was the filter, it should have gone away at that point because there was no other -there was no way to latch on at that point.
But she didn't quit.
1996 she was diagnosed with severe COPD. Much worse. Linked again to her smoking. If there had been any doubt lingering, if there had been any belief left about filters, if it was all a rationalization, surely it would have been gone then. She didn't quit.
2000. Was it because she discovered new information? Was it because she found out something about filters? What was it? No.
It was for the first time in her life she, according to Mr. Ward, had a purpose. That's what led her to quit smoking.
So let's talk about her responsibility.
There is only one person that had the ability to have Mrs. Ward quit smoking before she
did, only one. Mrs. Ward.
And Dr. Burns tells you she bears responsibility for that. Surgeon General of the United States said smokers bear a responsibility for that. Everyone agrees that she bears a responsibility for that because she had a meaningful choice because smoking -- addiction to smoking does not mean you cannot quit. She had the ability. She was no less addicted in 2000 than she was before.
It is the ultimate test of plaintiff's theory of what Reynolds did wrong and what difference it would have made and -- would have made, and it didn't.
Let's talk about damages very briefly. Compensatory damages. Mr. Gustafson correctly pointed out that sympathy cannot drive your decision on what makes Mr. Ward whole.
There is no way to make Mr. Ward whole in a real sense. Nothing will bring back his wife. Nothing will replace that. And we can't, in a courtroom or anywhere else, do that.
So we do our best approximation. And what you're asked to do, if you get that far, to determine that he's entitled to compensatory damages, you're supposed to think about what will make him whole.
How do you do that? How in a society do you place value on that? Well, one of the ways we do it is, you know, we think about, well, we buy life insurance to provide for our family members. That's one way of trying to approximate it. It doesn't replace the person you lose.
And people have, you know, $250,000, $500,000. Maybe some people have a million dollars in life insurance. Very few have $5 million that they suggest is reasonable.
And the other thing you need to consider is who the defendant is doesn't determine how much it takes to make Mr. Ward whole. It doesn't matter whether he lost his wife in a car accident case or in this case. The loss to him is the same regardless of why.
If this was an average person sitting at the table in a car accident, would you consider awarding $5 million? No.
It can't be tied to Reynolds. It can't be tied to what they spend on anything. The calculation is, what would make Mr. Ward whole.
I want to talk to you about punitive damages. You heard a very impassioned -- Mr. Gustafson is passionate and articulate and eloquent about why Reynolds should be punished.
But I want you to think about it in the context of everything you heard about the conduct over this period of time.
He tells you, filtration, the whole thing was outrageous, but omits the part about the role of the public health community in recommending it, and conducting and publishing the studies that led to the recommendations to the public all that time.
He never mentioned their role.
He talked about nicotine, and he talked about the idea of whether or not it should even be in a product.
He ignored the role of the public health community recommending research on finding out how low can you go, how can we make it
satisfying, how can we make the tar and nicotine ratio different so we can deliver more nicotine, keep him satisfied, but deliver less tar because it would improve the risks for the smoker.
What you need to do, if you get to this point, is think about the overall context of what the evidence was about everything that happened.
This isn't a stack of documents that was written 60 years ago, and you go through and you read them and see if any of them make you mad. That's not justice. That's not what this is about.
Think about what their expert said on the stand, and ultimately think about what effect have they really proven that it had on Mrs. Ward's behavior, because they have to prove that before you even think about the rest.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have talked about choice an awful lot. But the simple fact of the matter is, all along the way choices were made. Mrs. Ward had the ability to make the choice to quit in time that she
would not have developed COPD and she would not have died.
I'm asking you to enter judgment in favor of R.J. Reynolds. Thank you all very much.
THE COURT: Mr. Feiwus.
MR. FEIWUS: Your Honor. May it please the Court, good afternoon.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to start at the same place where I think I am ultimately going to finish, and that is with a thank you.
It has not gone without notice by anyone in this courtroom, the plaintiff's lawyers or the defense that all of you have paid careful attention to all of the testimony and evidence in the past two-and-a-half weeks.
That is no small task.
There's been a lot of evidence, a lot of testimony, and a significant amount of information to digest. And I know I speak for everyone here when I say how much we appreciate the time, commitment and attention that all of you have committed to this case. Without committed jurors like yourselves, our
civil justice system could not work. So again, I thank you for your jury service.
Now, before I get started in earnest, I want to briefly summarize for you what I think the key points are in the case, at least with respect to my client, Liggett.
And some of these are the very same points that I identified in my opening statement at the beginning of the case.
First and foremost, this case at its heart, is about Mrs. Ward's decision, her choice, her choice to start smoking cigarettes and to keep smoking cigarettes throughout her life, despite widespread information concerning the health risks of smoking, and despite numerous warnings she received all throughout her life.
The plaintiff is attempting to sidestep Mrs. Ward's personal responsibility regarding her smoking decisions by reference to her purported addiction.
The evidence in this case shows -- And I will discuss this in some detail -- Mrs. Ward was never addicted to Liggett brand cigarettes.
She chose to start smoking in the 1950s, in the face of widespread information that was publicly available regarding the health risks of cigarette smoking at that time.



MR. FEIWUS: May it please the Court, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence in this case shows, and I'm going to discuss in some detail, Mrs. Ward was never addicted to Liggett brand cigarettes.
She chose to start smoking in the 1950s, in the face of widespread information regarding the health risks of cigarette smoking available at that time.
And rather than attempting to quit in the face of that health risk information, she gradually increased her cigarette smoking because she enjoyed it and because it was the thing to do in the 1950s and early 1960s.
Second point. There is no evidence that Mrs. Ward ever smoked a Liggett brand as her primary or regular brand for any material period of time.
The evidence showed that over her 45-year smoking history, she smoked more than
20 different brands of cigarettes that we know of. Liggett brands were never her primary brands.
Instead, the evidence shows her use of Chesterfield and L & M was in the early years of her smoking, the late 1950s, early 1960s. And we will discuss that point at some length as well.
Point three, nothing that Liggett ever did or said had any impact or made any difference on Mrs. Ward's smoking decisions.
There's no evidence that any Liggett advertising or Liggett advertising campaigns or any Liggett statements or annual reports or anything from Liggett at all had anything to do with her smoking choices.
Fourth, Liggett has always acted as a responsible tobacco company. This is true back in the 1950s and '60s when there was emerging evidence regarding health risks of cigarette smoking, and it was true in the 1990s, when Liggett was the first tobacco company to add voluntary warnings on its cigarettes that smoking is addictive, and it is true today. And we will talk about that
at some length as well later in my presentation.
Lastly, I will try and walk briefly through the verdict form and will indicate to you what I think is a proper verdict with respect to Liggett.
The short answer is that you should find no liability with respect to Liggett.
Nothing Liggett ever said or did harmed Mrs. Ward, and there's no evidence that she used Liggett brands to any material extent such that they caused her any material harm.
We heard about this during Mr.
Baringer's presentation, and I want to address it briefly. The Court will instruct you about the Engle findings. There will be an issue for you to decide as to whether the Engle findings even applied to the facts of the case, based on the instructions the Court will give to you.
The Engle findings -- and this is very important -- are not just specific to Reynolds and Liggett alone. To the extent they apply in this case, they apply to Philip Morris, and Lorillard, and the other tobacco
company entities referenced in the instructions.
And here is the most important point. Whether the Engle findings apply or not, it will still be left to you as jurors to decide whether Liggett, Reynolds, Philip Morris, or Lorillard has any liability to the plaintiff in this case, based on the instructions the Court will give to you.
This is instruction number seven that the Court will read to you. Mr. Baringer showed it to you during his presentation.
I'll read it to you again.
The findings I have described to you do not establish that Reynolds or Liggett or Philip Morris or Lorillard are liable to Mr. Ward.
Nor do they establish whether Mattie Ward was injured by the conduct of either, or the degree, if any, to which their conduct was the sole or contributing cause of Mattie Ward's death.
The findings establish only what they expressly state, and you must not speculate or guess as to the basis for the findings.
The Engle findings, simply put, are not the end of the inquiry here. They do not conclude liability against Liggett or anyone else. Whether Liggett or any other company is liable in this case is an issue for you to decide, based on the instructions you receive and based on the evidence and testimony that you heard during the course of this trial.
Put up B. I'd like to revisit with you briefly what we know about Mrs. Ward's brand usage. As a starting point, unfortunately, we know very little.
The only testimony regarding Mrs.
Brand's usage [sic] came from Mr. Ward's and Mrs. Ward's daughter Annette.
Neither of them knew anything about Mrs. Ward's brand usage prior to December 1957. Both of them confirmed that she smoked over 20 brands of cigarettes over her 40-plus years of cigarette smoking, but they could not identify when she started or stopped smoking any particular brand.
They could not identify how much of any particular brand she smoked. At best, we're left with a vague history of her smoking
20-plus cigarette brands made by every major tobacco company over the past 60 years.
We know that Mrs. Ward started smoking sometime before 1957, but we don't know exactly when. We know that nearly everybody in her family smoked, and she started smoking by taking cigarettes from her brothers and because it was the thing to do.
No one testified about what brands she smoked prior to '57 or early 1958. Mr. Ward told us that when they got married in December 1957 she was smoking four to five cigarettes a day and was rotating between four different brands: Chesterfield, Camel, Lucky Strikes, and Pall Mall.
We do know, however, that the Chesterfield usage was short-lived. It had to have ended by the early 1960s at the latest. Why? Because Annette testified that she never saw her mother smoke Chesterfield.
Annette was seven years old in 1960 and ten years old in 1963. And Annette confirmed that by 1965 her mother was smoking Viceroys and other brands identified by Annette and Mr. Ward were filler brands that she smoked,
a random pack here, a random pack there, often smoked based on price discounts or coupons.
Mr. Baringer mentioned this point, and I'll mention it again. Remember Mr. Ward's testimony about Philip Morris's Marlboro brand.
Mr. Ward said that his wife smoked Marlboro for a significant period of time.
And for Mr. Ward, a significant period of time was two to three months.
What does that say about his recollection of all of these other brands?
What does that say about his recollection of a significant brand usage?
Do we really believe that Mrs. Ward made any regular use of the dozen or so that are identified in the middle period of this chart?
Nobody was able to come into this courtroom and testify how much Chesterfield or how much L & M Mrs. Ward smoked. There was virtually no testimony whatsoever about Liggett's third brand, Lark.
The bottom line is, only three Liggett
brands are implicated in this case: Chesterfield, L & M and Lark. And that is out of more than 20 brands over a 40-year -40 or 45 year time frame.
None of these Liggett brands were ever a primary or regular brand for Mrs. Ward. At best, she smoked Chesterfield and L & M in the late 1950s, early 1960s, and they were mixed in with a dozen other brands that she smoked at that time.
Let's talk briefly about addiction.
There's been a lot of evidence and testimony in this case about whether Mrs. Ward was addicted to cigarettes; and if so, whether that addiction could preclude her decision to quit smoking.
You've heard a lot of testimony about that. Heard a lot of argument about that. I am not going to retread over that subject at length again.
Instead, I want to focus you on one simple, uncontroverted fact. There's no evidence that Mrs. Ward was ever addicted to any of the Liggett brand cigarettes that she purportedly used in the late 1950s, early
1960s.
All of the evidence from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns about Mrs. Ward's addiction comes from much later in her life and is retrospective in nature.
Put up C.
This is the chart that was used with Dr. Cummings' testimony concerning Mrs. Ward's addiction. And you remember Dr. Cummings' testimony about Mattie Ward's addiction.
He based his opinion that Mrs. Ward was addicted based on three primary features: Persistent daily use for 45 years, the fact that she smoked first thing in the morning, the fact that she smoked 10 to 30 cigarettes a day.
It will be for the jury to decide whether there is sufficient evidence of addiction with respect to Mattie Ward at any time in her life.
One thing, however, is undisputed. And this is something that I asked Dr. Cummings during his examination when he was in this courtroom. There is no record evidence of addiction in the early 1950s and '60s, when
she purportedly smoked Liggett brand cigarettes.
Take that down.
Mrs. Ward married Mr. Ward in late 1957. She was only smoking four to five cigarettes a day. She had not yet accumulated the years of smoking under her belt that were so important for Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns's testimony.
There's no evidence she had any difficulty refraining from smoking at that time. There's no evidence that she had to smoke first thing in the morning at that time. These were the key pieces of Dr. Cummings' testimony regarding addiction.
The bottom line is, there is no evidence that Mrs. Ward was addicted to cigarettes in the '50s and '60s. And therefore, there is no evidence she was ever addicted to Liggett cigarettes or any other cigarettes in those early years of her smoking.
With all the information coming out in the 1950s and '60s about the health hazards of cigarette smoking, the cancer scare in the early 1950s, the widespread publication of
the Wynder-Graham mouse skin painting studies in 1953 and 1954, the front-page newspaper and magazine articles about the dangers of smoking, all of it culminating from the widespread publication of the Surgeon General's findings in the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, one of the biggest news stories of the 20th Century, in the face of all of that publicly available information about the health hazards of smoking, there is no evidence that Mrs. Ward was addicted at that time, and there's no evidence that she had an addiction that would have prevented her from making the decision to quit.
At that time Mrs. Ward voluntarily chose to continue to smoke and to increase her smoking in 1958 and 1959 from four to five cigarettes a day to ultimately what was later a pack to a pack and a half a day.
She was not addicted at that time, but she chose to increase her smoking in the face of all of the information that was available to her that it was dangerous and hazardous to her health.
The bottom line is, Mrs. Ward did make a
choice. She made a choice to smoke in the late 1950s and '60s, and there's no evidence she was addicted at that time and no evidence that she tried to quit at that time. Bottom line: Mrs. Ward was not addicted to Liggett brand cigarettes.
If Mrs. Ward quit cigarettes in the 1960s after she -- and Incidentally, that would have been after she stopped using Liggett brand, she would never have contracted COPD and she would never have gotten sick.
This fact is undisputed. It comes from Dr. Burns himself. It was in his testimony.
If Mrs. Ward would have heeded the warnings early on and quit, she would never have gotten sick.
I'd like to talk briefly about cigarette advertising. As a preliminary matter, there's no evidence that Mattie Ward ever saw or was influenced by any specific cigarette advertising at all.
Indeed, the evidence shows that nearly everyone in Mattie's immediate family was a smoker, and that she started smoking by
taking cigarettes from her brothers because it was the thing to do, not that she was influenced by any specific company advertising campaign.
With respect to Liggett ads, the evidence in this case demonstrates without question that Liggett ads could have no effect on Mattie Ward.
Although the plaintiff showed you half a dozen Chesterfield ads, most of them ran in the 1930s, 1940s, early 1950s, before Mattie Ward started smoking.
And what little testimony there is about Mattie's use of Chesterfield, we know that Chesterfield was never a primary brand, that she was not a long-time Chesterfield user.
Mattie rotated Chesterfield with three other brands in the late 1950s, Pall Mall,
Lucky Strike, and Camel. And in the 1960s she had moved on to other brands. There can be no question that the Chesterfield advertisements had nothing to do with her decision to smoke Chesterfield or anything else.
What about the L & M campaign?
D.
We saw this L & M ad many times in this case. It's the ad, the "just what the doctor ordered" ad.
We learned during Dr. Burns' testimony this ad campaign ran for a limited period of time, 1953 to 1955. We know the ad campaign terminated in 1955 because the Federal Trade Commission put an end to all such ads, whether they were from Liggett or anyone else in the industry.
But there is no evidence that Mattie Ward ever smoked L & Ms in the 1950s. The earliest we know Mattie ever smoked L & Ms is from Annette, who was ten years old in 1963.
We also know that L & M was never a primary brand of Mattie Ward. We know that she rotated L & M at best with a dozen other brands at the same time. And purportedly during that middle period it was Viceroy that was a primary brand of hers, not L & M.
So what effect did this ad, which ended in 1955, have on Mrs. Ward? There's no evidence it could have had any effect on Mrs. Ward, and there's no evidence that she ever
saw it or it had any influence on her smoking decisions whatsoever.
Instead, Mr. Ward and Mattie's daughter testified that she was influenced by price and coupons when switching to different brands, not company ads, not marketing campaigns.
And with respect to Lark, we didn't see any Lark ads whatsoever. The bottom line is, there were no ads marketing or statements by any tobacco companies that had any influence over Mrs. Ward's smoking decisions whatsoever. Nothing Liggett ever did or said made any difference to Mrs. Ward's smoking decisions.
Like to talk briefly now about the scientific evidence that you saw over the course of this case.
As I told you in the opening statement, much of the plaintiff's case is going to be about lung cancer and lung cancer causation.
This case, however, has virtually nothing to do with lung cancer. Mrs. Ward never contracted lung cancer. She never contracted any form of cancer.
Mrs. Ward suffered from COPD, essentially a form of emphysema.
The Surgeon General's conclusion in 1964 was that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer in men. This scientific conclusion has no real significance to the facts of this case. It is a red herring.
Remember, the Surgeon General did not find causation at that time between lung cancer in women in 1964 and did not find causation between emphysema and smoking in 1964.
Remember, Dr. Burns and I went around and around on this a little bit. I had a hard time getting a straight answer out of Dr. Burns.
But this is the 1964 report, and this is from the summary section on respiratory diseases. First paragraph: Cigarette smoking is the most important of the causes of chronic bronchitis in the United States and increases the risk of dying from chronic bronchitis.
A relationship exists between pulmonary emphysema and cigarette smoking, but it has
not been established that the relationship is causal. The smoking of cigarettes is associated with an increased risk of dying from pulmonary emphysema.
We went over this with Dr. Burns.
Clearly, there was an association at that time between cigarette smoking and emphysema, but the evidence did not rise to the level of scientific causation, and the Surgeon General did not conclude that there was scientific causation shown for emphysema until 1984.
If the measure of scientific responsibility is set by whether or not scientific causation was proven or admitted between cigarette smoking and emphysema, the Surgeon General would have failed that test in 1964.
That is because the Surgeon General did not conclude there was sufficient evidence to prove the causation between cigarettes and emphysema and COPD until 20 years later. We should not hold that standard to Liggett or any other tobacco company either.
So what is really going on? Why all this talk of lung cancer, when Mrs. Ward
never suffered from lung cancer?
By pointing to lung cancer, the plaintiff is trying to suggest that Liggett and the other tobacco companies concealed information generally about the health risks of cigarette smoking.
Given all of the evidence that you saw in this case, ask yourself: Does the evidence support that conclusion as to Liggett? Did Liggett conceal information regarding what it knew about the health risks of cigarettes in the 1950s and 1960s?
We saw overwhelming evidence on that issue. The answer to that is emphatically no. Liggett did comprehensive research on the health risks of cigarette smoking, on lung cancer, on bronchitis, on emphysema, on nicotine, on filtration; published that information in reputable scientific journals, and cooperated and turned all of that information that it had over to the United States Surgeon General in 1963.
Now, I told you in my opening Liggett today is a different company than it was 50 years ago. And no one who worked at Liggett
in the 1940s, '50s or '60s -MR. GUSTAFSON: Objection, Your Honor. THE COURT: Jury will step out a moment, please.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
COURT SECURITY OFFICER: Your Honor, the jury's in the box.
THE COURT: Please continue.
MR. FEIWUS: Thank you, Your Honor.
No one who worked at Liggett in the '40s, '50s or '60s is around today who can speak to many of the issues that came up during this trial, and no one from Liggett had come to this Court and testified about the things that happened 60 years ago.
Instead, we are left with the historical documents themselves to recreate the history.
So what does the evidence show about what Liggett did, and what does the evidence show about what other major tobacco companies did?
The evidence shows that Liggett was and is a responsible tobacco company. It took a path independent from the rest of the industry during critical parts of the tobacco and health story.
We saw evidence in the early 1950s that was emerging scientific evidence concerning cancer and cigarette smoking. There were early epidemiological studies in the 1950s,
famous Wynder and Graham mouse skin painting studies in 1953.
There's no question that these early scientific studies were very important. And by today's standards, we know they were largely correct.
Today in 2012, looking back more than 60 years, no one disputes that cigarettes are an important cause of lung cancer, COPD, and other diseases; but in the '50s and '60s, those issues were not yet resolved.
There was a legitimate scientific debate about the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, and cigarette smoking and emphysema, and a host of other diseases.
What did Liggett do in the face of this emerging evidence? It retained one of the most prominent biological testing firms of its day, the Arthur D. Little Consulting Company. And it started a large-scale biological and chemical testing program that was larger than the rest of the industry combined.
Like many other prominent independent
scientists of the day, Liggett set out in 1954 to replicate the famous Wynder and Graham experiments. It coordinated directly with Dr. Wynder and other members of the public health community.
It published much of its research throughout the '50s and '60s in prominent journals. Although it spent much of its resources on the issue of lung cancer, it did not limit its research to lung cancer alone.
Liggett investigated all aspects of its cigarette products. It studied the composition of its cigarette smoke, the effect of filtration. It conducted inhalation studies on rabbits and mice. It conducted its own epidemiological and statistical research, and it published on many of these subjects.
Most significantly, Liggett volunteered all of its research and knowhow to assist the public health authority and the Surgeon General with its landmark '64 report.
Liggett provided nine thick volumes of material, which you've seen a number of times in this courtroom, containing countless data,
findings and conclusions about the health risks of smoking. Provided that to the Surgeon General.
Liggett also made its own research scientists available to make presentations, to answer questions about any of its research or information about its cigarettes. It also made all of the resources of A.D. Little available to the Surgeon General.
We saw letters that the Surgeon General was eager to accept Liggett's cooperation and assistance and valued the research that Liggett turned over to them.
After the '64 report came out, Liggett continued to offer its cooperation and assistance to the Surgeon General. We saw that in the telegram from Liggett's president, Zack Toms three days after the '64 report came out.
We even saw a letter from the U.S. Department of Agriculture two years after the '64 report came out. Still impressed by the breadth of research that Liggett turned over to the Surgeon General, and the countless findings and conclusions that were included
in that research.
Now, plaintiff -- Do you have F, please?
This is L & M, a perspective review.
This is a document we've seen a number of times during this trial.
Plaintiff has repeatedly pointed to this document again and again to suggest that Liggett had information that it hid from the public, dated March 15, 1961.
There are biologically actively materials present in cigarette tobacco.
These are cancer-causing, cancer-promoting, poisons, stimulating, pleasurable and favorable [sic].
There is nothing in this document that Liggett did not publish in journals or provide to the U.S. Surgeon General in its nine-volume submission.
Among the critical findings of Liggett's submission to the Surgeon General include Liggett cigarettes contain many cancer-causing substances, including polycyclic aeromatic hydrocarbons, benzo(a)pyrene, ammonia, formaldehyde, and a host of other chemicals.
The report reveals that nicotine is one of the active agents in cigarette smoke that contributes to both pleasure and dependence.
Liggett's admission identifies that there is a statistical association between cigarette smoking and death rates.
Can I have G, please?
From the introduction of Liggett's submission to the Surgeon General, 1963. Page three. Nevertheless, we find enough of the results relating cigarette smoking to death rates to have been obtained in studies adequately meeting our standards for sound inquiry and analysis to satisfy us with respect to the overall conclusion that a gross statistical association exists between cigarette smoking and overall death rates.
Moreover and probably even most significant in the context of this case,
Liggett's submission to the Surgeon General is not limited to questions of cancer alone, but it addresses many other diseases associated with cigarette smoking, including bronchitis and emphysema.
Liggett did what any responsible company
would do. It thoroughly researched the issue. It cooperated with the public health authorities. It turned all of its information over to the Surgeon General.
Following the 1964 report, Congress and the Federal Trade Commission took action. They put Congressionally mandated warning labels on cigarette packages beginning in 1966, and they heavily regulated cigarette advertising and marketing going forward.
Liggett complied with all appropriate laws and regulations, put warning labels on its cigarettes, put warning labels on its advertisements, and abided by all restrictions. There is no evidence to the contrary.
So let's contrast Liggett's conduct with that of its competitors. We heard that the other major tobacco companies got together at the Plaza Hotel in 1953. They issued the Frank Statement to smokers.
They hired the PR firm Hill & Knowlton, and they created the Tobacco Research Committee, TIRC. And it's for you to decide ultimately what is the impact or import of
any of those actions.
But one thing is clear. Liggett did not participate in any of these activities.
Everyone who came into this courtroom testified to that.
Liggett did not attend the Plaza Hotel planning meetings. Liggett did not sign the Frank Statement. Liggett did not hire Hill & Knowlton. Liggett never joined the TIRC.
In 1964, following the Surgeon General Report, Liggett became a member of the Council for Tobacco Research, which was the successor to the TIRC, but only belonged to that organization from March of 1964 to January of 1968, less than a four-year period.
The only evidence -- The only evidence that we have as to why Liggett did what it did comes from a 1958 document written by British tobacco company scientists.
And they wrote: Liggett & Myers stayed out of the TIRC because they doubted the sincerity of the TIRC motives. They believed the organization was too unwieldly to work
Liggett thought the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large-scale research by the company directly in experimental research on cigarette smoking.
Unlike the other companies who were involved in the TIRC, Liggett engaged in serious science and did not speak on the issues until it had solid, concrete science to offer.
When it had scientific offer -- When it had scientific results, it did share them with the Surgeon General's Committee, published them in journals.
What would the plaintiff in this case have you believe? The plaintiff would have you believe that all of these companies are the same.
The plaintiff wants you to buy into the concept of guilt by association. Just because Liggett was a tobacco company, plaintiff wants you to lump Liggett in with all other tobacco companies in the industry, ignoring that Liggett's conduct was separate and distinguishable from these other companies. You should not accept that. You
should not accept guilt by association.
You have heard Dr. Cummings testify.
Each company was responsible for its own marketing campaigns. Each company was responsible for the construction of its own cigarettes and cigarette brands.
And these companies were stark competitors with one another. Each company had its own internal research. There's no evidence that the research memos from Reynolds, American, Brown and Williamson, Philip Morris, Lorillard, or any other company were ever shared with Liggett.
Plaintiff showed you company documents and company statements regarding efforts by other tobacco companies to market its product to youth. Again, it is for you to -- It's for you, the jury, to make your determination about what this evidence means.
But what is clear is, none of these statements or documents came from Liggett or Liggett personnel. Reynolds, Philip Morris, Lorillard, American Tobacco, Brown and Williamson. It's just one slide of many.
If you look through the evidence in this
case, you will not see evidence that Liggett targeted teenagers or young people with its advertising or its cigarettes.
Same is true with respect to internal company memos from Reynolds, Brown -- Brown and Williamson, American, or any other company.
Plaintiff suggests that these internal documents prove wrongdoing. That is ultimately something for you to decide.
There is no evidence, however, that Liggett knew or did any of the kind of research regarding its products that are shown in these documents.
No evidence that Liggett did anything with respect to nicotine yield in its products or adding ammonia in its products. There is no evidence that Liggett engaged in any of this conduct.
Whatever conclusion you may draw about statements made by Claude Teague or other researchers at other tobacco companies has nothing to do with Liggett's research program and nothing to do with Liggett.
Essentially, the plaintiff's entire case
against Liggett falls on one fact, that Liggett joined the primary trade association for the tobacco industry, the Tobacco Institute. Liggett did this with every other major member of the tobacco industry at the time: Manufacturers, distributors and growers.
You heard what Dr. Cummings said about the Tobacco Institute. Served multiple functions, including lobbying on behalf of the tobacco industry and representing the industry in Washington before regulatory agencies, state governments, and engaging in other activities that are protected by our Constitution.
The evidence shows that Liggett was a minor player at best, in terms of its financial contributions to the Tobacco Institute and in terms of its governance and control.
The evidence in this case that Liggett's contribution to the Tobacco Institute was substantially less than the contributions made by Philip Morris, Lorillard and
One of the documents in evidence is Tobacco Institute's budget for 1989 and 1990. This is the 1989 budget -- projected budget for the Tobacco Institute. You'll see Philip Morris, 46.1 percent of the budget, $17.8 million. Lorillard, 9.7 percent of the budget, $3.7 million. Liggett & Myers, $100,000, .3 percent of the total budget.
You see similar numbers, 1990. Philip Morris, 46.1 percent of the budget, $17.7 million. Lorillard, $3.7 million, 9.7 percent of the budget. Liggett & Myers, $100,000, .3 percent of the budget.
You remember -- Pie chart. You may remember that I tried to ask Dr. Cummings about this during his examination, but he conveniently did not know the information concerning Liggett's particular contributions, financial contributions to the Tobacco Institute and the CTR. The only number he could offer you was hundreds of millions of dollars.
MR. SCHULTZ: Judge, I'm sorry to keep interrupting. This was excluded from evidence --
THE COURT: Excuse me.
MR. SCHULTZ: -- during the trial.
THE COURT: Counsel, you make an objection.
Jury will step out a moment.
(The following transpired in open court, jury not present:)
THE COURT: Jury is out.
MR. SCHULTZ: Your Honor, it was tried to put this evidence in on cross-examination of Dr. Cummings. It was disallowed because there is no evidentiary basis whatsoever for it.
He tried again, even after you ruled the first one out, and that was also ruled out.
And now he's put in front of the jury on closing arguments something you didn't allow into evidence.
MR. FEIWUS: I just laid a foundation, based on the evidence that they put in the case, that in 1989 and 1990 Liggett's contribution to the TI was .3 percent, which is far less than their market share. That is exactly the line of questioning I tried to establish from Dr. Cummings. That is what
this pie chart shows, .3 percent.
THE COURT: You can argue it. You've got it in front of the jury. I didn't let you use the pie chart.
MR. SCHULTZ: Is the pie chart based on the document you just used?
MR. FEIWUS: Well, the pie chart has a source on it, which I can block.
MR. SCHULTZ: DOJ.
MR. FEIWUS: Which I can take off. But this is .3 percent, and it talks about its contribution. So it's a demonstrative of the evidence I have just elicited.
MR. SCHULTZ: 1958 to 1999 -MR. FEIWUS: I can block that off, if you want. I will block the years and will block the source.
MR. SCHULTZ: Not only does that not have an evidentiary basis, Judge; it is factually incorrect and misleading to say that's what they contributed to the TI for 40 years. That is not true.
MR. FEIWUS: It absolutely is true.
THE COURT: Counsel -MR. FEIWUS: The numbers --
THE COURT: You've got -- Mr. Feiwus, you have the evidence that is in the record.
You can argue the evidence.
MR. FEIWUS: I will.
THE COURT: This was not shown to the jury. And you've got two years that I recall the testimony addressing, and so I think this is misleading. Do not use it.
MR. FEIWUS: Well, Your Honor, what I will do is, I will cover up from 1958 to 1999.
THE COURT: No, sir.
MR. FEIWUS: What?
THE COURT: No, sir.
MR. FEIWUS: No?
THE COURT: You can argue the other evidence, and I think that's sufficient.
MR. SCHULTZ: It has been argued.
THE COURT: Call in the jury if they're ready, please.
(The following transpired in open court, jury present:)
COURT SECURITY OFFICER: Your Honor, the Jury's in the box.
THE COURT: All right.
Counsel, please continue.
MR. FEIWUS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Liggett's budget was a fraction of the contributions made by the rest of the industry, .3 percent, $100,000 out of a total budget of $38.7 million in 1989. The same was true in 1990.
What the plaintiff wants you to believe is that every letter, every comment, every statement by the Tobacco Institute or by Philip Morris, Lorillard or Reynolds is somehow attributable to Liggett and is somehow evidence of their role in a conspiracy.
Ask yourself: What documents have you seen by any Liggett personnel authorizing or directing Tobacco Institute conduct or statements, given Liggett's financial role and the other conduct that you know of? Does that inference make any sense whatsoever?
The same is true with respect to CTR. There's no evidence Liggett meaningfully directed the activities of the CTR. Formally resigned after four short years, January 1968.
While Liggett continued to participate in special projects, it did so on a case-by-case basis, funding only activities that it thought were useful or important.
Like the Tobacco Institute, we know that Liggett's contribution to the CTR and to special projects were significantly less than that of the other tobacco companies.
M, please.
This is another one of plaintiff's documents in evidence, LP-5252, August 19 -letter from Shook, Hardy & Bacon regarding the Feinstein research proposal.
Has a breakdown. Has a breakdown of the financial contribution of the various companies for this particular project.
Says, we also propose that the research be funded directly by the companies on a market-share basis, using the most recent Maxwell figures.
Philip Morris, 43 percent, $118,000. Lorillard, 7.5 percent, $20,000. Liggett,
3.1 percent, $8500. $8500 out of $276,000 spent by the rest of the industry. That was Liggett's contribution to the special
project.
You saw other evidence that Liggett's contributions were in many instances much less than its market share, less than even half a percent, substantially less than that spent by Philip Morris, Lorillard, and other tobacco companies.
I'd like to talk to you briefly about the verdict form. The evidence in this case proves that Mattie Ward was not addicted by Liggett brand cigarettes.
Liggett brands were not her primary or regular brands. To the extent that Mrs. Ward used Liggett brands, she used them early in her smoking history, she used them in rotation with at least a dozen and a half other brands of cigarettes made by other companies. Nothing Liggett did or said had anything to do with Mrs. Ward's smoking decisions.
N, please.
The verdict form that the Judge will give you once I am finished, we believe that there's no evidence here smoking Liggett brands -- that smoking Liggett brand
cigarettes was the legal cause of Mrs. Ward's COPD or her death.
Therefore, if you get to this question, Question 6: Was smoking Liggett brand cigarettes a legal cause of the death of Mattie Ward, we believe that based on the evidence, based on the instructions that you're going to be given, the jury's answer to those questions should be no.
Turning to Question Number 9, again, if you get to this question: Was the agreement between Reynolds, Liggett, Philip Morris, Lorillard, CTR, TI and others to conceal information regarding the addictiveness or the health effects of cigarettes or both, or the actual concealment of such information a legal cause of the death of Mattie Ward?
Is there any evidence of an agreement between Liggett and the other companies to conceal information? Did Liggett ever make any such agreement? The answer to that is no.
Was there any purported concealment by Liggett that was the cause of harm to Mrs. Ward? The answer to that is no.
We believe, based on the evidence in the case and the instructions that you will get, your answer to Question Number 9 should be no.
I want to talk briefly about Question 10. If you get to Number 10, it will be for you to decide what percentage of fault to assign to Reynolds, to Liggett, to Philip Morris, and to Lorillard, and how much to allocate to Mrs. Ward.
The plaintiff wants you to assign or at least suggested that you assign 30 percent allocation to Liggett, and a 30 percent allocation to Reynolds, and a 5 percent allocation to PM, and a 5 percent allocation to Lorillard.
Given the evidence that you've seen in this case, does that allocation make any sense whatsoever? We do not believe that you need to find liability with respect to any of the companies in this case, given the evidence that is before you.
However, to the extent that you come to this question and you are in your deliberation, I ask you to consider: Does
Liggett deserve the lion's share of the fault in this case?
Can I have O, please.
Remember the brand chart that I showed you at the beginning of my presentation, the brand chart that was created by the plaintiffs in this case.
And this is a breakdown, based on the stipulations between the parties, of which companies are responsible for which of the brands that are on the brand chart, for the brands that Mrs. Ward purportedly used.
Liggett is responsible for Chesterfield,
L & M and Lark.
Reynolds, Philip Morris and Lorillard are responsible for all the rest.
Philip Morris, for Marlboro, Virginia Slims and Basic. Lorillard for Kent,
Newport, Maverick, Satin and True.
Philip Morris and Lorillard together sold eight of the brands that Mrs. Ward purportedly used in the middle and later years of her life.
Unlike Liggett, Philip Morris and Lorillard were major players in the tobacco
industry for the past 60 years.
PM and Lorillard were founding members of the TIRC. They were present at the Plaza Hotel. They were significant players in the Tobacco Institute and the CTR.
PM's funding, almost half of the budget for TI, the Tobacco Institute, 46.1 percent, based on the document that the plaintiffs put into evidence. Lorillard, almost 10 percent.
If you get to this question, if you get to this Question Number 10, isn't the fair result to allocate the lion's share of the liability to those companies and not to Liggett? That, of course, will be an issue for you, the jury, to decide.
One of the last things I want to talk about is the issue of punitive damages. Plaintiffs have a claim for punitive damages in this case.
Punitive damages are a class of damages apart from compensatory damages. The plaintiff is going to ask you to award money to compensate Mrs. Ward for the loss of his wife. Plaintiffs have asked you for a $5 million number in that regard._
Punitive damages, however, are different. They are intended to punish the company and to deter it from acting with bad behavior going forward.
The Judge will instruct you on the standard for punitive damages. It's important to note that it is a standard that is different from compensatory damages.
For compensatory damages, the plaintiff only needs to show, only needs to accomplish their claim by the greater weight of the evidence.
But punitive damages, however, the standard is much higher. It is a clear and convincing standard, and the instructions will explain to you what the difference between the two is.
In order for the plaintiff to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the plaintiff is entitled to an award of punitive damages, the plaintiff must show that there is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation as to the matter at issue.
Here, whether any such evidence that Liggett's conduct caused harm to Mrs. Ward, whether it is necessary to send a message to Liggett to punish Liggett for the way it's doing business, that's what you have to apply the clear and convincing standard to.
As I discussed earlier and as you saw during the progress of the trial, Liggett acted the way a responsible cigarette manufacturer should have acted in the 1950s and '60s and thereafter; conducted independent research on important smoking and health issues; and turned over almost a decade of that research to the Surgeon General's Committee.
Today Liggett continues to conduct itself as a responsible tobacco company.
Back in the mid 1990s it was the first tobacco company to publicly admit that smoking causes serious disease and is addictive.
Liggett was the only company that puts a voluntary warning label on its cigarettes that is not required by Congress, stating that smoking is addictive.
Liggett today engages in virtually no consumer advertising of its products and is engaged largely in the sale of discount brand cigarettes, not brand cigarettes.
Liggett voluntarily discloses the ingredients of its cigarettes right on its cartons. Liggett is doing business today as a responsible tobacco company.
Nothing that Liggett did or said had any impact on Mrs. Ward's smoking decision and nothing that Liggett did caused harm to Mrs. Ward.
Liggett does not deserve to be punished with punitive damages for the conduct, based on the evidence in this case.
I'm going to wrap things up for you now. This case is not a referendum on smoking. It is not for the jury to decide whether smoking cigarettes are dangerous. Everyone accepts that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive products.
It is not for the jury to decide whether cigarettes should be sold or whether cigarettes should be banned.
Congress has determined that cigarettes
should be sold in the United States as a regulated product with warning labels, and people in the United States are permitted to exercise their choice as to whether to use these products.
The issue for the jury to decide is whether anything that Liggett did or said caused harm to Mrs. Ward. Did anything that Liggett did or said make any difference to Mrs. Ward and her decision to smoke?
Have the plaintiffs met their burden of proof? Have the plaintiffs been able to prove to you that Mrs. Ward smoked enough Liggett brand cigarettes over the course of her 45-year smoking history to have been a significant contributing factor in Mrs.
Ward's COPD?
The answer to these questions should be no, and your verdict should be for Liggett.
On behalf of myself and my client, and I'm sure everybody in this room, I want to thank you again for your time and your attention and your service in this matter.
Good afternoon.
