MR. FURR: Counsel, Ms. Webb.
Hello, once again, ladies and gentlemen.
The only possible place I can start is really to echo what Mr. Avera began with, and that is to thank you for your service, for your courtesy, for your attention. We all appreciate it. I can't say it any better than he did. Thank you very much for taking your time to help us solve this dispute.
I really want to begin the same way that I began this morning. I began this morning by telling you that the evidence will demonstrate that Mrs. Webb and her family are nice, loving, intelligent, successful people, and that you will hear us say nothing negative about Ms. Webb, about Mr. Horner, or about their relationship. And you haven't heard us say anything negative about this family. She loved her father. Her father loved her. He was a very good father to her.
The task before you now is to decide how to compensate Mrs. Webb for the loss of her father. It's a little bit of a difficult task because you've heard a lot of different facts during the course of the day, as Mr. Kavanaugh testified, and Noel Kavanaugh testified, and Ms. Rickli, Mrs. Webb. You heard a lot about
their lives together.
But what you have to decide is which of those facts are really the important facts that matter under the law with respect to the decision that you have to make. So I'm primarily going to spend my time with you working through the instructions that you were read, because those are your -- you're bound to follow those instructions. Those are the rules. Those are the rules that you follow to reach a decision in this verdict -- in this case, and I'll talk to you about the evidence that's most important under those instructions, and also about other evidence that while you were allowed to hear it during the course of the trial today, really aren't the types of things that should weigh heavily in your deliberations as you decide how to compensate Mrs. Webb.
So, I 'm going to spend my time working sort of simultaneously with the rulings of law that you're bound to follow, and the facts that are and aren't important with respect to how those rules of law apply to the decision that you have to make.
And I'll begin here, remind you that -- is this on? Thank you.
I'll remind you that the plaintiffs have the burden of proof in this case. That is, the Court has instructed you the plaintiffs have to prove to you with evidence the amount of compensatory damages that they are entitled to. And as I suggested this morning, they have to prove to you every dollar of damages.
You were asked to award $4 million. A very, very large sum of money. And as you consider that request and weigh the evidence to determine whether or not the evidence, in fact, supports that request or actually supports a verdict different than that $4 million, you're really going to have to ask yourself what evidence is in this case that justifies a verdict of $100,000? Or $200,000? Or half a million dollars? Or more?
As you work your way through your deliberations, your calculus, you're going to have to ask yourself what is it about this evidence that justifies this number versus another number.
Plaintiffs have to prove their case to you
with evidence. They can't prove it to you with emotion and sympathy. And it has been an emotional day. And just like I said at the beginning, we knew it would be emotional for the family, especially for Mrs. Webb. We tried to be very respectful of that. We recognize the emotion that she feels. We recognize that people feel sympathy for her. No one is trying to hide that.
But the thing to do is recognize it and put it aside, because as the Court has instructed you, you can't, under the law, base a verdict - - you can't base a monetary award on sympathy. You also can't base an award on lawyers' arguments, upon the rhetoric by the lawyers.
The closing argument you just had was a very elegant tribute to Mr. Horner and Mrs. Webb and to the life that they shared together, but it's not the lawyer's rhetoric or argument that matters, it's the evidence that you have before you and how you believe that evidence justifies a compensatory verdict of a certain monetary amount.
So it's the facts. It's the facts that
matter. And I'll remind you, if I could, that you have your instructions in your lap, I know. You will see on page 8 -- excuse me, page 11, instruction number 8, when you review your instructions you'll see in reaching your verdict do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion, or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision.
That's the legal principle about how the normal human reaction of sympathy to someone else's loss has to be set aside when you do your duty as a juror in this case.
There's a lot of other things you heard about during this case that were important for you to understand, but which you cannot award damages for. I want to go through them with you because you heard a lost of different things.
We talked about sympathy. Obviously you cannot award damages for sympathy.
You heard what Mr. Horner went through with his cancer, the pain he endured and the suffering that he incurred. But you cannot award monetary damages for Mr. Horner's pain, for Mr. Horner's suffering. Damages can only
be awarded for Mrs. Webb's suffering.
We've all heard the heartbreaking story of Venetia, and the multiple, multiple medical problems she faced, the burden that her medical problems created on the family, the heroic way that the family rallied around that infant; and Mr. Horner, his wife, Mr. Kavanaugh, Bobby Kavanaugh, Ms. Webb's, of course, heroic treatment of that very, very I'll infant. It's heart breaking.
But you're not here to award damages for Venetia. It's an awful, sad chapter in their lives. Venetia did pass away in 1977, a very long time ago, and you simply cannot award damages for Venetia.
You heard -- I'll call him Mr. Bobby Kavanaugh -- Mrs. Webb's son, who was the first witness today, and you heard him describe the loss that he experienced of his grandfather,
Mr. Horner. And I'm not challenging in any way that it was a significant loss for him, but that's not an element of your damages. You can't award damages in this case for Mr. Bobby Kavanaugh's loss.
The same situation for Noel Kavanaugh. Her
grandfather obviously played an important roll in her life. Their's was the household that Noel's friends gathered around, both in Miami after they got to Levy county, a wonderful experience for Noel and her friends to interact with her grandfather. And I have no doubt that Noel experienced a significant loss with when Mr. Horner died, but you can't award damages in this case for Noel's loss. She's not bringing a claim.
Just like Mr. Bobby Kavanaugh, he's not bringing a claim.
You've heard about other losses that Mrs. Webb experienced in her life. She lost her first husband, Mr. Robert Kavanaugh; another heartbreaking story of loss of a loved one, and I have no doubt it was a difficult experience for her, no doubt. But in this case you're not being asked to, and you cannot award damages to Mrs. Webb for the loss of her husband, Mr. Robert Kavanaugh.
Same thing with Mr. Charles Webb. We'll talk more in a little while about Mr. Webb, but you can't award damages for the loss of Mr.
Webb.
You know, another heartbreaking, emotional story in this case was the horrible experience that Mrs. Webb had when that plane wasn't pressurized correctly on the way from London back to the United States when they got their compassionate reassignment. It's caused her life-long hearing problems, other health problems. Another awful story that is sympathy-invoking, but you're not here and you're not being asked to award damages to Mrs. Webb for the health problems that she experienced, or for loss of hearing that she experi enced.
So it's one of those things as you sort through these facts, you really have to keep your eye on the ball as to what facts really do matter with respect to what the compensatory award will be, and what facts really are facts that an award can be based on.
Here's what your instruction will tell you: This is on page 8, instruction number 6: Any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence regarding the following elements.
And what "elements" mean is the types of damages for which you can -- I should say the
types of injuries for which you can award damages in this case. There are really two types.
One is the loss by Dianne Webb of Mr. Horner's parental companionship, instruction, and that word is actually guidance when you look at page 8 of your instruction.
The second element, the second injury that you can award damages for in this case are the mental pain and suffering that Mrs. Webb experienced as a result of Mr. Horner's lung cancer and death.
And so that's sort of the end of the first part of what I wanted to talk to you about, which is keeping our eye on the ball, making sure we understand the legal rules and what factors can and can't be compensated for in this case.
It's one of those things you have to take your time and work through the verdict form and remind yourself of exactly what it is you're being asked to compensate for as opposed to a lot of the other facts you heard that were important, but not compensable facts, not compensable.
What do we know about Mr. Horner? He's a nice man, good man, good father, good grandfather, good businessman.
Let me back up for a minute.
You know, I'm not going to belabor these facts. In fact, I cut out many of these facts from my discussion with Mrs. Webb, because you heard them all day long. I'll go through them quickly.
You know Mr. Horner was born in 1917. You know if he were alive today he would be 97 years old. He would be 97 years old.
Well educated man. Attended private schools, Vanderbilt University in Nashville.
He served our country from 1944 to 1946. He was a loving man, a successful man, and he retired in 1965 at the age of 48, because he was in a position to devote himself to other things than work, including, just like his wife did, and just like Mr. Robert Kavanaugh did, helping Ms. Webb take care of Venetia.
We also know that Mr. Horner taught his daughter Mrs. Webb well. One of the things he taught her was that as a citizen in this country, you have a duty to stay informed. You
need to know about current events. You need to know what's happening. You need to read your newspapers. You need to watch your news channels. You need to pay attention what's going on around you. That's one of the values Mrs. Webb told us he instilled in her, and she does to this day.
Let's go forward in time. You've heard that at the age of 73, Mr. Webb was diagnosed with his -- excuse me -- Mr. Horner was diagnosed with his lung cancer. He was treated with radiation, but that it recurred in 1994.
In the meantime, other very significant events happened in the family. Unfortunately, Dorothy Horner, Mr. Webb's wife - - excuse me -Mr. Horner's wife, died from cancer in 1993.
And in 1993, Mr. Horner saw the birth of his first great granddaughter, Molly.
You've also been told that Mr. Horner died at the age of 78 in 1996. You've heard that Mr. Horner remained relatively independent really to the last six months of his life; and even after his wife's death, he lived at home. He did his best to take care of himself. He tried to minimize the burden he placed on
Mrs. Webb, and he wasn't hospitalized until the very last week of his life. Then after a short hospitalization, unfortunately, this gentleman did succumb to his lung cancer.
That's really the fact of the matter, I think, about Mr. Webb -- excuse me, Mr. Horner.
I also want to talk to you, though, a little bit more about Mrs. Webb's life and to try to make sure that we keep in order the events of her life, including sort of the chronological and chronology we talked about this morning. That can be helpful in thinking about what happened and when it happened.
We know that Dianne Webb, then Dianne Horner, married Mr. Bob Kavanaugh in 1960. The love of her life. Her first wonderful husband, who was a wonderful father, a wonderful husband, and as Mr. Gustafson said, the love of her life.
They moved to the United Kingdom while Mr. Kavanaugh was serving the country in 1962. Venetia was born in 1963. In 1964, they moved back to the United States, and that was the plane flight during which Mrs. Webb experienced the depressurization that resulted in the
injuries and hearing loss that we talked about.
In 1966, Mr. Bobby Kavanaugh, Robert, was born. A few years later Mrs. Webb gave birth to her daughter, her daughter Noel. And as we discussed already, in 1977 her oldest daughter, baby Venetia, died after 13 years.
The family moved to Levy county in 1984, and tragedy struck again. Mr. Bob Kavanaugh, Mr. Robert Kavanaugh died from his heart attack.
Fortunately Mrs. Webb got lucky in love a second time in her life, and a year later she met Mr. Charles Webb and fell in love with him and began dating Mr. Webb.
She was dating Mr. Webb. Mr. Webb was involved in her life before, three years before Mr. Horner was diagnosed with his cancer.
In 1993, as we discussed, Mrs. Webb's mother Dorothy Horner died. Another major loss in her life. Her mother, we heard, had a very close relationship. Wonderful mother. Just like Mr. Horner did, Mrs. Horner also helped Mrs. Webb raise her children. And we talked about granddaughter Molly being born.
Mr. Horner died in 1996 from his lung
cancer. Mr. Bobby Kavanaugh, Robert, married Dana in 1999. In 2000, granddaughter Cayce was born. Later grandson Robert was born. Those are the grandchildren who are a big part of Mrs. Webb's life now which she spends a great deal of her time going to their volleyball games and football games and traveling around with the family.
Noel subsequently got remarried to Mr. Thompson, we heard, and then in 2013 Mr. Charles Webb died.
Let's take a step back. We talked about this this morning. In 1996 when Mr. Horner died, Mrs. Webb was a 54-year-old lady who was married to her second husband. She had two married, grown children. She had one great grandchild, another grandchild on her way. She wasn't depending on Mr. Horner for financial services or support or anything like that.
MR. AVERA: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
THE COURT: Sustained. The jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. FURR: Let's talk a little bit about Mrs. Webb's life since Mr. Horner died.
As we know, both before and after Mr. Horner's death, she was married to a wonderful man, Mr. Webb, and no one is suggesting that he stepped in and became her father. He was her spouse. Although he was in similar age to her father, he was her spouse who loved her and she loved him, and they had a full and happy life together.
Mr. Webb became a father figure to Robert and to Noel, and provided his wife the emotional support that you would expect a husband to do. They traveled together, they took over 100 vacations together. As Mrs. Webb told you, they had a wonderful life. And today she lives in a house that he built for her.
Those are the facts. Very important for you to consider as you evaluate the damages that should be awarded in this case.
We talked about the plaintiffs having the burden to prove their damages to you. The instruction tells you that any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. In light of the evidence.
You also know that the elements of damage Mrs. Webb is asking you to compensate her for
are Mr. Webb's -- excuse me, Mrs. Webb's loss of companionship, instruction, and guidance, and Mrs. Webb's pain and suffering caused by Mr. Horner's injury and death.
Any damages awarded to her in this case must, under the law, be a result of Mr.
Horner's lung cancer and death, not of any of the other tragedies in her life, not of any of the other losses in her life, but the damages must be damages that she experienced because of the loss of her father.
That brings us to where we are today.
Mrs. Webb is a mother, a grandmother, a great grandmother who has out-lived two husbands, and she's here asking you to award her $4 million for the loss of her father who died at age 78 in 1996.
There's another tool that you have, that you can use to evaluate what the damage should be, and that is as you were read the instruction about how you can consider the mortality table, and you can consider the time that Ms. Webb and her father, Mr. Horner, had lost together, and you can use that, although it's not binding on you.
The mortality table provides to you some guidance as to how much time they actually lost together had he lived a full life under the life tables, and you're entitled to consider that when you evaluate what the damages should be.
Mr. Sales showed you this right at the end of the plaintiff's case. You will have these back there, but basically the numbers are that Mr. Webb was expected -- excuse me - -Mr. Horner would have been expected to live in the range of another eight years, and to have died at the age of -- that should actually be 86 instead of 78. 86 instead of 78.
So she lost eight years with her father. And you have to decide how to compensate that. During those eight years she's asking you for damages for two things: One is the companionship, instruction, and guidance that her father was providing to her.
This is your decision, and your decision alone. You can completely reject the numbers that the lawyers suggest to you as to how to value these damages, but much like Mr. Avera, I'm going to suggest a number to you. I'm
going to suggest that you look at those eight years that they lost together, and you treat the companionship, guidance and instruction that Mr. Horner was provided to Mrs. Webb, as though he were doing that as a full-time job.
So that's all he was doing as a full-time job.
I suggest to you that a good, middle class American job pays in the range of $50,000 a year; a very good job. I would suggest you value each of those lost eight years at $50,000 per year, which would result in an award of $400 , 000.
Mrs. Webb is also asking you for pain and suffering damages. And while you think that $400,000 is enough, I 'm going to ask you that you consider maybe you should round that up to $500,000, an even half a million dollar award for the loss of her father.
I'm also going to suggest to you that anything over a million dollars would not be fair and just in light of the evidence, and that nobody should be made a millionaire because their father smoked cigarettes.
Thank you very much.
