MR. AVERA: Yes, sir.
May it please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes, sir, Mr. Avera.
MR. AVERA: Good afternoon, and hello again, ladies and gentlemen. I want to begin today by thanking all of you for your service.
It's folks like you that appear in response to a summons to make sure our system works.
I think I can speak for both sides in telling you that we so very much appreciate your attention these last few days.
I' m going to guess that whenever it was you received your jury summons, no one was particularly excited about receiving that. And out all the people that did show up Monday and Tuesday, we're mindful of the fact that there are quite a few people that probably did not show up.
But both sides are aware and we're mindful that you did. We know it's inconvenient, we know it places a burden upon you, but we recognize that you recognize that you have a duty to your community and to your nation to serve as a juror, and it is perhaps second only to serving in our nation's armed services in doing your duty as an American. And, for that, both sides express our sincere appreciation for that.
We're now coming to the end of the first phase of this trial. And you use the evidence that you have heard, and your collective
experience and common sense, to take into consideration the harm that Reynolds has caused Ms. Dianne Webb, and determine an amount to compensate her for the loss of her father,
James Cayce Horner, the loss of an extraordinary man. The loss of a father, and not just any father, an extraordinary father.
Each of you agreed that you would accept the findings that have been talked about on Monday, on Tuesday, and the Court has read to you again, the findings that Reynolds conspired to hide information from the American public,
Mr. Horner; concealed information about the health effects, the addictive nature of cigarettes and how they killed people.
All of those findings are binding upon you. They've been determined by a jury sitting just where you were almost four years to the day.
You haven't heard specific evidence about that conduct because that's already been determined. That Levy jury did that, and they're guilty of that which you read in those findings.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. AVERA: That's why we don't provide specific evidence of it, because that has already been done.
So we have to trust in you that you will abide by those findings, and we did do that.
But in deliberations if someone were to look behind those findings and to doubt whether there was a conspiracy or doubt the allegation, just remind them that's not the law. The law in this case is what Judge Griffis has read to you; the law in this case. You must honor those findings, as that is the law today.
So the question today is how much harm did Reynolds cause Dianne Webb, and how much you're required to compensate her for that harm, for her loss.
Today she looks to you to do the right thing and make absolutely sure that what you do is fair and just in light of your experience and common sense.
We've had such a very short time to present to you who James Horner was and his relationship with his daughter Dianne Webb.
But I think everyone would agree by his words and his actions, throughout the lifetime of his
daughter he made absolutely sure that his little girl knew that in his eyes she was the one, his little girl.
Why did he do that? Because for some fathers, holding that little girl in your arms for the very first time is a life-changing experience. And for Jim Horner, it must have been so. We know it must have been so by his words and his actions, because of his devotion to his daughter Dianne.
As his little girl grew, the man she called daddy her entire life was always there for her. She has vivid recollections of her early childhood in Charleston and in Miami. And is there anything that provides a greater sense of security to a little girl than feeling her daddy's arms wrapped around her?
Is there any greater need in a little girl's life than to feel that she had the protection of her father? And can there be any doubt by any of you that Jim Horner provided that to his little girl?
Life events come, and they go, and they certainly did in the Horner household.
Birthdays, holidays, Christmas, trick or
treating, boys, first dates, marriage and children. And through all of that, through all the fears and anxieties that a little girl growing up would have as she becomes an adult, there was one person there for her always, her rock, her daddy: Jim Horner. He was the one man in her life that she knew no matter what would always love her, would be there for her.
In some respects listening to some of the testimony was almost like two ships passing in the night today. And Mr. Gustafson talked about Mr. Horner and the relationship that he had with his daughter, that which we had to prove, that we had to demonstrate to you, then on cross-examination you heard about Mr. Webb.
A couple of observations about that.
In growing up and making choices about the mate for life, do we doubt at all that a woman's judgment in doing so is based largely on what her daddy taught her? By all accounts today, Mrs. Webb married two wonderful gentlemen: Mr. Kavanaugh and Mr. Webb.
This case is not about Mr. Webb. It's not about Mr. Kavanaugh. It's about Dianne Webb's relationship with her father.
If anyone would suggest that Mr. Webb replaced Mr. Horner's role, that would be a gross misrepresentation about life. Because as we all know in life, there's a relationship with your father, and there's a relationship with your spouse. And, of course, you love them, but those relationships are different.
One is your daddy and one is your husband, and one does not replace the other.
And the little girl, Dianne Webb, now grown, did face challenges in her life. You heard the testimony about Venetia and the challenges that were facing Dianne and her husband. You heard about Dianne losing Mr. Kavanaugh suddenly and unexpectedly.
And what does her father do? Venetia, he stepped up and made sure his little girl, his daughter, had the help she needed in caring for a child that had some tragic birth defects.
They would be overwhelming for anybody in the best of circumstances. And when things became too difficult, what did Mr. Horner do? He put his life to the side, he stopped the direction in which his life was going to make sure that his daughter had the help that she needed.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, I 'm sorry for objecting. I need to approach the bench.
THE COURT: Okay.
(The following discussion was held at the bench out of the hearing of the jury:)
THE COURT: Okay. Go ahead.
MR. FURR: Your Honor has given us, and the plaintiff has consented to it, an ongoing objection with respect to the evidence regarding Venetia and her impact on the personal representative's -- Ms. Webb's life.
And at this time I also, in order to preserve it, I need to make a motion for a mistrial based upon the admission of that evidence and the argument that's being made.
So I'm making a mistrial motion also.
MR. AVERA: I don't think it's timely with respect to the evidence. But with respect to the argument, we would ask the Court to deny it since Your Honor allowed us to introduce the evidence. This is fair comment on that evidence.
THE COURT: I'll deny the motion for mistrial .
MR. FURR: Thank you, Your Honor.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. AVERA: When she needed someone to hold Venetia while Mr. Kavanaugh or whoever was not there, who was there? Mr. Horner.
Those efforts by Jim Horner were largely unseen by the world, except for close family and maybe close friends who would look out the window at night and see him padding across the road in his night robe and slippers to respond to a call because his daughter needed somethi ng.
And what did he do when Bob Kavanaugh suddenly and unexpectedly died? His two grandchildren now to be raised, pretty much out of the home and being 20 at the time, raising a girl, those two kids, it was no surprise when the kids lose a parent that young suddenly and unexpectedly, they're in a fog. They don't remember. Time goes by and they don't have a recollection of the events because of the shock of losing them, someone so close, someone so important in their life, someone suddenly and unexpectedly. But Jim Horner was the kind of man who recognized that, who saw what was
happening around him and his family, to his grandchildren, and the challenges that his daughter would be facing, and he stepped through that fog for Dianne and he took her hand and he took the hand of Bobby and he took the hand of Noel, and he walked in the direction of moving forward with their life in a positive manner.
He helped Bobby to start in the military.
He was there for Noel, and he was there for Dianne. And for Dianne, having him there to help with her children, her grandchildren, those efforts by that gentleman go beyond what words could describe what he did as that father.
And it's because, as Mr. Gustafson told you folks, sadly not every father would do that.
Not every father would do what Jim Horner did throughout the lifetime of his daughter when she was faced with a tragedy each time: To step forward and be there for her, to be a rock for his little girl.
During those times when he wasn't actually holding Dianne's hand and helping her with the challenges in life that she faced, he had her
back. He had her family's back, and she had his.
Mr. Gustafson spoke to you about an extraordinary relationship between father and daughter. And perhaps many of you know those who have close relationships -- women who have close relationships with their father. But as Ms. Rickli told you, she said she doesn't think she's seen as close relationship between a father and daughter as between Jim Horner and his daughter Dianne Webb.
So years later when his little girl, a grown woman, is now in her early 50's, and he's lying in bed dying from lung cancer brought on by a company that for his entire life had never told what they knew about the deadly -MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
May we approach?
(The following discussion was held at the bench out of the hearing of the jury: )
MR. FURR: I'm shocked. The conduct has been kept out of this case. There's no evidence about what Reynolds said and when they said it and whether they ever said anything during his entire life. That's not part of the
record before this jury. There's no evidence of that.
This is argument of conduct based on evidence that is not in front of this jury, and I move to strike it and I move for mistrial.
MR. AVERA: I'm shocked, Your Honor, that counsel is not aware that I'm commenting on the findings that have been read to this jury by this Court. It's fair comment.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, that finding is totally -- it says nothing about what they said throughout the course of his entire life.
That's not in that finding.
MR. SALES: This is concealed and it causes death. It had to have happened during his life. When else could it have happened?
MR. FURR: He said more than that. He said - - he began to make an argument that Reynolds never said X, Y or Z during the entire course of his life. There's no evidence of that in this case.
THE COURT: Okay. The findings are the findings to this jury. You can comment on the findings to this jury. That's fair comment and fair to use in argument.
To go behind what the evidence was, probably not so much. I don't think what he said -- I don't think it was improper.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, that is my objection, that he went behind the findings, and he started to identify what was and what wasn't said during the entire course of -THE COURT: He didn't do that. That's not what he did. He said -- that's not what he said. He just said concealed information, which is what the finding is.
Now, if he goes beyond that and talks about what was concealed, then yes, that would be too much. Okay?
MR. FURR: He also can't talk about how long the concealment lasted or whether it was during his life.
THE COURT: During his life, throughout his life -- we're not getting -- now we're splitting hairs. The fact is it was during his life the jury made a finding there was concealment.
Do you disagree with that?
MR. FURR: No. And when that statement was made, I didn't object. This was more.
MR. AVERA: I respectfully disagree with counsel, but I'm going to pick back up where I left off by saying during his lifetime.
THE COURT: Okay.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. FURR: Your Honor, was the objection -THE COURT: The objection was overruled. Motion is denied.
MR. AVERA: That during Jim Horner's lifetime they had concealed information that they knew during his lifetime. He had to have known at that time looking into his daughter's eyes, without that information, he had given it all. He had left everything on the field to make sure that her life could be as close to normal as it could be with respect to the challenges that she faced during her lifetime. Who could ask anything more of a father than to do just that?
Ladies and gentlemen, there are too many absent fathers in our world today. Men, for whatever reason, do not understand the affect that they can have on a little girl's life, how
she will look up to him and learn how a man is supposed to treat a woman, learn how to select a spouse for a lifetime. How character, integrity and self-esteem matter in this world, and to teach the lesson that character is what we do when no one is looking. Jim Horner knew that. He knew those lessons and he taught them well, because from the moment Dianne Webb was born, she grew up knowing that her daddy's love was unconditional by his words and actions. He made sure that she knew no matter what, he was there for her and would love her forever, and then some.
Now, you may be sitting here this afternoon wondering how you should place a value on what was taken by -- from Mrs. Webb by Reynolds by their conduct.
They took a man's life, a good man, and now the voidness in Mrs. Webb's life, her pain which cannot be filled by Mr. Webb, which cannot be filled by the time spent with family, which cannot be filled with anything other than the horrible memory of what she saw her father go through, the pain that she saw him go through, the manner in which he tried to hide
from her what he was going through so she would not emotionally hurt.
Sometimes, just sometimes, justice is a long-time coming. But just like hunger is not made better by denying food, nor is the desire for justice lessened by the passage of time.
It's taken nearly 20 years since she lost him, for this time to come, for the time when they are to be held accountable by a group of citizens with an incredible power, and you have that. And that power is to right a wrong, to make a corporation who broke rules that we, as a people, and that they, as a corporation, are held to. It is an extraordinary duty, and it comes with it and extraordinary power.
And hearing these words you might think that I was going to ask you to do something beyond that which is fair, and I' m not going to do that today. Now is no different from Dianne throughout her entire life, nor will it be any different if Jim Horner were here.
She was raised, because her daddy taught her to always be fair and to do the right thing, and that is what we will ask you to do today, to be fair, to do the right thing, and
to be fair to this defendant.
So today, rather than encourage you to assess a number that is not fair, that is beyond the realm of reason, I, on behalf of Mrs. Webb would encourage you to do that which they did not do while the conspiracy occurred, and that is to be fair to Reynolds. I'm going to suggest to you a sum to compensate Mrs. Horner for what she has been through and what she will continue to go through for the rest of her life, and the memories that she has from what Reynolds did to her daddy, to her father, the sum of $4 million to compensate Mrs. Horner; not a penny more. You should not give one penny more, because that would not be fair to this defendant, and not a penny less.
She was the one that was there with him, not them. She was the one that took him to all his cancer appointments, not Reynolds. She was the one that watched him waste away from lung cancer that during his entire life was caused by cigarette smoking.
For Dianne, she didn't choose her father, obviously. In her mind her daddy was God's gift to her; and, likewise he was, and she was
to him.
Jim Horner brought to life the words of William Bennett. Mr. Bennett wrote a wonderful book called The Book of Virtues. It's a wonderful book for kids. Mr. Bennett said in that book that real fatherhood means love and commitment and sacrifice and a willingness to share responsibility and not walk away from one's children.
Did Jim Horner epitomize that? Of course he did. He was that kind of father. He did so in every facet of his life, and every facet included his little girl to make sure he could make her life better. He was virtuous, he was true to his family, and sacrificed for his only child so the life she would know would truly be better than if he were to leave her to fight those battles on her own. What we need in this world, folks, are more Jim Horners.
Dianne Webb was and always will be part of her father. He will always be a part of her. She lost that which was so very precious to her because of an inability of a corporation to use the courage that Jim Horner had through his entire life to do two things: To do what is
right, and to do what is fair.
They never thought, ladies and gentlemen, that they would be here being held accountable for what they have been found guilty of, and here they are. Here they are. Today, here in Bronson, just like in places all over our country, jurors just like yourself are sitting here hearing evidence and seeking that which must be done within the four walls of this courtroom, and in every courtroom in which justice is sought, and that is the truth, to ensure that justice be done.
Follow the virtues of Jim Horner. Do what is right. Please do what is fair.
Thank you.



MR. AVERA: I just want to point out a couple things quickly so we can get done this afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you again for your attention.
This was just shown to you a few moments ago regarding the life expectancy tables, which you can consider as part of your evaluation.
I'm sure you will note on there that that life table shows at the time of his death Mr. Horner had a life expectancy of a little bit more than eight years. That tells you six. That's not correct. In picking that up and doing the math, I want to make sure everybody is aware of that.
Secondly, it would be incorrect if the suggestion was made to you that the damages stop at the date when Mr. Horner would have died. Damages go through currently. You can
consider those life tables.
Mrs. Webb has another 17 years of life expectancy - - excuse me, 14, thank you,
14 years of life expectancy to live with those memories that were caused by this defendant.
Reynolds didn't bring you any evidence today. What they brought you was a very skilled advocate who talked a lot about Mr. Webb, Mr. Kavanaugh, and grandkids that Mr. Horner did not live long enough to see.
But very little time was spent on Mr. Horner, and why not spend time on Mr. Horner? Because Mr. Horner was a fantastic man. He was a fantastic father. He was the father we would want everybody to have in life, a father that was there for his little girl, his only child, all through her life, and you don't talk about that in a positive way if you took the man's life, because you're only proving them the damages are $4 million and not $400,000.
And that a lady who has suffered with these memories for the last 18 years and then another 14 years, that she should be compensated by treating her dad as if he had a job for $50,000 for eight years? That's not justice.
And my colleague Mr. Furr spent a lot of time telling you what you can't do. You can't award money for Venetia, you can't award money for Mr. Kavanaugh, you can't award money for Mr. Webb. You can't award money for the decompression. At no time has anyone on behalf of Mrs. Webb suggested to you that you can. In fact, Mr. Gustafson over and over again pointed out to the witnesses up here, this is not your claim. The only claim is Mrs. Webb's claim, so I want you to focus your testimony on how things affected Mrs. Webb.
We have gone out of our way to make sure that we have focused on that which you are here about, and that is to evaluate the life of Jim Horner and the life of Dianne Webb and their father/daughter relationship, and what she lost as a result of them, Reynolds, taking his life.
The evidence, the facts, the law are that concealment or omission by Reynolds of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of Jim Horner's death. And that Reynolds agreement to conceal or omit
information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature was a legal cause of Mr. Horner's death.
They want to talk about duty? Duty to read a newspaper? To be informed? A duty to be informed as an American citizen? That's the duty that was breached. That's the duty you should focus on, not a duty to read a newspaper and be informed. That (indicating) took Jim Horner's life.
And Mrs. Webb doesn't want sympathy. She's had all the sympathy she can stand from losing her daughter, losing her husband. No more sympathy. No sympathy in this courtroom at all, but you can use empathy, and empathy -empathy is a powerful means by which you, as the deciders of fact, can listen to the evidence and understand what this lady has been through.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
(The following discussion was held at the bench out of the hearing of the jury: )
MR. FURR: That's an unequivocal violation of the golden rule asking the jurors to place
themselves in the position of the plaintiff, to empathize with what she's experienced, and I move it be stricken and I move for a mistrial.
MR. SALES: Absolutely not, Your Honor.
He did not ask the jurors to place themselves in her position. He asked them to understand what she has been through. That's very different. That's the opposite of sympathy. That's the whole point of this argument, to explain to the jury that we don't want sympathy, but we do want them to understand her loss.
Sympathy means I hurt and I hurt with you. Empathy means you hurt and I understand.
There's nothing with that.
THE COURT: Objection is overruled.
Motion is denied.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. AVERA: So when you hear the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, to hear and to understand that evidence and to reach a true and just verdict is your task, and no one here on our side is asking for more.
They didn't bring you any evidence, they
stood up and told you what a good man he is, what a good woman she is, that they had a fantastic relationship, and that's unrebutted. We've proven to you every dollar. We've not only done that, we told you to not award a penny more because she was raised to be fair and to do the right thing, and to be fair to this defendant that took her father's life.
Thank you very much for paying attention today. We trust you will retire and listen to the evidence and return a true and just verdict as justice requires.
Thank you very much.
