MR. KAISER: Thank you.
May it please the Court, Counsel, ladies and gentlemen jury, good afternoon.
JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. KAISER: This is the chance that I get to speak to you, remember I spoke to you in the opening statement, I outlined what our evidence was going to be, now I have a chance to comment what that evidence was in my summation. And the way I'm going to do it, you are going to have the verdict
form when you retire to your jury room to deliberate.
And I'm going to put the verdict form up and just go through each numbered item and talk about the evidence in that regard, beginning with the first question.
THE COURT: The verdict -- the verdict form is attached to your jury instructions.
MR. KAISER: And the first question for your consideration is, "Was Carol Wendel addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
Remember we've talked about class membership, and that's what the first question answers, whether or not Carol Wendel was a member of the Engle class. And by way of illustration, let's talk about the evidence.
The first thing I want to talk about is addiction, and remember in my opening statement when I spoke to you I gave you different examples of what we were going to show. I told you we were going to talk about Carol Wendel's smoking routine.
I told you we were going to talk about the various opinions that her family members would render about
her addiction.
I told you we would hear directly from Carol Wendel through her husband and her daughter as to whether or not she was addicted. I told you there would be medical professional testimony by way of a medical record.
And so let's start with the smoking routine from Carol's husband Charles. And what did he tell you during his testimony? There was evidence that Carol Wendel would smoke a cigarette the first thing she would do when she woke up in the morning, and that was Charles Wendel's testimony. As soon as she got out of bed in the morning, what did she do, she smoked a cigarette.
Charles Wendel was asked about the number of cigarettes his wife would have by the time she went to work, at least three, before she left the house on her way to work. He was asked whether or not Carol Wendel smoked in bed, and he said yes, she
did.	Charles was asked how frequently she smoked in bed, and he said every night.
Charles was asked whether or not he had a recollection of his wife getting up throughout the night in order to smoke a cigarette, and remember the testimony, it was Charles Wendel who said on
the nights that I was up, which was basically every night, I would hear her. So I know that on most nights, my wife got up for the purpose of smoking cigarettes.
On nights that he was sleeping, he couldn't account for it. But he told you that it was numerous times during the week that his wife would get up and go smoke cigarettes after midnight.
Were there times during that period of -remember the testimony about the movies. Let me back up.
When Carol was ill, Charles was asked, do you remember if she would smoke when she had a cold or the flu? And the answer was, yes, she did, smoked while she was sick in bed.
There was testimony about whether or not they went to the movies, and at the time when you couldn't smoke in the movie theaters, whether Carol would excuse herself during the movie, go to the lobby and smoke.
And what did Charles Wendel tell you? On those occasions when they went to movies, always. Carol Wendel would excuse herself, go out in the lobby and smoke a cigarette.
And finally, Charles Wendel was asked when
your wife was diagnosed with lung cancer that ultimately took her life, did she continue to smoke? And what did he tell you, yes, she did.
Yes, she did.
Remember what he told you? The day she got her diagnosis and they went in the car to drive home, she had a cigarette. And while no one ever saw her smoke again after she was diagnosed with cancer, what did they tell you? Charles Wendel said he could smell smoke on her and that he would find open packs of cigarettes throughout the house. That's how he knew she had been smoking.
And what did Charlene Wendel have to say? She was asked very similar questions about her mother, about her smoking history, her smoking routine.
And remember the testimony from Charlene Wendel when she was asked, when would your mother have her first cigarette of the day, as soon as she got out of bed. She kept her cigarettes right next to her in the nightstand right next to her bed.
She had a recollection of her mother smoking in bed. She had a recollection of her mother smoking while she was sick, because in response to the question, she said absolutely, she smoked when she was sick.
Remember the testimony, Carol Wendel's grandson Justin, Carol was asked not to smoke in front of Justin because he had asthma and she honored that request, but she still, when she visited him, had to go outside and smoke cigarettes.
Charlene was asked whether she had a recollection of her mother smoking a cigarette when one was burning in the ashtray. She said yes, she did have a recollection.
And she was asked the same question, whether she remembered her mother smoking cigarettes after she was diagnosed with lung cancer. And remember she said she would like to say no, but she smelled smoke on her and she found packs of cigarettes in clothes she had been wearing before she died.
So both Charles Wendel, Carol's husband, and Charlene, the daughter, said the same thing about her mother after she was diagnosed with lung cancer. She continued to smoke cigarettes based on the smell of the smoke around her and the fact that they found open packs of cigarettes strewn around the house and in the clothes that she wore after she died.
And that's the smoking routine you heard about
during the testimony of Charles Wendel and Charlene Wendel.
What else? We talked about the different opinions about Carol Wendel smoking, and Charles was asked "Do you think she was addicted to cigarettes?" His answer, "Yes, I do." This is a man who had 40 years of experience with his wife because that's how long he was married to her.
Based on that 40-year period of time, based on his ability to see her smoke and know her smoking routine and deal with her smoking, he was of the opinion that his wife, yes, was addicted.
Charlene was asked the same question, "Do you think your mother was addicted?" And she didn't hem or haw, she said, "I know my mother was addicted." Again, this is her daughter. They spent time together. She is talking from a frame of reference of experience to know that her mother was addicted, her mother constantly smoked, her mother smoked because of addiction, not enjoyment.
Now, what about from Carol herself through the witnesses? Did Carol ever give you an explanation as to why she was smoking? And what did Charles say? "She liked to smoke. She thought she was addicted to it.
"Did she ever tell you she thought in her mind she was addicted?
"Yes. Yes, she did."
That's from her husband of 40 years.
What about her daughter? "Did she ever offer you any explanation as to why she didn't quit or try to quit?
"She said she was addicted."
These are opinions from her family members, from her daughter and her husband about whether or not Carol was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked.
And just ask yourself, just consider from the evidence the following. When you're talking about whether someone enjoys smoking, whether someone finds it pleasurable, people can find smoking enjoyable and pleasurable and be addicted to it. People that are feeding their addiction might find that addiction pleasurable.
You know why? Because without that addiction, they might feel pain, they might feel suffering, they might feel all sorts of stuff that's relieved once they smoke the cigarette so that they can say "I like it, I'm addicted to it, but I like it."
So just think, do you really feel that a woman
who goes to visit her grandson, to visit her baby grandson cannot leave her cigarettes home for a few hours when she's going to visit him if it's just a question of she likes her cigarettes? Do you think she could maybe take a few hours off if she liked her cigarettes?
Or maybe the fact that she couldn't even abstain from smoking and had to go outside on the lanai to have a cigarette while she was visiting her grandson demonstrates something else. Maybe it demonstrates that the woman was addicted and that's why she couldn't leave the cigarettes at home.
You think when someone gets a cold and a flu and they're bedridden and they're sick as a dog, you think maybe they might be able to just forget their cigarettes for a few days until they get better? After all, if it's a question of enjoyment, you don't need to enjoy them 24 hours a day, you put them aside.
She didn't do it. Why didn't she do it? You think maybe because it's addiction where she needed to smoke when she was sick?
If you go to a movie with your husband or whomever, you're planning on going to the movie to enjoy what's being shown, don't you think? And so
do you really need to bring the pack of cigarettes with you to enjoy the movie for a couple of hours? After all, you might love your cigarettes, but you could just put them on the side, put them at home for a couple of hours until you get back home.
But the fact that she had to absent herself and go out to the lobby and smoke cigarettes, what does that suggest to you? Did she like them that much where she's willing to just miss part of the movie to go smoke? Or maybe she was addicted. Or maybe she was addicted. What do you think?
When this woman was diagnosed with a disease that ultimately killed her, do you really think she liked those cigarettes so much she was going to say, "I don't care about this disease, I like my cigarettes"?
Now, what does common sense tell you? Does common sense tell you that someone with a disease that's going to kill them just likes cigarettes so much they want to smoke? Does common sense tell you that maybe she knew what she was doing was awful and disgusting and that's why she had to sneak those cigarettes so her family didn't see what she was doing?
Does that, ladies and gentlemen, smack of
someone who just enjoys those cigarettes so much? If you think that way on that first question, just put down no, she wasn't addicted, we'll all go home.
But I submit to you based on the evidence in this case, this was a woman who was suffering from a terrible addiction to the nicotine in those cigarettes.
And what else? In 1995, when she was diagnosed with that cancer that ultimately killed her, what did the doctor write in his impressions?
In 1995, in the history, his impression was a history of tobacco abuse. Long before this lawsuit was filed, you had a doctor saying history of tobacco abuse. Not use; abuse.
Even the defendant's own evidence, if you recall, through Dr. Proctor they offered and admitted several pieces of evidence, remember the Reader's Digest, newspapers, Florida Health Notes, and they introduced certain studies and other material, and one of them in particular, the American Journal of Psychiatry, the American Psychiatric Association, from 1962 and 1963, their own document, now, what did it say?
Heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true
addicts showing not only social habituation, but mild physiologic withdrawal effects. We know now that's a lot more than mild from the last Surgeon General's Report, but that's the defendant's own evidence.
So when you consider the total evidence which you were shown, what you heard during this trial, the smoking history, the opinions of family members, the opinion of Carol herself through her family members, the medical record from a doctor, a physician about tobacco abuse, and the defendant's own exhibits, more likely than not do you think Carol was addicted? Do you think it's more likely than not? Absolutely. Absolutely.
Now, the defense called Dr. Abramson, their addiction expert. Their expert in addiction psychology. And remember what he said. While Dr. Abramson professed to treat people that were addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, that's not really how his testimony came out.
Why do I say that? Remember he said he treats addicted people. But when he testified, he told you, among other things, that people can control their cigarettes. People can control their smoking. In fact, he's never seen an instance
where someone can't control their smoking.
If someone can control their smoking, and in Dr. Abramson's case, everybody can control their smoking, that would mean that nobody can be addicted. Why do I say that? If people can control their smoking, people can quit when they wish. If people can quit when they wish, it is not the nicotine compelling them to smoke.
So under Dr. Abramson's theory and testimony, there is no such thing as addiction, because he's never met a person who couldn't control his or her smoking. It's that simple. There is just no addiction.
And Dr. Abramson told you, he has never, nor will he ever, come across where addiction, anybody whose addiction caused disease. Doesn't happen. Why doesn't it happen? Because if a person can control their smoking, the addiction has nothing to do with the nicotine, there is no addiction. The nicotine is not compelling people to smoke if you can control the smoking and quit anytime you choose to quit. And so under that theory, addiction will never cause disease.
Dr. Abramson is a wonderful expert, and that's why he's being paid by the tobacco companies
because he will never testify that anybody meets class membership. That's what his testimony will be.
And what did Dr. Abramson say in this particular case how Carol controlled her smoking? Remember what he said. He admitted and acknowledged that the deposition testimony demonstrated that Carol went to movies, but his testimony, yes, there was a movie and she had to absent herself to smoke.
That's not what the testimony was, however.
It was on numerous occasions when she went to the movies that she had to get up to smoke, not on one occasion as Dr. Abramson thought.
When Dr. Abramson was asked, "Well, what about when she would wake up after midnight, wake up at night and smoke cigarettes?" His response was,
"Well, nobody asked her why she got up in order to smoke cigarettes." That was his example of how she was in control.
What about when she did not smoke in Justin's presence but went outside? And Dr. Abramson's answer was, "Well, she didn't smoke in front of him." Well, that doesn't mean anything, does it?
She actually made the concerted effort to go
outside and smoke a cigarette out of necessity.
She still smoked. But that's his example of another instance of how she somehow controlled her smoking.
And then when it came down to being diagnosed with a cancer that would kill her, how did she control that? Well, there was no evidence by which he could infer that she ever smoked at all, why? Because no witness saw her smoking.
So conveniently, Dr. Abramson wants to ignore the strong compelling circumstantial evidence from family members who said, yes, she did smoke. And so he puts all of those factors together and said Carol Wendel controlled her smoking. Which is totally belied and contradicted by the evidence.
And another thing about Dr. Abramson, he equates addiction with those who aren't addicted.
And what do I mean by that? According to Dr. Abramson, a person who is not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes has just as tough a time quitting as a person who is addicted. Does that make any sense on earth?
Think of it. How would it take a person who is not addicted to nicotine five to eight times to successfully quit, just as it would take an
addicted person five to eight times before they are able to quit. If you're not addicted, you don't need the substance, you put it down and walk away.
And so in Dr. Abramson's mind, when he says that, what does he mean? There is no such thing as addiction. If you're not addicted and you need to try and quit five to eight times, where is the distinction between non-addiction and addiction in his mind? There is none. And that's ridiculous.
And so in your jury instructions, you can see at the beginning about believability of witnesses.
I submit based on the evidence in this case, you should reject his testimony, because of some of those opinions and conclusions that he came up with.
Remember something else. How often during Dr. Abramson's testimony did you hear him talk? Remember the questions? The questions were almost unanimously asked so all he had to say was yes, no, yes, no. Why do you think that happened? Maybe because he might say things that weren't really smart?
But remember his testimony. How often did he get to explain things? And you saw when he does get to explain things, he contradicts himself. So
based on all of that evidence, there is no question in this case, is it more likely than not that Carol was addicted? Absolutely.
So in answer to the first question, yes, she was addicted. She was addicted to cigarettes.
What about her disease?
You heard from Dr. Reed. Dr. Reed is a pulmonologist we called. He talked about the records that he reviewed, the medical records, the deposition testimony. And Dr. Reed told you from the start that Carol had primary small cell lung cancer, primary, meant it originated in the lung.
And he told you the cancer was caused by her extensive smoking history. And not only did he say more likely than not, reasonable degree of probability, his opinion was based on almost a 99 percent certainty that Carol Wendel had primary small cell lung cancer. That's pretty strong. 99 percent. And it was based primarily, according to Dr. Reed, on pathology.
So let's take a look at the pathology. What do we have? We have a pathology report from a pathologist. What's their job? They sit and look under a microscope every day of their career doing this kind of stuff.
And what did he do? He was given a sample, he was given a sample of a lymph node, and from that sample he came up with the conclusion that there was a mass and it was a metastatic undifferentiated small cell carcinoma. That's based on his examination of a lymph node.
And there was a letter written by Dr. Rubin.
And what did Dr. Rubin say? Dr. Rubin gives the history and he said he spoke to that pathologist and that pathologist stated unequivocally, that means with no doubt, unequivocally that this is a small cell carcinoma, cancer, consistent with a lung primary.
Now, his opinion after the first pathology examination was unequivocal, yeah, small cell primary lung cancer. But he went a step further.
Not only did he rely on the first sample he was given, but he was going to exclude lymphoma and he was going to do another test to see if it was neuron-specific enolase positive, which would show the presence of small cell carcinoma.
Did the test, you've got a subsequent pathology report, it's negative for this LCA which excludes lymphoma, and it's positive for this specific enolase, which in the case of it being
positive is demonstrative of small cell carcinoma. And sure enough, that's what the findings are and the findings support the same diagnosis.
How do we know that? Not only from the conclusion reached in the pathology, but there is a subsequent letter, and this time in the letter, the doctor, Dr. Rubin, is discussing his conversation with the pathologist and he talked about those specific testing, the neuron-specific enolase and the LCA that he refers to in the pathology report, and these findings support the former reading of the tissue as metastatic undifferentiated small cell carcinoma. What's the conclusion? Carol Wendel has limited stage small cell carcinoma of the lung.
Now, that's based on the pathology, that's based on everything that was considered by these doctors in examining Carol Wendel. And the bottom line is primary small cell lung cancer.
And Dr. Reed tells you where does it come from, small cell cancer is almost exclusively, small cell lung cancer almost exclusively the result of smoking and associated with smoking. It is rare to see it, small cell lung cancer, that is, in the absence of smoking.
Now, that is the opinion of Dr. Reed based on all of these medical reports he saw, based on the pathology, not just on the unequivocal opinion that it was primary small cell lung cancer, but after a second sampling and testing to verify, in fact, that it was. And that's the evidence to support the fact that, yes, Carol Wendel's extensive smoking history caused her to develop small cell lung cancer.
What's important here is that the evidence in this case is the answer, the answers from the witnesses. It is not -- it does not consist of the questions. It is the answers that constitute the evidence.
So that when there are questions about, well, what about asbestos exposure? It's not the question itself that does anything. It's the answer to the question. And what did Dr. Reed say? No, that didn't happen here because none of the x-rays, none of the CAT scans, none of the scanning showed any evidence of asbestos exposure, and he would have been able to see it on the radiology, he would have been able to see it on the scanning, and even testified there were complete scans done in this case, and there was nothing that was showing
on anything to suggest, to suggest asbestos exposure.
And, in fact, one of the medical records in early March talks about the absence of occupational exposure. Well, what about this idea that the defense asked Dr. Reed, well, how about if it originated in some other place in the body, after all it could be a primary mediastinal tumor? What did Dr. Reed say? Yeah, anything could be, but in this case, it wasn't. In this case, it wasn't.
Dr. Reed said 99 percent certainty.
So it's not the questions, it is the answers that these witnesses tell you, and in this case, there is no question that the disease was small cell primary lung cancer from Carol Wendel's extensive smoking history.
What does that mean? Well, we have addiction and we have disease. Well, how did Carol Wendel's addiction cause a disease? How was it a legal cause of her disease? It's simple. Because of her inability to discontinue the cigarettes, the addiction caused the disease.
If she's addicted to smoking and smoking caused the disease, it's the addiction that caused it. If she's addicted to smoking and something
other than smoking caused the disease, well, then, obviously, the addiction didn't cause it. There is the distinction. The woman was compelled to smoke. The years of smoking caused the disease.
So in answer to number 1, I submit based on the evidence that the answer is yes. Yes. That establishes class membership.
Having said that, you will then be entitled to rely on the Engle findings. And let me just put this on the screen for a minute because there are two that are important at this point because you are asked to find legal cause. And one of the findings is that R.J. Reynolds was negligent. And the second finding, at least for this portion, is that R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
How do we prove those claims? By demonstrating to you that the cigarettes that were manufactured by R.J. Reynolds that Carol Wendel smoked caused her lung cancer. And by doing that, we have proved our claims of negligence and we have proved our claim of defective product strict liability.
And how was it, then, that her disease was caused by R.J. Reynolds cigarettes? You heard the
testimony. What does the evidence show? Carol Wendel initially started smoking Chesterfields. Smoked Chesterfields and other cigarettes during this time for not over ten years. You heard evidence that she tried Parliaments, according to her husband, and you heard evidence that she tried and she smoked Pall Malls that happened to be manufactured by R.J. Reynolds.
So in her initiation to smoking, we have Chesterfields, we have Pall Malls, we have Parliament. In total, maybe ten years. For the next 30 years, there is evidence that Carol Wendel smoked one brand of cigarettes, that being Winston filters or Winston Lights, for 30 years.
So the question is, was the 30-year smoking history of R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes a substantial cause of Carol Wendel's disease? And what's the answer? Absolutely. Not just more likely than not. Absolutely.
Why is that? Do you think that the initial ten-year smoking is enough to cause the disease and that the 30 years was nothing? Of course not. Of course not.
And soon you're going to see on one of the exhibits Claude Teague, a research economist from
R.J. Reynolds, even Claude Teague in 1953 wrote 96.1 percent of the smokers he found that had cancer had smoked over 20 years. In this case, you've got 30 years of smoking R.J. Reynolds' products. Actually, over 30 if you consider her smoking Pall Malls for however long she did.
There is no question the first ten years of her smoking history absolutely contributed to her disease because you can't take those puffs away.
But I submit to you that the next 30 years really was ultimately the substantial cause of Carol Wendel's disease.
So in answer to the question, number 2 is going to ask you for legal cause. "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of Carol Wendel's lung cancer and death?" I submit to you based on the evidence the answer is yes.
Now, number 3 and number 4, what's called the reliance, it's the concealment and the conspiracy to conceal. I want to take number 4 first, the conspiracy, because that involves all of the tobacco companies with whom R.J. Reynolds agreed with.
"Did Carol Wendel reasonably rely to her
detriment on any statement in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit material facts regarding the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
And by way of illustration, what's important here, ladies and gentlemen, is we are not dealing with Carol Wendel's attempts or not attempts to quit smoking, which you might feel very well is her fault. What we are here to decide is why she started to smoke. That's the important fact in this case right now. Why did she start, was her decision an informed decision or was it an ill-informed decision as to why she started to smoke. Whether she tried hard enough to quit comes later.
So let's talk about why she started to smoke.
And first of all, when did she start smoking? No one knows the exact date she started smoking, but what we do know is this. When Carol Wendel met her husband to be Charles in 1955, she was a regular smoker of Chesterfields unfiltered cigarettes. A regular smoker who Charles estimated was smoking a pack a day.
Common sense tells you that Carol did not
start smoking the day before she met Charles. Impossible. She had to work up to that pack a day smoking to become a regular smoker. The question then becomes how long did it take her to work up to that period of time where she was smoking a pack a day?
That's up to you to consider based on the evidence. Was it a year? Was it two years? You obviously know that it was not days or weeks for someone to start smoking and develop a smoking routine where she is already up to a pack a day in a week or two. So it very well could have been she started in '54, '53, '55, '52, anytime in that period.
But we do know in 1955, she was already a regular smoker, smoking a pack a day, and it defies logic to suggest that she had recently started smoking at that point.
We also know this. Remember Dr. Proctor, the historian of science, he testified about the tobacco industry, and what did he tell you? He talked about the tobacco companies, their mass marketing efforts, and he told you about the extensive advertising and their extensive marketing of their cigarettes during the '50s and even
before, such that they created a climate where he said cigarettes were normalized. Cigarettes were a part of Americana, where everybody was smoking. And everybody seemed to be smoking for the same reason, because it was the thing to do.
And who at that time knew that smoking was bad? What did Dr. Proctor tell you? People started smoking because of what they were being told and what they were being shown in these beautiful color lithography advertisements that appeared thousands of times in magazines -- in magazines, in print.
And that's why there was this climate created by the tobacco companies, and Dr. Proctor described to you where people could smoke. There were no regulations. People could smoke during the '50s and earlier in hospitals. People could smoke on public transportation. People could smoke in this courthouse in the '50s. People could smoke at colleges and universities. People could smoke in public buildings. People could smoke on airplanes. People could smoke sitting at their desk. People could smoke in department stores. People could smoke in elevators. People could smoke in restaurants.
People could smoke virtually anywhere during this period of time so that it was a normal part of behavior. And who on earth would have thought that smoking at that time was bad?
And remember what Dr. Proctor said, to the extent that there was ever negative information out there in the public domain, it was the advertising and the information being put out by the tobacco companies that were trumping or suppressing that information. That's what Dr. Proctor told you.
So we've got this climate. We've got this period of time where we know Carol started smoking at that -- some point in the early '50s, and we've got the Engle findings. And what do the Engle findings tell you?
Will you put up the findings?
The Engle findings tell you that -- and you may consider, must consider, that R.J. Reynolds agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment.
So from that finding, you've got R.J. Reynolds and other tobacco companies were concealing
material information that they knew, but they weren't telling the public, they weren't telling Carol Wendel.
And instead, they were advertising their product as safe, as glamorous, as pleasurable. Seeing people in all these wonderful situations without telling others that this product is addictive and this product is going to kill you perhaps, that it could cause lung cancer.
And so this is what the Engle findings tell you, that they were, R.J. Reynolds and others, concealing, they were concealing this information.
Now, do you think for a second that Carol Wendel knew when she started smoking, wherever it was in the early '50s, that cigarettes could cause cancer, that cigarettes were addictive? There is not one shred of evidence that Carol Wendel knew in 1953 anything about cigarettes, 1954 anything about cigarettes, 1955 anything about cigarettes, nothing. You've not heard any evidence that she knew anything about the bad effects of smoking, about the addictive nature of smoking.
Do you think for a minute that Carol Wendel knew in the early '50s, when she started smoking, do you think she knew that the cigarettes she was
going to smoke had carbon monoxide in the smoke? Do you think she knew that they had arsenic in the smoke? Do you think she knows that those cigarettes that she knew had radioactive plutonium?
Do you think for a minute she knew that? Of course not. But you know who did? R.J. Reynolds and other tobacco companies do and they didn't tell anybody. They didn't tell anybody.
And why was that? Why was that? Because they were marketing their product so people would start smoking their cigarettes and continue to smoke their cigarettes for a long time. And Robert Heimann, who was the chief executive officer and president of American Tobacco, which then became R.J. Reynolds, so R.J. Reynolds is responsible for his statements, Robert Heimann, you listened when we played the deposition, what did Robert Heimann tell you?
Remember he was talking about Pall Mall ads, and he was saying the whole purpose of spending millions and millions of dollars on advertisement is so people will buy the product. And he was saying, yes, they hope and they expect that the public, like Carol Wendel, will rely on their ads in the hopes that they will buy their product and
smoke, and smoke lots, and continue to buy cigarettes, like he said, they encourage people to smoke.
So it doesn't matter to him if someone smokes a pack a day, two packs a day, or what have you. What matters is that their advertising campaign is successful in getting people like Carol Wendel to smoke.
And we know that Carol Wendel was exposed to this 50-year denialist campaign. Remember Dr. Proctor telling you about their campaign to create doubt, their campaign to make it look like they were doing all of this research on smoking and health when they did everything but. All designed for one thing, so that people would still be reassured to not put down their cigarette, but keep on smoking. And they did that for 50 years.
And we have evidence that Carol was exposed to that denialist campaign. Why? Because her own daughter Charlene, what did she say? When she would have a conversation, conversations with her mother in the '70s, when her mother said, you know, on the one hand, you're reading about the Surgeon General's Report, and on the other hand, the tobacco companies are telling you it's not bad, who
do you believe?
Can you blame her? Can you blame her if she chose to believe what the tobacco companies are telling her? Can you really blame her for that?
And I submit you can't.
Remember Dr. Proctor telling you 250 billion, not million, billion dollars spent on advertising over a 50-year period. Now, can you blame someone for believing what they were hearing about those cigarettes?
And so it's the initiation of smoking. We know Carol was exposed to that denialist campaign. We know she was exposed to their advertising because she would talk to her daughter when she first started Chesterfields -- and remember, it doesn't matter if she first started smoking an R.J. Reynolds brand, it doesn't matter what brand it was because tobacco companies got together and agreed this is what we're going to do, we're going to create this doubt, we're going to create reassurance in the doubt, in the public, so that people will continue to smoke, and they did this together.
Remember? They met at the Plaza Hotel on December 14th, 1953, and they all got together and
decided this is what we're going to do. It's not a matter of the health of the public. It's not a matter of the safety of the public. It's a matter of their bottom dollar. That's what it was. And they were very successful over a 50-year period of time.
And so Carol talked about the ads. And she talked about the beauty associated with Chesterfields. And she talked about the athleticism associated with Chesterfields. And we know she watched the Flintstones with her daughter, which was on in 1960, and she saw the commercials for the Winston cigarettes during that time.
And we also know that at some point, Carol switched to a filtered cigarette. Why would she switch to a filtered cigarette? Well, remember, the tobacco companies, when this scare happened in the early '50s about this link between cancer and smoking, they decided that they were going to start advertising big time filtered cigarettes, which up to that time were not popular at all. People were smoking unfiltered cigarettes.
And all of a sudden, the tobacco companies start advertising filtered cigarettes as somehow safer. The filter is going to take out all these
bad things.
And Dr. Proctor, remember he testified, you can't filter smoke. It was a speed bump, just took a little longer for the smoke to get through the filter. Filters were a fraud. Filters were advertised as a way of convincing people like Carol Wendel to smoke without stopping, because now you have an alternative, a safer cigarette. That happened later.
We also know that Carol switched to light cigarettes. Why did she switch to light cigarettes? Because there was this push by the tobacco industry to start talking about cigarettes that were light in tar, low in tar, low in nicotine.
And Dr. Proctor told you, well, yeah, they were on these machine-yield robots, they were all very low in tar and nicotine, but the problem was people smoke cigarettes differently, and it really made no difference.
The fact that the cigarettes were advertised as light cigarettes wasn't true because they really weren't light, it depended on how people smoked. And people had a level of nicotine that they had to attain, so that meant nothing.
So when you take all of these factors here, what does it tell you? Do you think for a minute that maybe Carol Wendel did rely on what she was being told by the cigarette companies when she started smoking?
After all, if this climate was created to where everybody was doing the same thing because it was normal and everybody was smoking because this was a normal behavior and it was glamorized in the movies, your favorite actor and actresses were smoking on screen, your favorite athletes were pitching the product on TV day in and day out, your favorite athlete was pitching the product in magazine ads, these beautiful colored ads, your favorite actors and actresses were pitching their products on TV, on radio shows, in ads in newspapers and magazines, your favorite actors and actresses, they were sponsoring TV shows, they were doing commercials during their TV shows, you could not help but see these ads during this time.
So the question is, what was it that caused Carol Wendel to start smoking? And I submit to you it was the information with which she was inundated by the tobacco companies working together to ensure that people would start smoking, to ensure that
people would buy their message, to ensure that people would look at their ads to see -- look at all these beautiful people in wonderful situations extolling the virtue of that rod and taking up smoking because everyone did it. That's the reliance.
And then the question is what's legal cause? The legal cause is this. Do you think if maybe Carol Wendel, before she started smoking, before she started smoking her first cigarette, do you think if the tobacco companies had told her, look, this is what we know, cigarettes are dangerous, they can cause cancer, they can become addictive, and they have a whole bunch of chemicals you probably want to know about because you might not want to touch these things if you knew they had arsenic in it, that carbon monoxide is in the smoke, that radioactive plutonium is in the smoke, do you think Carol Wendel, before she started smoking, if she heard this information it might have changed her mind about smoking in the first place?
Do you think if the public, as it says in the Engle findings, do you think if the public had been made knowledgeable about all of this information
that was being withheld from them, do you think maybe the climate would have been different in that time and it might be more like it is today where people are shunning cigarettes instead of smoking cigarettes, instead of countless people starting cigarettes {sic} like it was then, maybe you would have much less starting like today.
If the climate were different when Carol Wendel was lured into smoking, if the climate were different and she had been advised of the information that was withheld from her, I submit to you she would not have smoked.
Why do I say that? Because the defense wants you to consider, on numerous occasions they've asked witnesses, well, wasn't Carol Wendel intelligent, wasn't she smart, wasn't she independent, and everyone to a T said yes, she was.
Well, they can't walk away from that now. She was intelligent, she was smart, she was knowledgeable. Do you think when you put those traits together, you've got a smart woman, a knowledgeable woman, an independent woman, and given all of this information, had she really known the truth, you think maybe she wouldn't have started smoking?
And I submit to you, maybe, just maybe, she wouldn't have, more likely than not she wouldn't have. And if she had been smoking, she wouldn't yet be addicted so that she could have easily put the cigarettes down and walked away.
That's what legal cause means on the conspiracy. And the conspiracy encompasses all the tobacco companies and it encompasses the Tobacco Institute and the Council for Tobacco Research.
They were all working together to mislead the public into smoking their cigarettes. And the same rings true for reliance on R.J. Reynolds.
So in answer to number 4, first of all, on the agreement, I submit to you the answer is yes.
Back to number 3, which just asks about reliance on R.J. Reynolds. "Did Carol Wendel reasonably rely to her detriment on any statement made by R.J. Reynolds which concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to her concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" And I submit to you based on everything I told you about the conspiracy, the answer is yes.
And in addition, we have the two extra
factors. Carol smoked Winston filters. And remember when Charles was telling her in 1964 about what he learned from the Surgeon General's Report, Carol Wendel at that time would have had that information. Whether she believed it or not is another thing. At least she had that information from Charles.
And what happened? In 1965, she started smoking Winston filters, Winston filters, as an alternative, they were advertising their product as safe, they were trying to convince people you do not need to stop, you could smoke a safer cigarette. And what did Carol do? She started smoking what she thought was a safer cigarette, much to her chagrin.
And what else? When this big push for light cigarettes was coming out and was being advertised by the tobacco companies, including R.J. Reynolds, Carol chose to smoke Winston Lights as an alternative to quitting, which is exactly what the tobacco companies, including R.J. Reynolds, wanted her to do.
Now, they can't come up here and say Carol Wendel shouldn't have believed us. That wouldn't make sense. She was doing what she was being asked
to do by R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies.
And so reliance, with respect to R.J.
Reynolds, I submit to you based on the evidence, that question's answer is yes.
So we come to the issue of comparative fault.
It is your job as jurors to apportion fault between Carol Wendel and R.J. Reynolds in this case. And just by illustration, let's just talk about some of the internal confidential documents of the tobacco companies and see how that relates to fault.
In 1953 -- and that's Exhibit 31, I put the numbers on here in case you want to review these documents. In 1953, Claude Teague, who was a bench chemist at R.J. Reynolds, did a survey where he looked at all of the research that had been going on up to date, and he wrote this survey to the people at his company.
And he concluded in the survey, among other things, that 96.1 of patients with cancer of the lungs who had a history of smoking had smoked for over 20 years, remember legal cause about the cigarettes, over 20 years, not just ten, and his conclusion was that the studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and
prolonged tobacco smoking and incidence of cancer of the lung.
1953. Before the tobacco companies got together, R.J. Reynolds knew this information and likely knew it before, because Dr. Proctor told you they were monitoring these studies, they knew who Angel Roffo was and they were monitoring that.
And we have verification in December of 1953 when the tobacco companies got together in the Plaza Hotel in New York. And from that meeting we saw the forwarding memo, and that forwarding memo suggested, demonstrated that the research directors of the various companies were well aware that their products could cause cancer and that their products were addictive. This was substantiated in 1953.
Now, this information was known to these companies, R.J. Reynolds included, in 1953. Did they share that information with the public and Carol Wendel at that time? And we know the answer is absolutely not.
Do you think for a second that's Carol Wendel's fault? Do you think for a second that you can blame Carol Wendel for the decision made by R.J. Reynolds not to share their knowledge of the health risk and addictive nature of their
cigarettes? That fault, ladies and gentlemen, from the evidence is on them.
And so instead of sharing that knowledge with the public and Carol Wendel, what choice did they make? The choice they made was to issue their Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers. Dr. Proctor pointed out to you the number of misleading statements in that document as well as the downright lies.
And what did he tell you? He told you that this Frank Statement, you can see, they were pledging to aid and render assistance to the research effort. They put safety at paramount importance. They were truly worried about the consumers.
And we know that was poppycock. We know that this Tobacco Industry Research Committee was set up as an industry shield. The tobacco companies knew it then, including R.J. Reynolds, and they knew it 20 years later. They were going to devote themselves to research efforts into everything but smoking and health.
And why? To satisfy the public that they were doing research on the issue of smoking and health so people like Carol Wendel would continue to
smoke. Is that Carol's fault? Absolutely not.
What else do we have?
Jumping to 1964, remember the Surgeon General's Report came out, and that was incredibly important news. Dr. Proctor said the news stations broke into programming to announce what the findings were by the Surgeon General and how important it was. This was a major news story.
And what was the evidence? Well, the Surgeon General's report was a portent of things to come. That was the labeling, the warnings on cigarettes.
And what did you hear? There was a concerted effort by the cigarette companies, including R.J. Reynolds, to lobby Congress so that the truth wouldn't be told in the warnings that were going to be placed on the cigarettes. And what was it that happened as a result of the lobbying efforts of the tobacco industry, the lobbying arm of the tobacco companies?
As a result of their lobbying Congress, the first warnings that were to be placed on the cigarettes in 1966 weren't even warnings at all, they were cautions. These cautions weren't even endorsed by the Surgeon General. And so the first caution you get on the cigarette packages say
merely "Caution: Cigarettes may be hazardous to your health."
Now, how do you think an addicted smoker interpreted that statement? You're not defining hazardous, so who knows what that means. And they're being told on these cautions that smoking might be hazardous. Well, it might not be. And that's the first caution that went on the cigarette.
And the FTC report in 1967, which is Exhibit 226A, speaks about the warnings and speaks about the ads. And feel free to pull that and read some of these sections in there. You're going to see, what were they saying about the warnings? There is virtually no evidence that the warning statements on cigarette packages has had any significant effect. If cigarette sales were viewed as an index of the effectiveness of the warning statement, one finds that in '66, more cigarettes were sold than ever before.
Motivations for smoking, physiologically, psychologically, sociologically are complex and a mere reminder of the hazards on the cigarette package cannot compete with the forces that promote cigarette smoking.
And they go on talking about how it says strong, habit forming, and that little caution is not going to have an effect. And you can read the excerpts of the FTC report, and it tells you basically that a person would have to live in a cave not to have seen all the advertising going on during this time.
The research and planning memo, this is another memo written by Claude Teague. They were happy, they were downright giddy that they knew their product was addicting people. That's what they wanted.
Not only were they giddy at the suggestion that the product was addictive and causing people to want to keep smoking, but what did they do? Somehow they must convince people with wholly irrational reasons to take up smoking, so what? So they'll become addicted. So they'll become addicted.
That was the strategy in 1972. And you can see it in their internal documents. They were elated that people were going to be smoking their products for a long time because they recognized they wouldn't be able to quit because they were going to be addicted, and that's what they did to
make sure they were going to get addicted, give them irrational reasons to start smoking, which is exactly what they did, through their beautiful advertising campaign.
There was a meeting of the Council For Tobacco Research in 1972. And what came out of that meeting? What was already known, is that people smoke cigarettes not for the taste, not for the enjoyment, for the nicotine. Smoke is beyond question the most optimized vehicle of nicotine and the cigarette the most optimized dispenser of smoke.
1972 Roper proposal, almost 20 years after their strategy was employed, what does the tobacco company say? Their strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed. And what did it consist of? Creating doubt, encouraging objective scientific research that they knew was going to relate nothing to smoking and health.
But they were patting themselves on the back talking about 20 years later their strategy was wonderful because they were convincing people to continue to smoke and not to stop.
And not only were they happy at the prospect of people smoking for nicotine and becoming
addicted, R.J. Reynolds wanted to do more, they wanted to experiment with ammonia added to their cigarettes so that would even make the nicotine more of a kick.
It would cause it -- remember Dr. Proctor talked about freebasing nicotine. So the nicotine would be in free form, which is absorbed quicker by the smoker and the smoker gets a kick. So you could actually have a cigarette with less nicotine, but you get the effect of a cigarette with more nicotine. That's what they wanted to do.
In 1978, in a confidential document, all of these people that were meeting together from the tobacco companies, R.J. Reynolds included, what were they told?
The Tobacco Industry Research Council was set up as an industry shield, like Dr. Proctor said, a shield for the truth. They were not going to do research into smoking and health. They were going to dupe the public into thinking that's what they were doing. Just like the special projects. The CTR has acted as a front. The CTR was a spin-off of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee. It was a front. It was a distraction. It was to conceal and be a shield for the truth.
The Nordine study, 1982, Claude Teague again. What does he recognize?
"Many but not most people are able to stop." Many but not most. They recognize that. And they recognize that smoking cessation aids were not far off. And what did they realize that if smoking cessation aids came to be developed? If that was going to happen, they were going to go out of business.
Why? Because people don't smoke for any other reason than the nicotine. And if they were going to have smoking cessation aids, they were going to be able to quit. And the companies would go out of business. So what do they want to do? Find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers to stop smoking. That was their strategy.
And what else did you hear? Remember the executives and the representatives, Anne Browder on the behalf of the -- on the Tobacco Institute, she's on television talking about smoking, and they don't believe that it causes cancer.
The Waxman hearings in 1994, all of the company executives, R.J. Reynolds included, under oath before Congress, they certainly had a right to testify, just not to lie. And what do they all do,
one by one, it is not addictive, nicotine is not addictive, nicotine is not addictive.
They were asked the same question about their product and the dangers of health. And each one to a man said the same thing, we do not think our product is dangerous to health. Under oath to Congress in 1994, it wasn't until 2000, according to Dr. Proctor, that they for the first time said their product was addictive and it caused disease, including cancer. That's in 2000.
And so there is a series of questions that I want to pose to you to see if they're answered during the summation by the defense. And I submit to you they will not be answered, because if they are answered, they will have to acknowledge that they have fault in this case.
So for example, and this is very high, one of these questions is why does R.J. Reynolds fail to address their statements made in their confidential internal documents? You listen when they get up here to make their closing argument, do you think for a minute they're going to talk about all their statements?
Do you think they're going to address Claude Teague saying that happily, people smoke and get
addicted? Happily nicotine is addictive? Do you think they are going to address statements about the TIRC being a sham? Do you think they're going to address all their statements they made in their confidential memo? And the answer is absolutely not.
Why? Because they'll have to acknowledge that at the time Carol Wendel started smoking, it was their fault because of the statements they were making, because of the strategy they employed.
They won't acknowledge that. They won't come up here and talk about their statements in their memos, they just won't do it.
Why does R.J. Reynolds act as if they don't exist? What do I mean by that? Well, they want to talk through Dr. Proctor about all of this information that was out in the public domain, all of this information that was available about the health risks of smoking, they showed you Reader's Digest, they showed you articles written by a punchdrunk boxer about the health effects of smoking, all of these articles over a 40-year period that included probably 15 to 20,000 articles, 30 of which might have dealt with smoking and health. But these were in the public domain,
so it must be that everyone knew about it.
And the newspaper carried articles about the health risk of smoking, so it must be, according to the defense, that everybody knew about it, despite Dr. Proctor saying that the tobacco companies were able to suppress all that information.
So the reason that R.J. Reynolds acts as if they don't exist is because they don't want to talk about the other information, they don't want to talk about what their response was.
Do you think they are going to get up here and discuss with you their white papers that they sent out to 200 or 300,000 people? Do you think they are going to get up and talk about their newsletters to hundreds of thousands of people saying lung cancer is more prevalent in bald men, lung cancer is more prevalent in people who were born in March? Do you think they are going to talk to you about that?
Do you think they're going to talk to you about their strategy employed by their executives who would appear in press releases, on television, on news shows talking about, "If we find anything bad in our cigarettes, we'll close shop"? "If we find anything bad in our cigarettes, we'll take it
out," knowing full well they couldn't?
Do you think they're going to talk about that? Absolutely not. They cannot address that, because by doing, so they have to admit their fault.
That's not Carol Wendel's fault. When R.J. Reynolds knew by the '50s that cigarette smoking contained carcinogens, cancer-causing agents, why did they choose not to tell the American public?
Do you think the defense is going to address that issue with you?
Are they going to get up and stand before you and say, look, this is why we didn't tell you all that our stuff can kill you? Of course they're not going to do that. Because they realize that's their fault, not Carol Wendel's. But listen to see if they do. Listen. And when they don't, what does it mean? They're at fault. Simple.
When they knew by the 1950s that nicotine was an addictive drug, why did they choose not to tell the American public? They knew at this time.
Carol Wendel didn't. The public didn't. Why didn't they tell people by that time? See if they address you and come up here and say, look, this is why we didn't tell people.
Do you think they are going to say we didn't
know? Well, their own internal documents belie that. You think they're going to say, look, we didn't, and let me tell you why we didn't. We were just too concerned for the health and safety of the community. Of course not.
And when they don't address this, you'll know why, because this is their fault, not Carol Wendel's. And we don't take responsibility for it.
We will not, we shall not, and we don't, for any of this. I'm sorry.
Why did R.J. Reynolds fail to tell the Surgeon General what they knew about their cigarettes? When the Surgeon General came out, they didn't speak in terms of addiction, but the cigarette companies, including R.J. Reynolds, knew their product was addictive.
They knew their product was addictive -- had an addictive drug in it, a potent, dangerous drug. They didn't share that with the Surgeon General, and the Surgeon General thanked them. They want you to know that they got thanked.
Well, maybe if they had told the Surgeon General about their addictive nature of their tobacco, he would have thanked them a bunch, but they didn't do that. Why didn't they do that?
Do you think that's Carol Wendel's fault that they didn't share that information with the Surgeon General, information they had and Carol didn't? Of course not. See if they address that when they come up here.
Why did they decide to lobby Congress for this watered-down caution that appeared on the cigarettes in 1966? So that they could conceal the truth about what they really knew. Why do you think that?
And yet they're going to get up here and say, well, this is why we lobbied Congress and this is why we didn't want a strong warning. Of course not. And when they don't do it, what does it mean?
It means they are at fault, not Carol. While professing to accept an interest in people's health and cooperating with those tasked with safeguarding the public health.
When the Surgeon General did issue his report, why did they ridicule it? Why did they publicly ridicule it and say the Surgeon General is misguided, the Surgeon General is making a ridiculous conclusion? The Surgeon General had thanked them. Why are they ridiculing him?
See if they respond to that when they come up
and talk to you and address the question of why they ridiculed the Surgeon General's Report. They knew the information was true, but they didn't tell the public.
Why did R.J. Reynolds respond to the strong evidence linking cigarettes to cancer, which they already knew, with a campaign designed to create doubt about the health risk and addictive nature of cigarettes for the next 50 years?
Do you think they were concerned so much with health and safety that's why they did it? Or do you think they all got together because they were realizing that their stocks were suffering and their bottom dollar was suffering and they needed to make a way to keep people smoking so their profits would be boosted?
Now, see if they address that when they come before you and acknowledge why they did it. See if they answer that question and come up here and say, look, this is why we had this campaign of denial for 50 years.
They won't do it. Why? Because that's their fault. That's their fault. This is not by accident. This is by intention. This is a conscious decision, not something that happened by
accident. This is a conscious decision that ignored the health and safety of the community because it was their bottom dollar that they were worried about.
Did R.J. Reynolds want Carol Wendel to believe their message about more research being needed, no proof that cigarettes were dangerous, bad things would be removed in cigarettes if they were found and they would close their business if it was found that their cigarettes were dangerous to health?
Do you think they wanted Carol to believe that? Do you think they wanted her to continue to rely on these beautiful advertisements that weren't talking about what was really wrong with their cigarettes and what their cigarettes had in them?
Of course they did. Of course they did. But see how they address that when they speak to you and see if they come up and say, look, this is what we wanted to have Carol think when we did this.
They're not going to address it because they can't because it acknowledges fault.
When R.J. Reynolds, why did they continue to use flue-cured tobacco when they knew their cigarettes caused cancer? Why couldn't they just use other tobacco that would not make tobacco
inhalable? If it wasn't inhalable, there would be no lung cancer. Why didn't they do it in the '50s when they knew?
That's not Carol's fault. See what they tell you when they come up here why they didn't use non-flue-cured tobacco, why they didn't make their cigarettes non-inhalable at this time.
We know the answer. The answer is they wanted to sell cigarettes and they wanted people to bathe their lungs with that smoke that contained carcinogens and nicotine so they would get addicted and continue to smoke for a long, long, long time.
See if they address that when they get up here, you know.
If only in the '50s they had made their cigarettes un-inhalable you think Carol Wendel would have gotten lung cancer? You think she would have smoked because she loved that cigarette?
If Carol Wendel believed R.J. Reynolds' denialist messages, is she blameworthy? Can you blame her for buying into their campaign that lasted 50 years that even they said was brilliantly conceived and executed?
And then we need to look at Carol's fault.
Did she try hard enough to quit? Did Carol lie?
Did Carol act with contempt? Did Carol mislead?
Did Carol conceal? Did Carol do any of that the tobacco companies did in order to get her to smoke? And the answer is, of course, no. No.
So what's her only fault, if any? She didn't try hard enough to quit. That's it. But you know what, remember she's addicted. She is addicted at this time.
And even RJR and the other tobacco companies knew something. What did they know? "The entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We can't defend smoking as free choice when a person is addicted."
Now, they got her addicted. They got, R.J. Reynolds, they got her, the other tobacco companies, when they got together to agree to do what they did, they all got her addicted because they all wanted her to smoke their product and they glamorized their product and they wanted her to be addicted.
Can they now say that's her fault because she didn't try hard enough to quit once we got her addicted and once they know they can't argue choice once someone is addicted? Really, can you really
see that that's her fault?
But if you want to put fault on her, you know what you should do? Just consider how did the cigarette companies act? How did R.J. Reynolds act? They acted with intent. They acted with disregard for the health and safety of people like Carol Wendel.
Do you think they cared about her? Or did they care about their profits? Do you think they cared when they wanted people to continue smoking instead of stopping, knowing full well they could get cancer and die, do you really think that?
They wanted their money. They wanted sales from cigarettes, they wanted their stock prices to rise, they wanted to make their shareholders happy to the expense of the public and Carol Wendel.
That's acting with disregard. That's acting with intent.
Why did they lie to people? Why did they go before Congress and take an oath and lie? Why were they telling people they were going to do all this research knowing they weren't? See, that's misleading. That's concealing. That's lying.
Did Carol do any of that? I submit to you, based on all of their acts in this case, they are
ten times at fault than Carol is, ten times. So what does that mean? If you attribute any fault to her, put 91 percent on tobacco and RJR and 9 percent on Carol. Give her 9 percent. Blame her for not trying hard enough to quit, despite her addiction being caused by R.J. Reynolds. Do it.
I want to talk now about damages. In this case, what does Charles Wendel want? He does not want your sympathy, and the jury instructions the judge read to you, you are not to consider this case with sympathy in mind. You are to consider this case and decide this case on the merits and based on the evidence, and that's what we want you to do.
There is no question this is an emotional case. The suffering, the cancer, it's sad anyway, but we don't want sympathy. What do we want? We want what the law entitles us, and that's compensation.
Charles Wendel wants to be compensated for the loss of his wife, and he is entitled to be compensated under our system that we have. And what he wants is called compensation for non-economic damages, non-economic damages, pain and suffering and loss of the companionship his
wife.
How do you quantify that? When the judge read you the instructions, there is no formula that you've gotten in the instructions to be able to apply and come out with an amount. But I could suggest something to you and I'm going to do that to help you, to aid you. And I'm going to suggest that you base your dollar -- your damages amount based on units of time.
And what do I mean by that? We all have watches on because we're so driven by time, everybody is. We do everything by the minutes, by the hour. Everything is regulated by time. People get their hours of sleep at night. People go and do their eight to ten hours of work in the daytime. People have to be somewhere at a certain time. I had a certain amount of time in my closing argument. We are all driven by units of time.
You saw in this case an expert witness,
Dr. Abramson, he's paid $600 an hour for his time. He earns it, he prepares, he gets on the stand, he's asked questions, he answers questions, he tells you what he did, he's on the stand for three or four hours, that's 18 to $2,400 that he has earned, and he leaves and goes on his way. Made
his $600 an hour, that was the wage that he was assigned, that he commands for his testimony.
And you can see that's -- people are paid by the hour. That's the way people -- that's the way we pay people in this society. And all you have to do is read the newspapers to see, there is some people like athletes that make astronomical amounts of money. And other people make, what, $10 an hour is minimum wage.
But the bottom line is that regardless of what people make, they do their job, they try to do their job well, they get done with their job, they make their money, and they go on their way.
And so in a sense, Charles Wendel, based on this evidence as you saw, he got a job. And his job was given to him by R.J. Reynolds when his wife got sick from the cigarettes that she smoked and died. And the job that Charles Wendel got was to watch his wife with this terrible disease suffer and die.
And that's what he wants to be compensated for. He wants to be compensated for having to go through that suffering for having to watch his wife die. And you heard the evidence in this case.
Where is the picture?
Lest you forget, this was a living person.
That's Carol and Charles Wendel in earlier days, smoking a cigarette. There is Carol Wendel, obviously on the beach smoking a cigarette. And that's Carol Wendel as she was going through the treatment. This was in December of '95, several months before she died.
You heard the evidence. This is an insidious, horrendous disease that was caused by her smoking cigarettes. And you heard that Charles went to virtually every one of her treatments. And each one of those treatments, she would go home and she would become sick and she would be bedridden from the treatment.
And Charles never in a million years thought that this was ever going to happen. Charles and his wife had moved to Florida because they had retired and they wanted to enjoy the rest of their life in Florida in retirement.
And little did he ever expect that on this day in March of 1995, his wife would go get an x-ray because she wanted to take this diet pill and the x-ray showed a spot on her lung that was diagnosed ultimately as small cell lung cancer and from then things just went downhill and they went downhill
pretty fast you heard. Where Carol had this aggressive therapy of chemotherapy and radiation, and each time she had the therapy, she would get sick, she would have to lay in bed.
And Charles testified about this progression in her health, this progression where she was losing weight each time. Each time of the treatment, she was losing weight. She could not eat, she had no appetite.
You heard that the radiation treatments were burning her esophagus to where she could hardly swallow because of the pain. And so her life was just going to get treated, going home for bedrest, and you heard Charles talk about this to where eventually it got to the point where he would have to carry her into the bathroom and clean her up and bathe her. Something that a husband or a spouse would never want to go through. That was certainly not his choice.
Charles Wendel didn't apply for this job, he didn't ask for this job. That was the last thing on his mind that he would be tasked with having to watch his wife get sick from cigarettes and ultimately die because of that.
And that's a full-time, 24-hour-a-day job,
because Charles Wendel was lost -- losing the companionship of his wife because she was no longer becoming a person, she was just someone who was sick.
And each time the treatments, each time she got worse and worse and was dwindling away. You know it sticks out through the testimony, you hear these people remember certain things. What did Charles tell you? She was like a skeleton she had lost so much weight.
What else did he tell you? He talked about the stench, the stench of death, the stench of rotting skin. Remember he talked about that?
That's something that sticks out in his memory when he's going through this.
You know what else? He was talking about he remembers this one day this clump of hair was blowing out of her scalp. That's something to this day that he recalls. You heard how he testified about that.
And ultimately, Carol's condition got to the point where she basically was nonresponsive. She was hallucinating. Remember Charlene talking about she would call up, she thought the television was talking to her. This is real. This is not made
up.
And finally, when there was recurrence and that the cancer was all over her lungs, remember what the testimony was, she asked the doctor, she goes, "Look, what would you do if I was your mother? What would you recommend?"
And the doctor said, "You know what, I would tell my mother just to go home and relax." And she did that and she died a week later.
And Charles told you the circumstances under which she did pass away. She died in his arms.
And he has that remembrance forever. And to this day, even Charles -- you know, he got married three years later.
That's something that Charles never wished, he never thought the day would come when he would have a new wife, where he would be in a new relationship, he would have a new family. And he's happy 15 years later being married to this woman.
But you know what, he still doesn't forget he was married to this woman, Carol Wendel, for 40 years.
And he has incredible memories from that relationship because he loved her.
And even to this day, according to Sylvia, his wife, they don't bring up that subject because if
they do, he still gets emotional. And you saw him on the stand how emotional he got just talking about his wife. This is a wife he was married to for 40 years. Those memories don't go away.
And so he endured that suffering and he wants to be compensated for that suffering. And the way I've done it is to break it down. How much is that suffering worth? Now, I would submit to you that if Charles had the chance, if he -- by chance, if he could get his wife back, he would take it and he would run out of here, but that doesn't happen.
Our system allows compensation. That's why we're here.
And so what I've done is I've broken compensation down from the 13 months that Charles had to watch his wife with lung cancer suffer and
die,	which I submit to you is just -- what kind of wage, what kind of price can be put on something like that, watching your wife die? No one should have to go through that.
And so I have given you by way of suggestion different computations. I say suggestion. You are free to accept this method of calculation, you are free to accept parts of it, you are free to just decide you want to do your own calculation, or you
might hear a better one from the defense and you might say I like that better. So whatever you want to do, mine is offered just as a suggestion.
And if we could put up -- and if we could start with the 13 months of suffering to death.
This is the second part.
We're going to have two that we've broken it down to. The first one is the 13-month period of time that she had the cancer until her death, which was from March of 1995 until April of 1996. And you can see, at some point today we'll get up the figures, you can see based on a $600 an hour, which is a low range -MR. BAYUK: Your Honor.
MR. KAISER: -- for 24 hours -MR. BAYUK: Improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled. Overruled.
MR. KAISER: At 395 days, which is 13 months, equals $5,688,000. The next range is $800 an hour for the same time period, which is 7,584,000. The high range at a thousand dollars an hour times 24 hours times the same amount of days, 9,480,000. Again, this is for the 13 months that he saw his wife go through this horrendous disease because of her cigarettes that gave her the cancer. That's 13
months.
He has lived since that time of Carol's death 18 years. 18 years later. Now, does he still suffer today? Obviously, not as much as he did during that 13 months. But you know what he's lost? He has still lost that companionship where he never expected her to go first. Where he never expected to be without Carol even to today.
Thankfully, he's happy in a relationship with his new wife, but he still doesn't have the companionship of the wife to whom he was with for 40 years and expected to be with her then and expected to be with her now and expected to be with her in the future. And for that loss of companionship, he should be compensated at a wage or a price far less than watching her endure her suffering, I submit.
And so based on this death to today, which is
18	years, if you start at a low range, $10 an hour for this time period of 18 years, that's 1,576,800.
If you go to the middle range of $15 an hour for his loss of companionship for this 18 years, you arrive at a figure of 2,365,200. If you to go a high range of $20 an hour for his loss of companionship over this 18-year period, it's
3,553,600.
And so when you add up just till today the total amount from the low range, mid range, and high range, the summary is the low range is a total of 7,264,800, the mid range is 9,949,200, and the high range is 12,643,080. That's the system that I think is appropriate under the circumstances and the evidence in this case. As I said, you could accept it or do what you wish.
Now, one last thing when I'm talking about damages. This is compensatory damages. This is to compensate Charles for his loss.
You're going to be asked to decide whether or not Charles -- whether or not the tobacco company, R.J. Reynolds, should be punished, entitlement to punitive damages. And let me just put some things here by way of demonstrative as to what we have proven that entitles the imposition of punitive damages against R.J. Reynolds in this case.
And what have we proven to you? What have we proven about their conduct, their intentional conduct, their reckless disregard for the health and safety of others?
Number one, that they knew about the health risk of smoking their product, they knew full well,
and they chose not to tell the public and Carol Wendel. That is a matter of intent, not accident.
That's willfulness. That was done on purpose.
Number two, by their own documents, R.J. Reynolds wanted smokers to become addicted to their cigarettes. They wanted smokers to become addicted so they would be longtime smokers of their cigarettes. Why? Because more money from sales of cigarettes. That's intention. That is not mistake. That's not accident. That is intention to the disregard of the public and Carol Wendel.
They advertised their filter and light cigarettes as safer knowing that they were no more safe than unfiltered and regular cigarettes. And why did they do that? They did that so people like Carol Wendel would be lulled into this security that they were going to be able to switch to a safer cigarette given the health issues that were in -- that were out there at the time.
And so the tobacco companies, R.J. Reynolds, instead of allowing people that maybe wanted to quit, maybe wanted to try and quit, lulled them into this safety of smoking a filtered or a light cigarette.
And that's what people like Carol Wendel did,
much to their chagrin, because the filters weren't safe and the light cigarettes weren't safe and they knew it. That's intent. That's not accident.
That's not a mistake. That was a conscious decision that they made so that people wouldn't stop smoking.
Remember what I showed you, the one internal document. With smoking cessation aids coming into existence, what's that going to do? They were sure it was going to put them out of business. So what was their response? Let's convince smokers not to stop.
They engaged in this agreement, a conspiracy with other tobacco companies to create doubt about the health risk and addictive nature of their cigarettes. That was a conscious decision to meet on December 14th, 1953 at the Plaza Hotel. That wasn't happenstance, that wasn't an accident, that was on purpose to respond to the negative information that was out in the public.
And what did Dr. Proctor tell you? They were successful in suppressing this negative information about their product, and they themselves told you in their memos, in their internal memos that you've now seen, that their strategy was brilliantly
conceived and executed.
That's not accident. That's not mistake.
That's an intention to convince people to continue to smoke their cigarettes so they could line their pockets with money.
They lied to the public about the health risks of smoking. You saw in 1994 the Waxman hearings. They lied to the public about nicotine not being addictive. They never came out and admitted it. They lied. That's their conduct. They lied to the public and people like Carol Wendel.
They lied to the public about their advertising campaigns, because while they were advertising this glamorousness associated with their products, this satisfaction about their products in the early '50s, were they telling consumers this really isn't true, there are serious health consequences if you smoke this, and there is addiction problems if you smoke? They didn't do that. That's their intention. That's not design by accident or mistake.
And Carol Wendel and countless other people died because of intentional acts done by R.J. Reynolds. There is no mistake about it,
Dr. Proctor talked about the number of people that
died.
If only, if only R.J. Reynolds and others in the 1950s had decided let's don't make our cigarettes inhalable, so that they won't be able to bathe their lungs with carcinogens and get cancer, just think how many people would have been saved. Just think, when they knew in the '50s that their product was addictive, they had the wherewithal and ability to take enough nicotine out so people could smoke and not get addicted. And they didn't do it.
All of these are examples, are facts that you heard that entitle, that entitle the imposition of punitive damages against R.J. Reynolds.
Now, this is a different standard. And I submit to you that we have proven by clear and convincing evidence that entitlement, that punitive damages are warranted in this case. All you have to do is consider the behavior in which they engaged, their intentional acts, their misleading the public, their lying to the public, their deceiving the public, their disregard for human safety because of their profit, because of their desire to make money.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, I ask you, consider the testimony in this case, consider the
evidence, feel free to look at all of these exhibits that have been offered into evidence. And
I	ask you that based on all of this evidence and all of this testimony, you compensate Charles Wendel for the loss of his wife, for his pain and suffering, for the loss of companionship.
Thank you.



MR. KAISER: All right, thank you.
I	will promise to be brief. And I want to start just with addiction and go through each and every step of the way like I did the first time, but in a much shorter order.
You know, the judge, when he read the instructions, you notice there is no definition of addiction. You didn't see, you didn't hear any definition of addiction. It's not a magical concept. It's something you are going to be to able to decide. And let me just help you with a couple of things here.
A lot of this is using common sense based on the facts. This is a woman who you heard could not sit through a movie without smoking in the lobby.
A decision made to go see a movie to enjoy it with whomever she was with, but found it -- that she had to get up through the movie to go smoke.
Now, you have to ask yourself, is that addiction or is that merely enjoyment? Obviously, that's someone who is addicted that can't sit at a movie without going to the lobby, missing whatever part of the movie she has missed to smoke a cigarette.
The fact that Ms. Wendel on many occasions would wake up during the night to smoke a cigarette or cigarettes. Does that suggest to you that the woman just loves cigarettes so much that she would forego sleep and have to get up to smoke? What does common sense tell you? That is evidence of one who is addicted who has to get up during the night on several occasions during the week, several times, countless times.
This is a woman when she went to visit her grandson, not just when the grandson was there when she was the daycare person, when she visited the grandson at her son's house and was asked don't smoke in front of Justin, the woman, if she just liked smoking, why couldn't she leave her cigarettes at home so that she didn't have to smoke in front of her grandson?
The fact is she didn't smoke in front of her grandson, but she felt that she had to still go
outside to have that cigarette. Now really, is that a question that the woman just liked smoking so much she had to go outside, just couldn't forego a couple of hours? Of course not. That's someone who was addicted and has to smoke wherever she is.
This is the woman who would get the flu or a cold and be bedridden, but found the need to continue to smoke cigarettes. I ask you, is that someone who enjoyed cigarettes so much that she still had to smoke for that enjoyment despite being sick with the flu or a cold or is that someone who is addicted and is compelled to smoke whether she is healthy or not?
This is a woman who would often light cigarettes while one was burning in the ashtray.
Do you just enjoy the cigarette so much that you need to do that? You enjoy them so much that I'm just going to have another one right after having this one in the ashtray? Or is the urge so compelling that you need to smoke because you are addicted? I submit to you the evidence shows that's because she is addicted.
The woman was diagnosed with lung cancer and she is still sneaking cigarettes despite having been diagnosed with lung cancer. Ask yourself
this, if this woman, as we have heard from everybody, was strong-willed and independent and intelligent and wanted to do what she wanted to do, and if that meant she enjoyed smoking and told everybody that she enjoyed it and wasn't going to quit, why do you think she was sneaking cigarettes when she had lung cancer?
If she liked it, whether she was diagnosed with lung cancer or anything, all she had to tell her husband was, "Hey, leave me alone, I enjoy what I'm doing. I'm a big girl, I'm independent. I don't care if I have lung cancer or the flu, I'm going to smoke my cigarettes because that's what I want to do."
Why all of a sudden did she have to sneak them? Why all of a sudden did she have to sneak those cigarettes that she wasn't going to smoke in front of her husband, and she wasn't going to smoke in front of her family, when she found out she had lung cancer?
If she's as strong-willed as they say she was, if she's as independent as they say she was, if she is as smart as they said she was, and if she was bound and determined to continue to smoke because she enjoyed smoking and no one was going to tell
her otherwise, then why all of a sudden did she have to sneak the cigarettes?
Do you think maybe because the woman was addicted, hopelessly so, and knew she couldn't quit and despite having lung cancer still couldn't quit knowing it was going to kill her? And you think maybe her husband might say something if she was smoking in front of him? Do you think maybe there was a little bit of embarrassment there with this woman knowing she couldn't quit?
And I submit to you that is certainly clear evidence of someone who is addicted.
You heard from the defense that there is no evidence that Ms. Wendel ever tried to quit. And I submit to you there is. There is. And you know what that evidence is?
In 1974, when she sat down and she had a discussion with her daughter and she said in that discussion, "Don't you smoke cigarettes, because if you do, you will not be able to stop because you will get addicted," how does she know?
How would this woman, Carol Wendel, have known that unless she had tried herself once upon a time to quit and found out that she herself couldn't quit, that she had been smoking for 20 years and
tried and without telling anybody and realized, can't do it. I can't do it.
Do you think that might give her a frame of reference so that she was able in 1974 when she caught her daughter smoking to say don't you start or you won't be able to quit? Maybe because she had tried. Just maybe. That's circumstantial evidence that absolutely she might have tried. And she did try, otherwise how would she know to tell your daughter don't do it because you are going to get addicted?
This woman smoked one and a half to two packs of cigarettes every day for 40 years without a day off. Is that somebody who just likes them so much they can't take a day off? No, really. Do you think just because you enjoy something, you can't take a day off?
If you like pizza, do you need to eat pizza 30 times a day for 40 years? Do you think maybe you'd get sick of it? Do you think you might enjoy something a lot, but you might take a day off? You might be able to take a week off. You might become sick of something and take months off.
But the same thing applies to cigarettes. Do you really think that somebody would need to smoke
30	of them every single day for 40 years because that's enjoyment?
See, this is common sense. When you have to do it for 40 years, 30 of them every day without a day off, without getting bored, without getting sick of them, it doesn't mean that you just like them, it means you need them. And it means you're addicted to it. And if you don't believe that, figure it out.
If the woman smoked 30 cigarettes a day for 40 years, and the average person, just consider it's eight puffs on a cigarette, that's 3,500,000 doses of nicotine that bathed her lungs during that 40 years.
You know that nicotine is a dangerous and addictive drug. Do you think 3,500,000 doses might be enough to cause someone to become addicted or do you need 3,500,001? What do you think?
3	million doses of a dangerous drug that bathed her lungs for that 40-year period coupled with all these other examples of her love of cigarettes, doesn't that sound a little bit like maybe the woman was addicted? I submit to you the evidence shows it does.
Let's talk about the good Dr. Abramson. The
evidence shows that Dr. Abramson was a walking contradiction, talking out of both sides of his mouth. Let's see how.
And you notice, not once, not once did anyone from the defense get up here and talk about what he meant when he was talking about controlling one's smoking. They didn't get into that. Why not? Why didn't they? But we're going to get into a lot.
On the one hand, Dr. Abramson was asked, "Do you treat patients specifically for nicotine addiction?"
And what did he say? "It's very rare to treat patients specifically for nicotine addiction for a variety of reasons. The biggest reason is that the vast majority of people who stop smoking do it on their own without any medical help."
What's he saying? No, I don't see patients like that because they've all quit before they see me. Obviously, it's so easy for them to do it.
But when he was asked again, "Back to your clinical practice, Doctor, over the years, I think you said you've been practicing since 1987, about how many patients would you estimate you've treated for some issue related to substance use or substance addiction?
"Thousands of patients.
"How many patients, if we're going to focus specifically on smoking, some issue related to smoking or nicotine addiction or quitting smoking, how many patients in the last almost -- 26 years?
"Again, it would be thousands. I couldn't give an absolute number."
Despite the fact that, no, not many, it's rare, because they all quit before they see me. Which is true.
"Isn't it true, Doctor, that as of October 13th, 2010, you did not have a single patient in your practice who you were treating solely for nicotine addiction?
"That's true."
Okay, what part do you want to believe? On the one hand, of course I don't treat patients specifically for nicotine addiction, they all quit before they see me. In the next breath, I have treated thousands. In the next breath, I don't have any of them. As of October of 2010, I've not treated a single one.
Let's go down further. "The DSM," on which he relies as the gold standard, "uses a term called ' dependence'; right?
"Correct.
"For purposes of your testimony today, will you agree that dependence is the equivalent of addiction under the DSM-IV?
"Sure."
What then? "Now, you have testified that for your purposes, addiction and dependence mean the same thing?
"Correct.
"But nowhere in the DSM-IV that you relied on do they say that addiction and dependence can be used interchangeably. They don't say that, do they?
"That's correct."
Okay, which one do you choose to believe? The good doctor when he says he's using it for the purposes of the DSM-IV or the good doctor who says they don't talk about it in the DSM-IV as being used interchangeably?
That's what I mean by a walking contradiction. Who do you choose to believe, the doctor on the left or the doctor on the right? That's up to you.
"I would say that she was in control of her own behavior, including smoking."
Again, remember, if he says control and people
are in control of smoking, there is no addiction, because if you are in control, you could quit when you want, says the good doctor. If you could quit when you want, then you weren't being controlled by nicotine and you weren't addicted, says the good doctor.
"Give me an example of what type of person would not be in control of their smoking behavior such that they would be addicted. What would it take for somebody to not be in control of their smoking behavior? What kind of people?
"In my clinical practice, I have not seen anyone like that.
"What does that mean? If everybody can control their smoking, then nobody is addicted?
"Right.
"You have never seen anybody who meets your definition of addiction, have you, who cannot control their behavior to the point where they have to smoke; right?
"There are a few questions there, which should
I	answer?
"In your clinical experience, you have not encountered anyone who could" -- and that should be "not control their smoking behavior; isn't that
true?
"Yes."
Well, it's easy for him to say that Carol Wendel was in control of her smoking behavior because the good doctor has never seen anybody who wasn't.
"Can you be addicted under the DSM-IV without having met criterion number 4, which is quit attempts?"
Now, remember, the defense has spent almost the entirety of their closing argument talking about quitting, didn't want to stop, didn't want to quit, wanted to smoke, didn't want to stop.
"Can you be addicted under the DSM without having met criterion number 4?"
Well, you heard them say the doctor says you can't be addicted if you've never tried to quit.
So in answer to the question, of course.
"Of course you can be addicted. Like I said, you only need to have three of those criteria along with the clinically-significant impairment or distress. So it's one criteria equal to the other criteria." Says the good doctor.
"Have you ever found a patient to be addicted who hadn't tried to quit smoking?
"No."
So on the one hand, good doctor is saying of course you could be addicted if you haven't tried to quit, that's only one criteria. On the other hand, he's never found a patient to be addicted who hadn't tried.
"And then I said, 'Attempts to quit or being able to quit is not a major factor in being -- in determining addiction?' Your answer, 'Correct.'
Do you recall saying that under oath?
"Yes."
The good doctor is saying that's not a major factor in determining addiction. And yet he's never met someone who has not tried to quit who he has found to be addicted. What side of his mouth is he talking out of?
"Dr. Abramson, as an addiction psychiatrist, are you familiar with the use of the term 'tobacco abuse'?
"Well, it's generally used by non-behavioral practitioners to describe someone who is using tobacco.
"What you said is people use the term 'tobacco abuse', and I think you said non-behavioral practitioners use that term to describe someone who
uses tobacco?
"Correct.
"Except Dr. Hummel didn't say history of tobacco use, did he?
"Correct.
"He used the word 'abuse', didn't he?
"Correct."
Well, on the one hand, good doctor is talking about tobacco abuse meaning someone who uses tobacco. Well, Dr. Hummel didn't say that. He said in his note from March 2nd, 1995, tobacco abuse. It is what it is. Not use, abuse.
What else does the good doctor say?
"Whether or not Mrs. Wendel was smoking after her diagnosis, is that determinative of whether or not she was addicted?
"No.
"Is it determinative of whether she was under the influence or control of nicotine?
"No.
"And the section of the DSM-IV, it has a section on nicotine dependence, also points out that continued use despite medical problems related to smoking is a particularly important health problem. It says that, doesn't it?
"Yes.
"Do you agree with that?
"Absolutely. Well, it doesn't mean a lot on the one hand, but on the other hand," he agrees,
"it's certainly a very important factor.
"Well, maybe another way to ask it is if a patient came to you and said I am addicted to smoking, is that all you would need to know to write down a diagnosis -"No, of course not.
" -- of nicotine addiction?
"Of course not. I would have to do a thorough assessment, diagnostic evaluation, history.
"Would part of that assessment, sir, look at the person's quitting behavior?
"Yes."
So the good doctor, if someone says they're addicted, no, no, he can't take that at face value.
He would have to do a complete assessment.
"On the other hand, tell the jury, please, the different things that you saw in all the testimony about reasons why Mrs. Wendel continued smoking.
"Um, there were numerous examples. She enjoyed the feeling of smoking. She enjoyed smoking with an alcoholic beverage. She enjoyed
smoking with coffee. She enjoyed smoking after having sexual relations with her husband. She enjoyed smoking in social situations."
And yet not one word about him having to do a complete assessment based on those answers.
See, when the good doctor finds it convenient for him, he doesn't have to do a full assessment.
But when someone says they are addicted, then he has to do a full assessment. What side of his mouth is he talking out of?
"For your patients that you treated for smoking who have gone on to get a disease related to smoking, do you assess whether their -- if they were addicted under the DSM, whether their addiction played such a role in their smoking that you would consider the addiction to be a cause of their disease?"
His answer, "I always do that assessment, yes."
What does that mean? This is the good doctor saying that in his practice as a psychiatrist, when he finds somebody addicted, he goes further and determines legal cause of their addiction, as if that's medically necessary in his practice.
And it says "jury instructions" there because
you can refer to your instructions and look at legal cause.
And yet here is the doctor saying in his practice, he always assesses people he thinks are addicted as to legal cause. You see, in private practice, you deal with medical cause. In the courtroom here, we deal with legal cause.
Do you really think the good doctor assesses all of his patients that he finds addicted as to whether or not their addiction was a legal cause of their disease? Of course not.
"If you are not addicted to smoking, is it difficult to stop?
"If you are not addicted to smoking? For some people, it can be different" -- it should be "difficult to stop.
"And that's because nicotine is such a powerful addictive substance, such a powerful drug, it is such a powerful psychoactive drug that even people who are not addicted can have trouble quitting; isn't that true?
"No, I would disagree with that."
Okay, here on the one hand, people that are not addicted, he's saying that could be difficult to stop, and now on the other hand, no, he
disagrees with that, that it's such a powerful drug.
"I think you indicated that it takes somewhere from five to eight attempts before someone is usually successful in quitting; is that right?
"Yes.
"How many attempts does it take for somebody to quit who is not addicted to cigarettes?
"I say the same amount.
"So it's just as hard to quit smoking if you are addicted or if you are not addicted, have I got that right?
"Yes."
Again, does common sense tell you that if you are not addicted, you have just as much difficulty quitting than an addicted person? That's utterly ridiculous. A person who is not addicted does not have a problem putting a cigarette down. A person who drinks alcohol socially doesn't have a problem putting a drink down.
And yet the good doctor wants to equate someone who is not addicted to cigarettes with someone who is, who might very well take five on eight times to be able to quit.
Let's see what else the good doctor had to say
in his testimony. And you'll recall, "Did you ever ask them to send you any articles on nicotine addiction?" Remember he was being asked the attorneys.
"Yes.
"What articles did you ask them to send you?
"I don't remember the specific articles I asked for, but in my office, I don't have access to a medical library, and I asked them if they could get me some PDFs of some articles that I wanted."
This is their expert on whom they rely to come in here at $600 an hour who doesn't have access to a medical library and who asks the attorneys for whom he is working to send him articles on addiction. Is that someone you want to rely on?
"Were you ever shown, have you ever been shown a script of your trial testimony?
"I have been shown papers on which there were questions that the attorneys planned on asking me and summaries of my opinions in response to those questions.
"Did you not -Answer: "Did you not use the word "script" yourself and acknowledge that you had seen a script?
"Yes."
This is an expert who they're paying $600 an hour to come in here and tell you that Carol Wendel was not addicted, who admits to having seen a script of the questions and the answers about which he will testify. Is that an expert on whom you can rely?
"Is it not fact that the DSM estimates that between 80 percent and 90 percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence?
"That is contained within the DSM; however, that information is outdated and is now estimated that 50 percent based upon current research.
"Okay. But that's in the DSM-IV. You're here to tell us that's outdated?
"Yes."
So the good doctor wants you to believe that when it doesn't help his case, when there is information that 80 to 90 percent of regular smokers are addicted, according to his gold standard, what does he tell you? That's outdated. That's outdated. Is that someone on whose testimony you can rely? Please.
"Isn't it a fact, sir, that you have not seen a case of someone where the addiction was the cause
of their disease? In fact, Doctor, I believe you have indicated that you haven't seen such a case. You have also stated previously that you can't imagine such a scenario; isn't that true?
"Yes, I did state that."
So here we have their expert, the good Dr. Abramson, basically telling you he will never, never find a case where someone is addicted or whose addiction caused disease. In other words, nobody under the classification or rubric of Dr. Abramson will ever satisfy class membership. That's what he is telling you. Is that believable?
Of course not.
And the defense says we didn't call our own expert, but I submit to you we did have expert testimony. When he was asked, the good doctor, about Surgeon General, "Didn't the Surgeon General say that all it takes is a half a pack of cigarettes to become addicted?"
The doctor acknowledged that, "Yes, that's what he said, but I don't agree with it."
When Dr. Abramson was asked, "Sir, isn't it a fact that the Surgeon General, the public health authority in the United States" -MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, can we approach for
just a second on this? Make an objection sidebar?
THE COURT: Give me your legal basis for your objection.
MR. BAYUK: Improper use of a learned treatise which does not come in as substantive evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled. We'll put it on the record later.
MR. KAISER: When he was asked about the Surgeon General having said that addiction to nicotine is as strong as cocaine and heroin,
Dr. Abramson acknowledged, yes, that's what he said, but he did not accept that and did not agree with it.
So as far as addiction, consider the testimony, the reliability, the credibility of Dr. Abramson. And consider the facts, the real facts in this case, that you don't need expert testimony for. And it's really beyond doubt, not just more likely than not that Carol Wendel was addicted and was not using -THE CLERK: You have five more minutes.
MR. KAISER: -- tobacco because of enjoyment.
Let's talk about medical testimony. And real simple. Real simple. Dr. Reed, Dr. Siegel,
Dr. Hummel, Dr. Reuben, Dr. Tsakalakis,
Dr. Kalemeris agree to what? It was small cell lung cancer.
You can look at the medical records and there is not one shred, not one word of anyone disagreeing that it was a primary cancer of the lung and it was small cell lung cancer. And who did the defense call? No one, no one to dispute it. That's uncontradicted evidence.
They want you to believe that somehow Dr. Reed is not credible because he didn't see two or three reports that were referenced in the reports that he did see.
And remember when I asked him, this bronchoscopy that was done that didn't find cancer, does that end the story? Do you then tell the patient you don't have cancer? He goes, "Of course not." Of course not. That's the evidence.
If we were to believe what the defense is telling us, oh, my gosh this is really asbestos exposure, well, then Dr. Reed is wrong and Siegel is wrong and Hummel is wrong and Reuben is wrong and Tsakalakis is wrong and Kalemeris is wrong, there is a lot of people that made a big mistake.
Didn't happen. Didn't happen.
Real quick, reliance. The issue on reliance,
there is two.
One is the conspiracy. Remember the conspiracy encompasses all of the tobacco companies, and the defense doesn't want to talk about all of this. It's not whether Ms. Wendel tried to quit, it's what was she given, what was the information out there when she started smoking.
And it doesn't matter whose brand she started, but the fact remains is that all of these tobacco companies got together and agreed and they inundated the market with their advertisements and their mass marketing and they created this climate where it was normalized. And Carol Wendel, like everybody else, started smoking.
And believe me, from the evidence you know that the tobacco companies themselves knew far more than anybody else about their products and they didn't tell what they were concealing.
And so that's the issue. If Carol Wendel as being smart and intelligent as she was had known about all this information when she was young and first started to smoke or hadn't even started yet, do you think maybe it would have been different if the tobacco companies had come up and said, hey, this is what the information is?
And as far as R.J. Reynolds even after 1964, even if Carol Wendel knew about this information out there, R.J. Reynolds was trying to do everything they could to suppress that so that people wouldn't believe it.
And how do they go about doing that? Smoke our filtered cigarettes. What's the evidence?
Carol started smoking their filtered cigarettes. Smoke our light cigarettes. Don't quit, you don't need to do that. We're making a safer cigarette. They're called lights, they're low in tar, they're low in nicotine. And what was the evidence? Carol Wendel started smoking lights.
That's reliance. It's not just that you could infer, infer reliance, that's actual reliance, so that has been proven. Again, more likely than not? Of course.
And lastly, let's talk about -THE CLERK: You have two more minutes.
MR. KAISER: -- real quickly this comparative fault. The comparative fault.
What the defense wants to tell you is that Ms. Wendel is 100 percent at fault simply for not trying hard enough to quit. That's it. That's it.
But when you look at this, they want to ignore what
they did, and it can't go away, because what they did is important. They knew cigarettes caused cancer, they didn't tell anyone. That's their fault.
They knew that their cigarettes were inhalable long before Carol Wendel started smoking, and they chose to make them inhalable and did nothing about it, and it doesn't matter if they invented flue curing or not. What matters is they had the wherewithal to make them not inhalable, and they didn't do it. That's not her fault.
They knew nicotine was addictive, didn't tell the public, that's not Carol's fault. They had the ability to take enough nicotine out of the cigarettes so that you could smoke your normal amount and you wouldn't get addicted. They didn't do it. That's not Carol's fault, that's their fault.
They provided a psychological crutch so smokers like Carol wouldn't stop, but they would switch under the guise that filters and lights were safer. That's what Carol did, she relied on them. That's their fault.
They didn't warn the public about the health risks of smoking until they had to by Congress in
1966. That's their fault, not Carol's.
They chose not to advise the Surgeon General's Committee what they knew about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. That's their fault, not Carol's.
They chose to give people the rational reasons to start smoking. That was their fault, not Carol's.
They were part of a denialist campaign for 50 years. That's not Carol's fault. They wanted her to believe their message. That's their fault.
And Carol didn't try hard enough to quit.
Yeah, you might say that's her fault. That's her fault.
THE CLERK: Time is up.
MR. KAISER: But all the time tobacco company R.J. Reynolds is saying you don't need to quit.
THE COURT: Time is up.
MR. KAISER: Just change brands.
So ladies and gentlemen -THE COURT: Say good-bye.
MR. KAISER: I thank you for your time, and in considering the evidence and the testimony, compensate Mr. Wendel for his loss.
Thank you.