MR. DAVIS: May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Please, sir.
MR. DAVIS: Counsel, Ms. Whitney, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury. You know, our system of civil justice works because we start with impartial jurors who, like you, took an oath to render a true verdict based on the law and the evidence in the case.
And we spent a couple of days a couple weeks ago making sure that you were that impartial jury. Remember how much time we spent on that. And then we asked you to be the judges of the facts and to do that job rationally and logically.
We asked you to decide the case based on the
evidence that is presented and the testimony presented during trial and applying that to the law that is given to you by Judge Monaco. And we asked you to do that without such things as bias or sympathy or prejudice or public opinion or, indeed, any other sentiment influencing your impartial rational judgment in reaching your verdict.
Now, of course, everyone feels sympathy for someone who is sick and has lung cancer and has struggled with that. Of course. But -- and that’s fine. But those sentiments cannot drive your evaluation of the case, and that’s the very reason that we spent so much time talking in jury selection about impartiality.
Now, all of us in this courtroom have seen throughout this trial how seriously you have taken your jobs. You have listened to the evidence. You have looked at the documents. You’ve really struggled to get the information that’s coming with you, and we all thank you for that, because that is what makes this system work.
Now, what exactly are Ms. Whitney’s claims? What precisely are the claims, the legal claims that you are going to be called upon when you retire to decide in this case?
The first, first claim, is whether the cigarettes manufactured, made and sold by Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds that Ms. Whitney smoked were defective because of an inadequate warning before July 1, 1969. And if you decide they were defective because of an inadequate warning before 19 -- July 1, 1969, you then have to decide if that defect was the legal cause of her lung cancer. That’s the product claim that Judge Monaco talked about.
The second claim is whether Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds negligently failed to warn about the addictive nature and the health effects of cigarettes before July 1, 1969, and if they did, whether that negligence, that failure to warn before July 1, 1969, was the legal cause of her lung cancer, and that’s the negligence claim that Judge Monaco instructed you that you have. Two claims.
Now, a couple of things about those claims. There is no claim in this case for fraud. There is no claim in this case for misrepresentation. There is no claim in this case for concealment. There is no claim in this case for broken promises. There is no claim for misrepresentation. Those claims
have never been in this case, ever.
Now, the claims that are in this case focus on warnings. They do not focus on the cigarettes.
It’s the warnings that are the focus of these two claims, the product claim and the negligence claim.
There is no claim that any particular design feature of a cigarette was the legal cause of her lung cancer. You’ve heard evidence, you’ve heard a lot of evidence about design features of cigarettes, inhalability, manipulation of nicotine, additives, menthol, ventilation holes, ammonia, low-tar cigarettes, de-nicotized cigarettes. There is no legal claim in this case that any of those design features were the legal cause of her lung cancer. They used to be in the case, but they’re gone.
So the focus is on the warnings that Ms. Whitney claims the companies should have given before July 1, 1969. That’s the case.
Now, let’s just note the day here. Before July 1, 1969. We’re just a couple of weeks short of that being 44 years ago. So in a way, you’ve got to be like historians. You’ve got to figure out from the evidence such things as, what was the state of science on the health risks of smoking
before July 1, ’69?
What information was open and obvious and generally known about the health risks of smoking before July 1, 1969? What was the understanding about whether cigarettes were addictive before July 1, 1969? What was being communicated about whether smoking was dangerous or could be addictive before July 1, 1969?
In other words, your decisions about whether or not these products were defective because of a failure to give an adequate warning before July 1,
’69, or whether the companies were negligent for failing to give a warning about the health risks of cigarettes or their addictive properties before July 1, 1969 can only be made by looking at the state of affairs in that time period, not as science and scientific understanding has evolved in the decades since that time.
Now, another important point here, and this is in your instructions.
I’m going to put this up here. This will be on page 6 of your instructions when you receive it, and you heard -- you’ve heard Judge Monaco read it. It’s this paragraph right here. "With respect to plaintiff’s product defect and negligence claims,"
the two claims that are in the case, "in determining whether defendants’ cigarettes were unreasonably dangerous due to inadequate warnings," that’s the product claim, "or whether defendants negligently failed to warn," that’s the negligence claim, "you cannot hold either defendant liable merely for manufacturing or selling cigarettes that presented health risks."
In other words, the fact that before July 1,
’69, the companies manufactured and sold cigarettes that were dangerous is not alone enough to impose liability. That’s the law.
Second, "And with respect to both of these claims, no duty exists to warn or instruct about risks and risk avoidance measures that should be obvious to or generally known by foreseeable product users."
The law is that the defendants did not have a legal obligation to provide any warning except a warning that would not be obvious or was not generally known, not to Ms. Whitney, not to specific people or any specific person, but to foreseeable product users. That’s the law.
And I think it goes without saying that Ms. Whitney can’t predicate a claim based on the
fact that she didn’t get a warning about something if you find from the evidence that she already knew it.
So these are the legal principles, the legal principles that I suggest will and should guide you as you evaluate the evidence and reach a verdict on the claims in the case.
So let’s turn to specifics of Ms. Whitney’s claim. What is it specifically that she is claiming that the companies failed to warn that was not obvious or generally known before July 1, 1969? What is it?
I didn’t hear one thing in Mr. Kelly’s presentation specifically.
The instruction says -- talks in terms of adequate warnings or failure to provide warnings, reasonable warnings about the addictive nature and health risks of cigarettes. That’s kind of a general thing. What is it?
Well, let’s just start, we didn’t hear anything; right? But let’s start with health risks of cigarettes and the addictive properties of cigarettes. And let’s look back at the state of things before July 1, 1969 on that question.
Let’s talk first about the dangers, the
dangers, the health risks of cigarettes. Now, no question, now, we’re historians, no question that the fact that the use of tobacco has been dangerous, has been generally known -- is dangerous has been generally known going all the way back to the 1800s.
You heard testimony from Dr. Cummings, you heard testimony from Dr. Burns. Dr. Burns testified that the harmful effects of tobacco have been known for centuries. Dr. Cummings told you that around 1900, the State of Florida -- a number of states, including Florida, banned the manufacture and sale of cigarettes. The term coffin nails to describe cigarettes has been used for over a hundred years.
If you go back into the 1930s and 1950s, articles were being published in some of the most popular magazines at the time, Reader’s Digest, TIME, LIFE, articles which Dr. Cummings told you were written for the average person, not for scientists, the ordinary and foreseeable user of cigarettes.
The articles discussed the health risks of smoking and how it can be difficult to quit. The articles had such titles as "So You’re Going to
Stop Smoking?” "Coffin Nails”, "Nicotine Knockout”, "How Harmful Are Cigarettes?"
Ms. Whitney testified she knew that term "coffin nails", and we know Ms. Whitney’s parents subscribed to Reader’s Digest and LIFE, and we know she flipped through those magazines all the time as she was growing up.
Dr. Cummings explained that during the 1940s and the 1950s, scientific studies were coming out linking smoking to lung cancer. Dr. Wynder’s mouse painting studies in 1953 provided the biological evidence that there was a link between tobacco tar and cancer. And you remember that this was the -when that came out, we showed you that LIFE magazine article about the publication, the publicity that that got.
"Smoke gets in the news. Doctors report tobacco tar induces mouse cancer, note rise in cigarette use and human lung cancer." In one of the most popular magazines of that day.
Dr. Cummings testified that about a year after the reports of Dr. Wynder’s work came out, virtually everyone in the country had heard about the association between smoking and lung cancer. We’ve got a poll from 1954 that we introduced, a
Gallup poll asking the ordinary person, the foreseeable user of cigarettes, "What do you know, or have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of lung cancer?" 90 percent in 1954 had heard or read something, the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of lung cancer. General knowledge.
And this was many years before Ms. Whitney says she started smoking. The risks were obvious and generally known to product users even then.
As we move on through the ’50s, the 1950s, you’ve heard evidence about Edward R. Murrow’s program. Remember, he was the famous war correspondent, and he did a two-day, back-to-back program about smoking and health. And you saw clips of those programs.
And then in 1957, Dr. Burney, who was then Surgeon General of the United States, stated that -- he said that public health officials had informed the public about the dangers of tobacco use through what he called excellent coverage in the press, radio, and TV. The risks were obvious. They were generally known. Cigarettes were dangerous, they could cause cancer.
Indeed, starting in the ’50s and throughout
the ’60s, the public health community provided a steady flow of information regarding the clear and present danger of smoking. Dr. Cummings told you that. We took him through that on the stand. And these obvious risks that were generally known made their ways to the Whitneys and their household and to people like them at the time.
Ms. Whitney, you learned, in the early 1950s, when she was just four or five, six years old, she knew her grandmother didn’t want her smoking because she had gone -- didn’t want her mother smoking because she had gone to her grandmother and her grandmother went to her mother and was upset and her mother quit.
She knew during the ’50s that her brothers Larry and Gary got caught smoking by her dad and they got into big trouble. You heard testimony from Maurine Gregory yesterday, that was one of Ms. Whitney’s high school classmates, and remember Ms. Whitney was in high school from 1963 to 1965. That was her high school -- her high school years.
Miss Gregory told you about a student assembly at the Hialeah High School, you remember, and the students were shown pictures of the smokers and nonsmoker’s lung and how the smoker’s {sic} lung
was pink and the other was black and unhealthy.
The connection between smoking and lung problems was so well known at that time that it was part of the curriculum of the public schools. And, in fact, as Miss Gregory said, remember, it didn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out in the 1960s that smoking was dangerous.
I mean, think about that. You heard Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings talking about birth cohorts, people that are born in the same place, same time, same frame. Well, Miss Gregory was not only in Ms. Whitney’s birth cohort, but she was friends with her, she attended the same school as Ms. Whitney, and she testified that she knew smoking wasn’t good for her health. It didn’t take a rocket scientist. Obvious, generally known at the time.
And we move forward into the ’60s, 1964, the pivotal Surgeon General’s Report, this is the -- it was front-page news across the country, this was the report that -- from January of ’64 in the Miami Herald, this was the newspaper you know that was taken in the Whitney home, the newspaper that she read because she was interested in the news.
Dr. Cummings said this was a big deal. He called
this historic.
The report said that smoking causes lung cancer. The report was the lead story not only, not only in the newspaper, but on the evening television news that was very popular and was watched in the home.
He said it was historic, and he testified to this, because this report changed people’s views about smoking and health and led to smoking behavior changes and reduction in diseases called by -- caused by tobacco use. That was 1964.
Now, Ms. Whitney was 15 years old when that report came out. Dr. Cummings told you that during her -- his almost four-hour interview with her that she grew up reading the newspaper, that she was -grew up reading the Miami News, she was interested in the news, and she testified that -- he testified that he told her -- she told him that she was watching the news on a regular basis. And we know her parents subscribed to Reader’s Digest and TIME and LIFE. And Ms. Whitney testified that she read those magazines. She testified that she heard the term "cancer stick" to refer to cigarettes.
Dr. Cummings told us that he found Ms. Whitney to be a person who was interested in the world and
curious about things and intelligent. All of the witnesses, all of the witnesses that knew her and know her described her as smart, interested in things.
And Ms. Whitney testified that she remembered the Surgeon General’s Report. She testified she didn’t know precisely when she heard about it, but I would suggest to you that the evidence would be that it was when it was publicized so broadly when it was front-page news and when it was on the TV, and most certainly, it had to be before July 1,
1969 .
I apologize. She graduated in ’66, of course, it was three years. My bad. ’63-’66, she graduated in the spring of ’66. Thank you for correcting me.
The -- you know, we -- that news report that came out, Harry Reasoner, very respected journalist, we won’t play it again, but he summed up, the whole CBS evening news that night was about the Surgeon General’s Report. We played it. And this is what he said to the foreseeable users of cigarettes.
"In this kind of country, it comes down to whether you like it or not. No one is going to
forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. The decision is his. The decision and the health that may depend on it. This is Harry Reasoner, good night." That’s the kind of message that was being conveyed as a matter of something that was generally known at the time.
Now, in 1966, the first labels appeared on the cigarette packs. I think we’ve got a demonstration. "Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." 1966. That warning was on every pack of cigarettes sold in the United States for the time period in issue, from the point in time that it came on in ’66 up until July 1 of 1969 .
Now, Ms. Whitney testified that she read these 1966 -- this warning when it went on the pack, she saw it on every pack, and she understood it.
Recall her testimony, she said that the warning was saying it was hazardous. She noticed that word. And she said, her words, "Right there on the warning I needed to quit." "Right there on the warning I needed to quit." And Ms. Whitney told you that when she saw that 1966 warning, she understood it was conveying to her that if she
smoked, it might be hazardous to her health, not somebody else’s health, but her health.
Miss Kuchler asked her this question, "Well, as you were a member of the public who was using the product, so this warning was meant for you, among others." And she said, "Yes." She knew it was meant for her.
She knew it was directed to her and that it was about her health and smoking, and how dangerous it could be, how hazardous it could be. There is no question that that was before July 1, 1969.
What could be more obvious to cigarette smokers than to see it every time they would get a pack out and pull a cigarette out for a smoke.
You remember Dr. Cummings testifying about Daniel Horn? He was the public health official who in 1968 gave a public interview and said you could stand on a rooftop and shout "Smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone something they did not already know.
That was the state of public information, the public information environment at the time. You can yell "Smoking is dangerous" from a rooftop, and everybody had already heard it. That’s how generally known it was at the time.
And so I submit to you that the evidence, the evidence in this case shows that in the period before July 1, ’69, people knew that cigarette smoking could be dangerous to your health and it could cause cigarette smokers to get lung cancer. The message was there for any foreseeable user of cigarettes. And given the fact that the risks were obvious and generally known -- flip this on, please. Okay.
Those risks were "Obvious to or generally known by the foreseeable product users" in the time period. There was no duty to warn of those risks under the law. And that is particularly true where the evidence is that she knew. She knew that.
So let’s turn and talk about addiction for a minute. We talked about the health effects. The other things in the instructions is the failure to warn about the addictive properties, the addictive properties of cigarettes.
Well, let’s talk about the term "addiction".
Now, you learned from the evidence that when the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report came out, the Surgeon General used the term habit to -- rather than addiction to describe smoking. That was because nicotine at that time did not meet the
medical definition, the scientific definition in place at that time of addiction.
Now, as the medicine evolved, as science evolved over time, that definition changed. And you heard from Dr. Burns, and I think you saw a slide of it during the plaintiff’s presentation, that it was not until 1988, almost 20 years after July 1, 1969, that the Surgeon General first used the term "addiction" to describe smoking.
So as a starting point, it’s important to remember that in our relevant time period, the scientific consensus was that smoking was a habit, not an addiction. That was the science in place at the time.
And Dr. Lipowicz explained to you that, of course, when he was asked on the stand, of course Philip Morris did not -- and the other tobacco companies didn’t issue a warning that tobacco and use of smoking was addictive because that wasn’t the state -- because before July 1, 1969, not even the Surgeon General was calling smoking addictive and using that term.
Now, was it being studied, was it being looked at, were scientists using the term in ways that may not have been the technical definition? Can you
find documents that relate to using the term "addiction"? Of course. But that was the science at the time.
And again, it wasn’t until years later, 1988, and you heard this from both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, that the scientific consensus was that the term "addiction" should be applied to smoking and part of that was because the medical definition of addiction changed as it evolved.
But here is the thing. You know, you can call it addiction, you can call it habit, you can call it hooked, you can call it a monkey on your back, but the evidence is clear on the general state of knowledge on nicotine and addiction before July 1, 1969 .
The fact that nicotine has been in tobacco has been known since the early 1800s. It was identified as the chemical, as a chemical then.
You heard that from Dr. Cummings.
Dr. Cummings testified, this is his words, it’s been a -- it’s been common knowledge in this country for more than 100 years that it can be difficult to quit smoking. General knowledge for more than 100 years.
It was such common knowledge, it was the
subject of jokes. You remember that Mark Twain, wonderful humorist, 1880s, I’ve quit -- "It’s easy to quit smoking, I’ve done it hundreds of times." You can’t make a joke out of something that people don’t generally understand. It was that well known that cigarettes were hard to quit, regardless of what you called it.
Dr. Cummings explained to you that the terms like nicotine fiend and nicotine fit to refer to smokers and their need for cigarettes was used long before Ms. Whitney was born. He confirmed that Reader’s Digest articles in the 1940s onward referred to nicotine as a drug.
Dr. Burns testified about folks talking about how hard it is to quit smoking, and sometimes using the word "addiction" for 150 years. But again, whatever you call it, whatever term you put on it, isn’t the real issue whether smoking and people knew smoking was hard to quit once you started?
MR. PHILIPSON: Sorry.
MR. DAVIS: I guess it is the real issue.
And there can be no doubt that Ms. Whitney was hearing the same general information, the same information that was generally known before July 1, 1969 .
She testified, she told you she had heard the terms nicotine fit and that she understood it, her terms, that this means needing or wanting nicotine. Folks, that’s describing habit, addiction, hooked, monkey on your back. That’s it. That’s what she understood.
Now, I submit to you that the evidence in this case, testimony and the exhibits that have been received, shows that in the period before July 1, 1969, that period when Ms. Whitney says she took up smoking, it was completely obvious and generally known that smoking could be very difficult to quit once you start.
And because it was obvious and generally known, the law says to the -- to foreseeable users of cigarettes, the law says there was no legal duty to do -- to issue any additional warning, whether it’s under the product claim and the claim that the product was defective because inadequate warnings -- no adequate warning was given or because of the negligence claims, either one.
Now, let’s go to the verdict form a second. I want to show you this. This is the verdict form that you will have to fill out. This is the actual document that the judge will give you, and it has,
as I think Mr. Kelley mentioned, it has five questions. And I want to focus on these.
Question 1, "Please state, as to each defendant, whether there was negligence on the part of the defendant due to defendant’s failure to provide adequate warnings prior to July 1, 1969, and if so, whether such negligence was a legal cause of Ms. Whitney’s cancer."
If you find that the warnings that she says should have been given on the health risks, the addictive qualities or properties of cigarettes were open and generally known in that time period, then you check no here, because she has not proven by a preponderance of the evidence that element of that claim.
MS. KUCHLER: Stan, you are at 33 minutes.
MR. DAVIS: Excuse me.
MS. KUCHLER: 33 minutes.
MR. DAVIS: 33 left?
MS. KUCHLER: You have used 33.
MR. DAVIS: Used, thank you. Okay.
Question 2, "Please state, as to each defendant, whether cigarettes manufactured by that defendant and smoked by Mrs. Whitney were defective due to the defendant’s failure to provide adequate
warnings prior to July 1, 1969," that’s the defect claim, "and if so, whether defect was the legal cause of Ms. Whitney’s lung cancer."
If you find, same thing, that the warnings they said were given about the health risks and addictive properties were obvious and generally known to foreseeable users, you put no there. And if you put no in the blocks for 1 and 2, the case is over. "If you answer no to question 1 and 2 as to both defendants, your verdict is for defendants and you should proceed no further."
All right. Now, let’s -- let’s shift over, let’s shift over to the second part of this.
Because if you find -- even if you find that there was negligence or the products were defective because of warnings, your job is not over. You have another question to address. And it’s in both claims.
"If so, whether that defect was a legal cause of Mrs. Whitney’s lung cancer." That’s in the product claim. And in the negligence claim, "If so, whether such negligence was the legal cause of Ms. Whitney’s lung cancer." Legal cause.
All right, now, in my opening presentation, I gave a rough example of what legal cause is,
remember crossing the street, getting hit by a truck, medically it’s the cause of my death.
What’s the legal cause, what would you need to know before the truck driver would owe compensation?
Now, Judge Monaco has now given you an instruction on legal cause, and let’s just take a look at it.
Right here. "Negligence or product defect is the legal cause of a loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the negligence or the product defect, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred."
But for. Now, it doesn’t have to be the only cause, but for it to be the legal cause, it has to be a but-for cause.
So, in other words, what this means is, as to any particular specific piece of information that you would find by the preponderance of the evidence was not obvious, was not generally known, and, therefore, should have been given prior to July 1,
’69 to either make the defendants not -- made them negligent or made the product defective, you must prove that if she had received that particular
piece of information but for not getting it, she would not have gotten lung cancer, because that’s her injury.
So ask yourself as you evaluate this case, what specific warning could Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds have given her before July 1, 1969, that if she had received it, would have caused her never to stop smoking -- start smoking? What specific information could she have received after she started smoking but before July 1, 1969, that if she had received it, would have caused her to quit?
Because if it is not but for the information she didn’t have, she wouldn’t have gotten lung cancer, then the answer on the second part of these questions is also no, no, no, no. Those elements, legal cause, are in both the product claim and the negligence claim. And if they’re not met, the law says you put no. And if you put no on all those checks, the case is over.
"If you answer no to question 1 and 2 as to both defendants, your verdict is for defendants, and you should proceed no further."
Now, let’s go back and look at the time period and look at this question of what would she have known that could have made a real difference, but
for, in the time period before July 1, 1969.
Now, Ms. Whitney presented no evidence, no testimony as to any specific piece of information that if she had known before she started smoking, she never would have started. She never told you that, anything, no evidence. She never presented any specific piece of information that if she had gotten it after she started smoking, she would have quit right then. Nothing.
No testimony that if she had been told that cigarettes are dangerous or they cause cancer, even if you assume that wasn’t generally known or that they’re addictive, even if you assume that wasn’t generally understood, she would have made a different decision about her smoking behavior.
Now, think about this. Ms. Whitney testified she understood and read the 1966 warning, but she testified she did nothing in response. The warning did not matter to her.
Dr. Cummings provided very important testimony on this issue. Remember, we asked him what he had told her during that four-hour interview to get ready, and in reviewing her deposition, to get ready to come in and testify in this case.
And he said that she told him that a different
warning would not have made any difference to her. That’s in evidence, her statement to Dr. Cummings, a different warning would not have made any difference to her.
You heard her brother, Larry, through deposition yesterday, you know, depositions are just like them being here, he was asked a question about whether he was aware that anyone could have said anything to his sister to quit before she did, and he said no, I’m not aware of anything that could have been said.
So you heard it from Dr. Cummings, because that’s what Ms. Whitney told him, you heard it directly from her, you heard it from her brother, who loved her, considered her the closest -- was closest to her of any of the siblings, no different warnings, nothing anyone could have said would have gotten her to either not stop or certainly to quit before she got sick, so sick and coughing up blood in 2 008.
And if a different warning wouldn’t have made a difference, it wouldn’t have caused her to quit or wouldn’t have caused her to stop smoking -never start smoking, it can’t be the legal cause, it can’t be but for, that’s the law.
Now, Mrs. Whitney told you she quit for eight months in 1968 when she was pregnant and couldn’t smoke. She said immediately after her son was born, she started smoking again.
Now, you heard from Dr. Cummings that withdrawal symptoms, the bad ones go away in a week or two. So the bottom line is, even if we assume she was addicted before 1968, the withdrawal symptoms, the pain, and it’s tough, were way gone by the end of that pregnancy.
As we move past 1969, we can move to events past 1969, but remember, it’s only the things that weren’t done, the warnings before that time that are relevant for liability, but, you know, if you don’t believe -- you’re allowed, Judge Monaco told you, to make reasonable inference from the evidence, so how has she responded through the years to the warnings she did receive can inform your judgment about what she would she have done if had she gotten additional information or did know something before July 1, ’69.
So let’s look at what the evidence is. 1970, stronger warning, "The Surgeon General has determined that cigarettes are dangerous to your health." She read it, she understood it, she
testified to that. Did she do anything when it came out? No.
1971, Dr. Cummings testified that all cigarette advertising went off television. All gone, no more cigarette ads after ’71. That same year, at the urging of her brother Larry and her dad, she went to the Hialeah Hospital clinic that was run by Seventh Day Adventists. She testified that she went there because of the warning said -because of the warnings. That’s what motivated her to go.
And you heard testimony about how these clinics operate, the information that they give her -- that they gave her, that cigarette smoking is bad for her health. You heard from Larry who attended the clinic about the information that was there, the healthy lung, the diseased lung.
She got a lot of warnings at that clinic, not only about health effects, but how to quit. She got the motto "I choose not to smoke." That’s what she learned there. It’s not my word, "I choose," it’s the word that comes from the professional community of people that try to help people quit smoking, all the way back to 1971. "I choose not to smoke."
She was warned if she had wanted to quit, she had to throw away her cigarettes, throw away her lighters, throw away her ashtrays, throw everything that related to smoking, get a buddy, all right, drink liquids, juice, it’s tough, you are going to have to suffer through it.
She testified that when she left that clinic that night in ’71, she knew, she testified when I left that clinic in 1971, she told Miss Kuchler this, I knew that smoking was bad for my health.
And you know she didn’t heed the warnings that night. She stopped, had them stop and get cigarettes, and she went home and smoked them either that night or the day after, but Larry and her dad never smoked again.
She testified that 1971, she said this, was the first time she ever tried to quit, first time she ever tried to quit was that Hialeah clinic.
And she confirmed to Miss Kuchler not that she didn’t want to quit but, she wasn’t ready.
Miss Kuchler asked her isn’t it fair to say that when you went to that clinic you weren’t ready? She said, yes, that’s right. I wasn’t ready. Doesn’t mean I didn’t want to, but I wasn’t ready.
MS. KUCHLER: Stanley, you have used 45 minutes.
MR. DAVIS: Thank you very much, Deb. I appreciate that.
Dr. Cummings told you that until they make up their minds to quit, until they are ready, until they are motivated, they will not quit smoking. Quitting smoking is just wanting to quit smoking, he told you that, he’s a professional in smoking, quit smoking, has been his whole life. Wanting is not enough. Just throwing away cigarettes one at a time -- one time that she said she did under duress is not enough.
She said she tried to quit two, four, more times a year, but she has no specifics about that, and I suggest to you it’s because she wasn’t doing those things that were necessary, she wasn’t throwing away her cigarettes, she wasn’t throwing away her ashtrays, she wasn’t throwing away her lighters, all those things that she had learned.
My goodness, if you had been doing that two to four to five to six times a year year after year, you would remember the specifics, you would be able to talk about it. She didn’t remember.
So maybe all those attempts were just like
1971. She said she wanted to quit, but she wasn’t ready. But she had the information that she needed. She knew the risks. She knew the health risks, she knew the addictive properties of cigarettes. There is no warning that would have mattered to her. She said it; her brother said it.
We know in 1972 that new warning, this one, the one that was up, that "The Surgeon General has determined," was on all cigarette advertising. It hadn’t been on TV for a year, but it was on printed ads.
Dr. Burns testified that people learned about the health risks of smoking from all multiple sources, friends, school, newspapers, magazines, radio, television, public health community. We know that Ms. Whitney’s friends, her family members warned her of the health risks of smoking.
Her sister Sharon and her coworkers told her she should quit. You heard Larry testify that he and his wife Barbara repeatedly told her not -- to quit and her response was, "Yeah, I know, but."
1985, we have the new warnings, these rotating warnings, you have seen those. One of those, that third one, specifically smoking causes lung cancer. Again, there is no evidence she heeded that
warning, changed her behavior, took any of the steps that she learned were necessary to quit smoking.
In fact, she testified at one point, the warnings were just repetitive, she just quit looking at them, she just put the cigarette pack in her case, she didn’t even need to read it anymore, she knew it so well.
So I ask you to keep in mind what the undisputed evidence is about other smokers were doing in response to the warnings, right after the ’64 report came out, Surgeon General, Dr. Cummings testified that millions of Americans quit smoking. He told you that by 1965, 17 million Americans had quit. Between ’64 and ’79, 30 million people. That’s 2 million people a year had quit smoking.
And he testified of those people, 90 percent were addicted. 90 percent were addicted. 90 percent quit cold turkey, of the people who did quit. Undisputed evidence.
And the fact is that as Dr. Burns told you, even addicted smokers remain responsible for their behavior. Dr. Burns said that. They remain responsible for their decision to continue smoking. That’s their expert.
Now, ask yourself, was Ms. Whitney different because she was waiting to hear something from a tobacco company? Is that what she was doing, waiting to hear something from Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds and she didn’t hear it?
She had not changed her behavior based on warnings she got from people she knew, people she loved, people she trusted, people she respected, from magazines, newspapers, cigarette packs, the Surgeon General, stop-smoking clinics.
What was she waiting to hear from a tobacco company, and particularly, what was she waiting to hear before July 1, 1969?
All right. Here is one more thing to think about when you’re thinking about this legal cause question and whether but for not receiving what you might find to be necessary warnings before July 1, 1969, was that she would not have gotten lung cancer.
You’ve heard from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings that when a person quits smoking, their body begins to repair itself. And if a person quits early enough and stays quit long enough, the risk of a smoking-related disease basically comes back down to essentially that of someone who never smoked at
all. That’s the medicine.
And Dr. Burns told you that if Ms. Whitney had quit by 1994, 1994, it’s medically more probable than not that she would not have gotten lung cancer when she did. This is an important point as you are considering but-for cause and what could have been done to prevent her injuries.
And even if you decide that Ms. Whitney needed some additional warning before July 1, ’69, you know she had that information well before 1994.
Dr. Burns told you the smoker is responsible for his or her behavior and their decision to continue smoking.
I want to now turn to another subject. I want to talk about Ms. Whitney’s smoking history.
How am I on time?
MS. KUCHLER: You have used 50 minutes.
MR. DAVIS: Thank you.
I want to turn now and talk about Ms. Whitney’s smoking history, and particularly the evidence about her smoking before July 1, 1969.
And I suggest to you that it is critically important for you as the jury to determine whether Ms. Whitney is truthful and accurate in her testimony about when she started smoking and how
much she smoked and whether she smoked in high school. Why is that important? Well, let me offer a couple of thoughts on that.
First, you heard an awful lot about marketing to youth, marketing to kids. If Ms. Whitney wasn’t a regular smoker until 1966, after she was 18 and graduated from high school, then all the evidence you’ve heard about youth marketing issues wouldn’t apply to her and it wouldn’t mean anything to the case, because she would have started as an adult.
And second, I believe I understand that her position is that she was so hopelessly addicted by the time she did learn of the health risks of smoking that she wasn’t able to quit.
But you heard Dr. Burns tell you that the development of addiction is a process, it’s not a toggle switch, it’s a process that increases in intensity over time. So knowing exactly when Ms. Whitney started smoking and the information she had before that, before she claims to become hopelessly addicted, knowing how much she smoked when she smoked in this time frame is a key issue in this case.
She claims that the companies didn’t warn her and give her enough information in time for her to
quit. So the truth about when she started and how much she smoked is very much a factual question I suggest you need to decide.
So let’s look at that evidence. Ms. Whitney testified that she started smoking at 13 or 14, that would have been in 1961 and 1962, when she was in junior high school. She can’t remember if her first cigarette was one that she and Sharon got from their dad’s pack and sneaked or whether she got it from a vending machine.
She testified that she started smoking because she wanted to look mature, be cool, and fit into the -- I think she called it the in -- be in with the group that she hung out with.
She says she became a regular smoker almost immediately after that first cigarette. She says by the time she was a junior, she was smoking a pack a day, 20 cigarettes a day. By senior year, she says up to a pack and a half, 30 cigarettes a day.
You remember her testimony. Get up, smoke a cigarette on the way to pick up her best friend, Melinda Russell, pick up Melinda, smoke a cigarette on the way to school, park the car, smoke a cigarette on the way to school, smoke cigarettes at
breaks at high school, smoke cigarettes over the lunch break, go to her job as part of that CBE program at the Miami Rug Company, smoke constantly all afternoon, go home, smoke in the car on the way home, make dinner, do some chores, leave at 7:00 to go out, smoke constantly until she got back at 11:00, go to bed, and get up the next morning and do it again.
Now, Ms. Whitney testified that she hid her smoking for all those years from her parents until she started smoking after she had graduated and had gotten married in 1967. She hid her smoking because she testified she knew that her parents didn’t want her to smoke and she would get into trouble if they caught her.
But she testified they never caught her.
Never a question from her parents about her smoking or her clothes smelling like smoke. Never left a pack around her room. Never left a butt where it could be found. Never left a butt in the car or left it smelling like smoke. No matches ever found, no lighters, no nothing.
Regular smoker since she was in the eighth grade, pack a day as a junior, pack and a half as a senior, not one mistake. According to her
testimony, Ms. Whitney was very, very good at hiding things from her parents and her smoking.
But as Judge Monaco instructed you, you can use reason and common sense in evaluating the evidence in the case. Does reason and common sense tell you that if Ms. Whitney smoked as much as she claimed she did from junior high all the way through high school in the amount that she did, that her parents, who we know were opposed to her smoking, wouldn’t have figured it out?
Kids can get over on parents sometimes, no question. But years and years of heavy smoking, often in the car, and they never noticed? Really?
Now, her best friend in high school was Melinda Russell. Best friend. And you heard her testify by deposition last week. She did testify Ms. Whitney smoked, but her testimony about how much was quite different. You remember it?
The earliest she remembers Ms. Whitney smoking was in the ninth grade. She testified that she didn’t smoke every day in junior high, and she didn’t know how much Ms. Whitney smoked at that time, she didn’t remember how often Ms. Whitney smoked.
She thinks they started smoking every day in
their junior year when they had a car. But her recollection and testimony was that it was more like one cigarette in the morning on the way to school, maybe a cigarette or two at lunch because they could -- you know, when they would take their lunch break, and then maybe one or two on the way home .
She also testified there were times when she might not have smoked at all, that’s her friend’s testimony, a few cigarettes a day and some days no smoking at all. Doesn’t your reason and common sense tell you that that sounds a whole lot more like how a high school kid would smoke?
Yesterday, you heard the testimony of Myra Drummond-Ryan. Remember her deposition testimony? She was a grade ahead of Ms. Whitney. She was close friends with Ms. Whitney’s sister Sharon in junior high and high school. Myra spent time at the Baldwin home.
She testified she was almost a member of the family. She dated Ms. Whitney’s brother Gary. She went on family trips with them to the beach. She was a bridesmaid at Sharon and Ms. Whitney’s double wedding and attended the rehearsal dinner and the wedding and the reception.
She testified that before she graduated from high school in 1965, and that would have been at the -- excuse me, at the end of Ms. Whitney’s junior year, she never saw Ms. Whitney smoke a cigarette.
Now, she did make clear that she was closer to Sharon, Sharon was her better friend than Ms. Whitney, but she also testified she didn’t remember Ms. Whitney smoking in 1967 at the rehearsal dinner or in and around the wedding or the reception after or any of those events.
To her, Ms. Whitney was a nonsmoker and she was surprised, she told you, to find out much later, 1977, ’79, at a nightclub that she was a smoker.
But Ms. Whitney -- Myra also told you one other very important fact. She told you that Sharon and Ms. Whitney shared a bedroom growing up, they had the same bedroom.
Now, Sharon, her sister, came here to testify in court, and she was asked when did your sister start smoking regularly? Remember what she said?
"I can’t remember. It was so long ago. I just can’t remember."
She also testified, "I know Ms. Whitney dated
a boy in high school, he was a little older and he smoked, so maybe they smoked together in high school. But I’m not positive." Those are her words.
Now, remember, Sharon is just one year older than Ms. Whitney. Now, as I say, kids can hide things from parents sometimes, but reason and common sense tell you that if Ms. Whitney,
Ms. Whitney could not have hid the amount of smoking she says she was doing for years and years and years from her sister who lived and slept in the same room.
How could Sharon not know Ms. Whitney was smoking that much if, if she was smoking as much as she claims? My goodness, I mean, Sharon even testified, remember, she has a memory of a boy Ms. Whitney dated who smoked, but she has no specific memory and could provide no specific testimony about Ms. Whitney, her sister, smoking that she lived with.
MS. KUCHLER: Stan, you have used 60 minutes.
MR. DAVIS: Thank you very much, Deb.
You have also heard testimony from Ms. Whitney’s brother Larry, that deposition was read to you yesterday, and he explained how strict
the household was, how their father made it clear that the children could not smoke until they were of legal age.
And up until 1965, when he left to go into the service, Larry didn’t know whether -- he didn’t know that Ms. Whitney was a smoker. Now, recall that Ms. Whitney began her senior year in high school in 1965.
And up until the time he left, in that time period, her brother Larry never saw her smoke, never smelled smoke on her clothes. He testified about that. And he saw her every day. In fact, the first time he remembers Ms. Whitney smoking at all was in September 1970, when he came back home to live for six months after he had been in Vietnam.
He doesn’t know when she started. That’s her brother Larry, the one who went to Hialeah Hospital stop-smoking clinic with her, the one who testified he was closer to Karen than all his other siblings.
Now, Larry did testify about all the things he had never heard from Ms. Whitney. She never told him that any cigarette ad caused her to start or to continue or to not quit smoking. Nothing about ads. Never told him she believed anything about --
anything about an ad.
Never told him she didn’t believe the truth of the warning labels or that any tobacco company had confused her about whether smoking was dangerous or addictive or difficult to quit or that she thought cigarettes were safe.
Nothing she ever told him suggested that she was getting mixed messages or she was waiting to hear something from a tobacco company before she made a decision to quit smoking or that she believed that tobacco companies were more credible than the Surgeon General or any of the other information she was given.
Doesn’t reason and common sense tell you that if, in fact, Ms. Whitney was, in fact, struggling at that level with those issues, that she would have discussed it with her dad and Larry at least in the context of the stop-smoking clinic?
They’re on the way home from the clinic. She says, "Hey, stop, I need a pack of cigarettes." What? Now? We just were there. Don’t you think they would have said why? Doesn’t common sense tell you, "Why, Sharon, why are you doing this?"
And don’t you think that if she was struggling internally, waiting to hear something from a
tobacco company, mixed messages, not sure about health, would she have told Larry that then and discussed it?
Isn’t that where the application of logic and reason takes you in the evidence in this case?
Yesterday, you saw the video deposition of Maurine Gregory. She was another friend of Ms. Whitney in high school, and that was in her junior and senior year. They were classmates in that Cooperative Business Education Club or CBE class. CBE class. They were one of Mrs. King’s beauties, remember?
They sat next to each other in class. They got in trouble for cutting up in class.
Ms. Whitney signed her yearbook, wrote her a nice note, "Love you, Maurine." "Love you, Maurine."
Ms. Whitney was standing next to Miss Gregory in that CBE class photo.
You heard Maurine Gregory say she didn’t like smoking, she didn’t like the smell of smoke at all, she had a nose for smoke and smokers, said she had a nose like a Beagle, and she was very sensitive to odors.
She remembers being able to tell if a student had had a cigarette at a lunch break and came back
and sat next to her because, in her words, that student reeked of smoke.
Maurine never remembers Ms. Whitney smoking a cigarette in high school. Never smelled smoke on her. She thought she was a nonsmoker. She sat next to her in class. And she testified, you saw it, without equivocation, without doubt, that if Ms. Whitney had been smoking 30 cigarettes a day, she would have smelled it.
Maurine Gregory, as you know, also gave direct evidence of what the smoking and the risks of smoking were in that time frame in that high school, that auditorium program in Hialeah High.
Miss Gregory was in the same cohort, she knew that smoking could cause lung cancer, she told you it didn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out smoking was dangerous to your health, and she was speaking exactly in the same time frame that Ms. Whitney was involved in here.
So no witness corroborates Ms. Whitney’s claim of when she started smoking and how much she smoked through high school. Not her brother, who didn’t even know she was smoking then, or her sister, who remembers a boy she was dating that was smoking, but nothing about her smoking and can’t be positive
she was smoking in high school. And she shared a bedroom with her.
Myra Drummond-Ryan, a close member of the family, had sleepovers, took trips, dated Gary, knew nothing. Maurine Gregory, the close friend from the CBE class in school, hated the smell of smoke, never smelled it on her.
The most we have in the case is Melinda Russell, the best friend, who says they smoked a few cigarettes in junior high and in their junior and senior year, sometimes they would drive to school, over break, at lunch break, and home, and even then, not necessarily every day.
Now, we have, other than the testimony of the witnesses, we have other evidence of Ms. Whitney’s smoking before July 1, 1969. That’s her medical records. Ms. Whitney testified that over the years, when she went to doctors, they took medical histories from her and asked whether she smoked or drank.
Ms. Whitney stated that she never knowingly gave her doctors information that was inaccurate. She said she always wanted to give her doctors the most accurate information possible because she knew they would use that information to decide how best
to treat her.
Now, let’s look at some of that evidence. And this is all in evidence.
Can I, please?
THE COURT: You’ve got 23 minutes left.
MR. DAVIS: 2 3 minutes.
MS. HENNINGER: Left in —
THE COURT: That’s for both defendants.
MR. DAVIS: All right. I’m going to move through these quickly.
This is a medical record, this is Exhibit 57 from Florida Neurological Association -Associates. It is dated -- you will find it here. It is dated September 8th, 2006. In it, it is reported -- it is signed by Ms. Whitney. You will see that.
Did you ever smoke? Yes. She smoked one pack a day for 40 years. This is in ’06. 40 years from ’06 is 1966. Ms. Whitney turned 16 -- 18, I’m sorry, in 1966. That would be after graduating from high school, when she was an adult.
This is Exhibit 65. It is from Digestive Disease Associates. It is dated April 30 of ’07. Tobacco use, smokes one pack per day for 40 years. 40 years from ’07 is 1967. She was an adult, and
like the other record, this was before this lawsuit was filed.
This is Exhibit 68. It is from her primary physician, Elizabeth Sanders. The question is -it is signed by Ms. Whitney. It is dated March 8 of 2011. It says that she smoked one and a half packs a day for 40 years, and quit in 2008. You can see it. It is dated 6/5/09.
How old were you when you -- yeah, I’m sorry. It’s dated March 8 of ’11, quit in ’08, that would be 1968. She was an adult at that time and out of high school.
This is a record that you saw used with her on the stand, Exhibit 60. It’s from the Moffitt Cancer Center. Total cancer survey. It’s dated June 5, ’09. "How old were you when you started smoking cigarettes?" 18. She was 18 in the fall of 1966, after she graduated, when she was an adult, and this is another record before the lawsuit was filed.
And the last record I want to show you is this one, Exhibit 61. This is in Ms. Whitney’s own handwriting. It shows her date of birth. It was filled out by her. And it was at Pulmonary Physicians of Gainesville. It is dated 5/19 of
’09, and it is two years before this lawsuit was filed.
Smoking history. Former smoker. Age started, 18. Age stopped, 59. One pack a day. Her words, her writing, her handwriting before this lawsuit was filed.
I respectfully suggest to you that the evidence in this case shows that Ms. Whitney may have smoked a few cigarettes in high school, but she did not smoke as early or as much as you would believe -- have you believe.
I respectfully suggest that the preponderance of the evidence in this case is that Ms. Whitney did not start smoking regularly until 1966 or later, after the warning in ’66 went on. And as we know, Ms. Whitney told you she read that warning.
It may be in her interest in this lawsuit, and you may consider her interest, in terms of the outcome of the case, to have you believe that she smoked and started smoking and was hopelessly addicted before she got that warning.
And so knowing when Ms. Whitney started smoking and when she learned the risks are important in this case. And if you judge all the testimony and decide she started smoking when --
decide that she started smoking when she said she did, before this lawsuit was filed, what she told her doctors, well, that’s another reason to put no in those checks on questions 1 and 2.
I don’t know if you’ll read them, I covered this very quickly, I want to make sure.
MS. HENNINGER: I just need ten minutes.
MR. DAVIS: You’ve just got ten minutes?
MS. HENNINGER: I need ten.
MR. DAVIS: I’ll move quickly. I want to give Miss Henninger some time.
I don’t know if you’ll reach the issue of comparative fault, but it’s on the verdict form. It’s right here. If you reach that issue, you’ll have to decide, you get to decide what the percentage of fault is ascribed here. But I would -- if you -- I’ll leave that to you.
Damages. There is a line for damages. And the only point I want to make here is that we did stipulate to the medical damages in the past and the cost of her future treatment, but please understand, that was to shorten the trial and prevent the necessity of putting on evidence.
It was not because we accept liability, because we are not required to accept liability
under the law. We do contest that we were responsible. We do contest that the companies have responsibility.
As far as punitive damages, that final question involves punitive damages, the first thing I want to make you aware of and understand is that you are being asked to decide, you are not being asked to decide the amount, you are being asked to decide whether, under the circumstances of this case, they are appropriate based on clear and convincing evidence.
I don’t think you’ll reach this issue, but if you are, you should -- you are deciding whether punitive damages should be awarded to punish and to deter others. Before we ever get to the amount, there will be another phase of the trial, there will be more evidence, there will be more argument, and you’ll have a time to deliberate to determine that amount.
Let’s talk about the standard for a moment, clear and convincing evidence. Punitive damages are warranted only if they can be proved by clear and convincing evidence. It’s a much higher standard than preponderance of the evidence because of the nature of these damages.
It’s your instructions, but the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue.
And keep in mind, this case is about Ms. Whitney, and your instructions talk about the conduct that caused her harm as the basis of punitive damages. That’s the law. You’ll see it in your instructions.
Any punitive damages has to be based on the conduct that you would find caused her lung cancer, and in the context of this case, it’s the product claims and the negligence claims relating to warnings before 1969.
Only if you find the companies were guilty of intentional misconduct or gross negligence, which was a substantial cause of injury to her, can you award punitive damages if they prove it by clear and convincing evidence. Folks, there is a question on that. I respectfully suggest you should check no if you get there.
I want to thank you for serving as jurors. I have run more time than I meant. And I apologize to Miss Henninger for short-circuiting her
presentation, and I didn’t mean to take her time, but I thank you for your diligence, it’s an important case to Ms. Whitney, it’s an important case to us. We respect Ms. Whitney’s right to bring this case.
I’ve been in the system 35 years. I’m delighted that people can bring big corporations to court, delighted. But with that is a responsibility to prove your case under the law and the evidence.
And you know what, if we have impartial jurors that give everybody a fair shake and base the case on the evidence in the case and the actual claims of the law presented, then truth and justice is what comes out. And I could not be more proud of that or more confident in you.
And I thank you very much for your time.



MS. HENNINGER: Good morning still.
Mrs. Whitney, Your Honor.
Well, it’s been a long a little bit over two weeks. And as you’ve heard, I don’t have much time to address you this morning, but I’m going to try to make my points as quickly as I can because as you know, we’ve all prepared for this and we have
things that we want to say, but the first that I do need to take time and thank you for being here.
Mr. Kelley and I agree on this, we have to, you know, give you our appreciation for agreeing to be jurors in this case. You’ve paid attention, you’ve taken notes, and we truly appreciate it.
There has been times in this case that we’ve had a couple laughs here and there, but it is a very serious matter and you’ve taken it very seriously, and everyone in this courtroom appreciates that.
Now, Mr. Davis talked to you about the issues for the jury to decide, and essentially, these are did R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris fail to warn about the dangers of smoking before 1969, and if so, was this a legal cause of her lung cancer in 2009, and the second, as Mr. Davis just talked to you about, and I’ll get into a little more detail on, is whether or not Ms. Whitney is entitled to punitive damages.
Now, this is essentially the question you have to ask on the first, and it’s whether Mrs. Whitney -- that Mrs. Whitney did not get lung cancer because R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris failed to warn her about the dangers of smoking
before 1969.
What does that mean? Mr. Davis explained this to you a little bit. He explained to you there is two parts to that question, two parts to the two questions on failure to warn before 1969, and the first is simply failure to warn, it’s kind of self-evident.
Plaintiff must prove that R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris failed to warn about the dangers of cigarettes before 1969. That’s the first part of that question.
And then the second part of that question he explained is the legal cause part, and that is, plaintiff must prove that any pre-1969 failure to warn was the legal cause of Mrs. Whitney’s lung cancer that developed 40-some years later.
So I’m going to start looking at the first.
And Mr. Davis covered this in spades, so I’m not going to waste much time doing it, but essentially, the jury instruction is this, and Mr. Davis showed it to you, but there is two things to point out which he pointed out.
First, you can’t hold the defendants liable merely because we make cigarettes. Remember, about two weeks ago, I sat here and said, hey, this isn’t
a popularity contest, it’s not about whether you like or dislike cigarettes or tobacco companies.
And that’s exactly what that instruction is telling you. And you can’t hold RJR or Philip Morris liable just because we sell cigarettes.
And the second part is what he explains so eloquently is that there is no duty to warn or instruct about risks or risk avoidance measures that should be obvious to or generally known by the foreseeable product users.
So what does that mean? Well, you heard that Mr. Kelley said that, you know, the first two questions are easy, and they’re really not, because there is a lot more to it. In fact, there are a lot of documents that he showed, and I suspect that in Mr. Mitnik’s 30-some minutes he has left, you are going to see more internal company documents.
We do not have time to address all of those tobacco company documents, but when you go back in the jury room, if you choose to look at the exhibits and the evidence that’s in there, look at the dates of the documents. Look who wrote the documents.
Because one of the documents that Mr. Kelley showed you today that he said was a secret internal
document that nobody ever got to see was Plaintiff’s Exhibit Number 15, and this was written by a scientist, Dr. Claude Teague at R.J. Reynolds in 1953, and what it is, it’s a review of public literature, literature that is published.
He went to the library, he looked at it, and he wrote a paper on it. And, in fact, the final four pages of Plaintiff’s Exhibit Number 4 {sic} is a bibliography where he cites everything that was available in the public literature.
Now, there is no duty to warn when the risks are open and obvious, and you don’t need to be a doctor or scientist or a tobacco company employee to have known before 1969 that smoking was dangerous or hazardous.
And Mr. Davis covered all of these with you, and I am not going to go over them. They’re all in evidence about the common knowledge that was available not to doctors and scientists and tobacco companies, but to members of the general public like Mrs. Whitney, people who read magazines and watched television news.
And you also heard a lot about advertising.
And I think the claim is being made somehow that before 1969, even though everybody knew that
smoking was bad, somehow, all these ads that you showed and Mr. Kelley showed you again this morning somehow -- I don’t know what the claim is other than the ads made it look glamorous.
And you saw ads that -- for products that Mrs. Whitney smoked and ads that -- for products she didn’t smoke. She didn’t smoke Philip Morris {sic}. She didn’t smoke Camel cigarettes. She didn’t smoke Lucky Strikes. But you saw all of those ads.
But let’s ask yourself what ads influenced her to choose the products she chose, at least for my client, prior to 1969, and the answer is none.
There is no evidence that ads had anything to do with her decisions in choosing the two brands of cigarettes my client made prior to 1969, and that’s Winston and Salem.
The evidence is in this case that she chose Winstons, she chose them after Marlboros because her friends smoked Winstons. She sang the jingle with Mr. Kelley when she was up on that stand, but never once did she say that any advertising by R.J. Reynolds and Winston cigarettes, the Flintstones, Winstons taste good like a cigarette should, never did she say that’s why I chose Winstons.
The same thing for Salems. She chose Salems in 1969 because a friend gave them to her. That’s when she was out of cigarettes, a friend gave her a cigarette, he gave her a Salem, and she liked them. She started smoking Salems not because of any advertising, but because someone gave them to her.
So advertising has nothing to do with the R.J. Reynolds brands that she smoked before 1969.
And for that reason, plaintiff can’t get over her first hurdle, she can’t get over it for Philip Morris and she can’t get over it for Reynolds, but let’s for the sake of argument look at legal causation, and that is that plaintiff must prove any pre-’69 failure to warn was a legal cause of Mrs. Whitney’s cancer in 2009.
Now, this is the legal instruction, I’m not going to read it all because I am short on time, but you will have it with you, and it’s important to point out directly, continuously, substantially, but for the negligence or product defect, the loss or injury or damage would not have occurred.
That’s a lot of legal mumbo-jumbo, a lot of legal language up there, so I broke it down like this. The failure to warn must directly cause, continuously cause, and substantially cause
Mrs. Whitney’s lung cancer in 2009, and that’s not the case.
And it’s not the case for the simple reason, first, Mr. Davis covered numerous reasons, but this is one simple reason it’s not the case. And that’s because two witnesses took the stand, Mrs. Whitney took the stand, she was up there and she looked you in the eyes and she very honestly said that she takes responsibility for not quitting smoking.
And the day before she did that, Dr. Burns took the stand and he told you that all smokers, even addicted smokers, heavily addicted smokers, people who think they are controlled by smoking, as Mrs. Whitney said, everyone, only Mrs. Whitney could have made the choice to decide to quit smoking.
Everybody can quit, and only Mrs. Whitney held the key. She held the key, and she admits that she is responsible for not quitting smoking. That’s the but-for cause.
So in my little time left, I want to talk about punitive damages. And punitive damages are, as Mr. -- well, Mr. Kelley described them, the reason that we’re here, but it’s not. We’re here because plaintiff has a pre-’69 failure-to-warn
claim. And any claim for punitive damages must be based on first establishing that there was some duty to warn prior to 1969, which there is not.
But if you get to punitive damages, you’re going to have the instructions in front of you, and it’s a different burden for plaintiff. Mr. Davis started getting there, he was running out of time a little bit, so let me cover it.
The question is has plaintiff proven by clear and convincing evidence that R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris intentionally pursued a wrongful course of conduct having actual knowledge of the wrongfulness and a high probability of injury or damage, or acted so recklessly or wanting in care that it constituted a conscious disregard or indifference to the life, safety, or rights of smokers. That’s the standard, clear and convincing.
Now, I want to talk just a little bit about three quick reasons why I think that you should answer no to that for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. And the first is Dr. Cummings.
Dr. Cummings admitted that Reynolds scientists sincerely believed that they developed low-tar cigarettes because they were safer. He told you
that he reviewed all of these documents, thousands, and he digitized them, and then I got to cross-examine him and I asked him three simple questions, in review of all of your documents, did you see documents in the internal Reynolds files that showed that Reynolds developed low-tar cigarettes because it’s what the scientific and medical community was urging him to do, and he said yes.
And then I said, "Did you see documents that Reynolds scientists sincerely believed that lower tar nicotine -- lower tar and nicotine cigarettes would reduce the risk of disease?" And he said yes. Scientists, not lawyers.
And then I asked him, "Did you see, in all of those thousands of documents, documents where Reynolds scientists believed that compensation was temporary and incomplete?" That means that lower tar and nicotine cigarettes, the smokers actually did get lower tar. And he said yes. That’s not actually conscious disregard, willful conduct.
And let’s talk quickly about something else. There is something called TWG, and I’m not going to go into it too much, but it’s the Tobacco Working Group, you’ve heard about it, it’s when the NCI,
the National Cancer Institute, and the tobacco companies’ representatives worked together to try to develop a safer cigarette.
Well, they worked together, and there is some insinuation that perhaps the scientists from the tobacco companies weren’t really doing their best, they were representing themselves and they weren’t really allowed to try, but you saw this, it’s in evidence as Defense Exhibit 27, this is a letter from the president of R.J. Reynolds to the scientist who was on the TWG, and he said, "If there is a safer cigarettes, let’s continue and increase our efforts in this program. Please prepare a plan to carry it out." That was the direction given to the RJR scientist. And the TWG wasn’t successful, there wasn’t a safer cigarette, but Reynolds kept trying.
And this is the last thing I’m going to talk to you about, why you should check no as to entitlement to punitive damages, because I talked to Dr. Cummings about this. Reynolds has tried and tried to develop safer cigarettes, and they’ve got something called a heat-not-burn cigarette. You may remember Premier and Eclipse.
Dr. Cummings has studied the Premier, he’s
studied the Eclipse, and some things he told us, he told us that the development of the heat, not burn, was a responsible thing for Reynolds to do. He studied Premier and he knows that smokers rejected it for a variety of reasons, because it tasted icky, it smelled bad, and it was really, really hard to light.
But after it failed in the marketplace, Reynolds didn’t stop. They continued to try. They spent a lot of money, and they came up with what Dr. Cummings called Son of Premier which is now known as Eclipse. And Eclipse is on the market, it’s still on the market today.
And I asked Dr. Cummings, I said -- I was standing right here and I said, "Dr. Cummings, isn’t it on the market today and it’s not doing too well?"
And he said, "You know what, it’s not doing well because you are not marketing it the right way. "
And then I was really shocked and surprised because Mr. Mitnik got up here and one of the first questions, if not the first question he asked Dr. Cummings, "Well, isn’t it true that Reynolds got sued for marketing Eclipse cigarettes as being
safer?”
It’s darned if you do, darned if you don’t. I don’t know which way.
Now, I’m going to be brief and just walk through this.
THE COURT: You’re out of time.
MS. HENNINGER: Okay. I’m just going to show where we check -- I guess we don’t -- you can -Mr. Davis showed you where you checked the nos and you go all the way through. Thank you.
