                  CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. BAYUK:  May it please the Court,
     counsel, Mr. and Mrs. Wilcox.  Ladies and
5282 gentlemen, good afternoon.  Hope you all had a
     nice lunch.  Probably the last time I'll be
     standing up here talking to you.  You may be
     happy about that.
          I'm going to talk to you for a little bit,
     and then Ms. Henninger is going to come and
     talk to you for a little bit more to give you
     our closing arguments.  But there's really
     nowhere else I could start but to thank you for
     your attention in this case.  The case has gone
     on almost a month.  We're in the middle of the
     fourth week.  It's been a long case.  You all
     have worked long hours, many days 8:00 to 6:00.
     Close to it.  So I know it's been hard on you.
     Thank you very much for your attention.
          You had to be very patient in this case.
     And I know sometimes you had to be a little too
     patient.  Actually, when you boil it down, it's
     a pretty simple case.  It's a pretty simple
     case about very specific legal issues, all
     directed to Mr. Wilcox.  Mr. Cleston Wilcox.
          I submit to you this case could have been
     tried in about a week.  We could have been here
     a much shorter time, but the case dragged on.
     Why did it do that?  Let me give you an
5283 example.
          MR. SALES:  Objection, Your Honor, to
     counsel's argument with respect to the length
     of the trial.  It's argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  Let me give you an example of
     why the case took so long.  You heard from
     Dr. Proctor.  Dr. Proctor was the first witness
     the plaintiff called, came from California.  He
     was on the stand for the better part of three
     days, and he came and talked to you and told
     you how much money he had made, how many
     thousands of dollars he had made just in the
     first two weeks of August.
          And he took the stand and he testified
     that he made an effort, he deliberately ignored
     learning anything about the decedent in the
     case.  He ignored learning about Mr. Wilcox.
     He knew there were depositions available.  He
     knew there were family members available to
     talk to, and he chose to ignore finding out
     anything about Mr. Wilcox, and instead came and
     talked to you all about generic issues, about
     generic conduct, about historical conduct and
     smokers other than Mr. Wilcox.
5284 And we asked about it on
     cross-examination.  And he said he's not a
     biographer of Mr. Wilcox.  In other words, he
     comes in and tells you about things, and he has
     no idea and has made no effort to learn whether
     they have any impact on Mr. Wilcox.
          And you heard a lot about that in the
     plaintiff's closing arguments, the first part
     of it you heard this morning.  You saw a lot of
     documents.  You heard a lot more about history.
     You heard about other smokers.  But you didn't
     hear much about Mr. Wilcox or whether any of
     the things that they showed, the documents they
     showed through time had any impact on
     Mr. Wilcox.
          And so I want to talk to you about the
     evidence that's been presented here that will
     help you answer the questions that you all have
     to decide.  Because you all have to decide
     questions that are very specific to Mr. Wilcox.
     Very specific.  Very specific legal issues.
     And all of the claims relate to one smoker, and
     that's Mr. Wilcox.
          And so you don't need to take my word for
     it.  Baron, can I have the ELMO.  It's not just
5285 me saying this is about Mr. Wilcox.  You can
     see just by looking at the verdict form --
     you're going to get this when you go back to
     deliberate.  I've highlighted it.  Get out of
     your way.
          Every question on the verdict form has
     Mr. Wilcox's name on it except for the last
     question.  Every claim in the case relates to
     Mr. Wilcox.
          Mr. Gustafson said in his opening
     statement -- or excuse me, in his closing
     argument that, showing you documents, you have
     to decide whether you are going to accept what
     Reynolds did, whether that was wrong.  Whether,
     looking at the documents, was it wrong for
     Reynolds to do that.
          There's no question on the verdict form
     about that.  There's no question about these
     documents that you've seen.  I'm not going to
     waste your time talking about the documents,
     because that was a prior trial.  That case was
     tried almost 20 years ago.  That jury, the
     Engle jury, heard nothing about Mr. Wilcox.
     That's why you all are here.  If they had heard
     it, the Engle jury heard anything about him,
5286 you all wouldn't be here and you --
          MR. SALES:  Objection.  No basis in the
     record for those statements of counsel.
          MR. BAYUK:  This is argument, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BAYUK:  You all wouldn't be here,
     certainly not for four weeks.  We've seen every
     claim relates to Mr. Wilcox.
          There's some jury instructions -- you all
     are going to have copies of these when you go
     back to the jury room.  This is what Judge
     Lindsey read to you this morning.  I wanted to
     point a few of these out to you to aid us as we
     walk through the evidence and to aid you when
     you all go back to the jury room and think
     about the evidence in the case.
          The first one I want to show you all is on
     the third page -- you're going to have page
     numbers at the bottom of the set you get.  I
     want to show you first what's on page 3 of the
     instructions.
          Pretty simple instruction, but it means
     quite a bit.  See if I can zoom in here.  I
     don't know how to zoom in here, but this
     reminds you that the plaintiff bears the burden
5287 of proof on every issue in the case.
          It should be no surprise to you all.
     You've been told this.  You were told this
     before opening statement.  Judge Lindsey read
     it to you this morning.  The plaintiff is the
     one bringing the case.  They bear the burden.
     They bear the burden of proof.  They have to
     bring you evidence to prove their claims.
          Another instruction that's important is on
     page 32 of the instructions you're going to
     take back to the jury room with you, and this
     tells you what the evidence is in the case.
          MS. HENNINGER:  The black knob.
          MR. BAYUK:  It tells you the evidence is
     the sworn testimony of witnesses, the exhibits
     and the facts that were admitted or agreed to
     by the parties.  And it goes on to tell you,
     you should and you can use reason and common
     sense.  You can draw inferences, but you should
     not guess about things that were not covered
     here.
          You should make the plaintiff bring you
     evidence.  The plaintiff can't meet their
     burden by arguing things, by asking you to rely
     on argument, by asking you to connect the dots
5288 for them for evidence they didn't bring.
          While I'm up here, I want to show you one
     more instruction.  This is going to be very
     important, because there are a lot of witnesses
     in this case.  A lot of witnesses.  This is on
     page 33 of your instructions.  And this tells
     you how to assess those witnesses.  Fact
     witnesses, expert witnesses, it tells you that
     you all are the triers of fact.  You judge the
     credibility of the witnesses.  You judge their
     demeanor.  You judge their opportunity to know
     things.
          And then for experts, you judge their
     credibility.  You can accept or reject any part
     of their testimony.  So you have to decide what
     you thought of the people that came to the
     witness stand and testified to you.  That's
     what you do back in the jury room.
          These are very important instructions.
     Not to say the other instructions aren't
     important.  But these are things that are going
     to help you walk through the evidence in the
     case.
          And so what we have is a very specific
     framework of how to approach your job in the
5289 case.  We know that every claim relates to
     Mr. Wilcox.  We know that the plaintiff has the
     burden on every claim.  And we know they have
     to meet that burden by bringing you evidence.
     Not argument, not rhetoric, not unreasonable
     inferences, but evidence.
          And so with that in mind, I want to talk
     to you about what the evidence actually is in
     this case that's going to help you answer the
     questions you're here to decide.
          But the first thing I want to do is, you
     know, based on -- can I switch that, please?
     The first thing I want to do is talk to you
     about some of the things that Dr. Proctor
     testified about.  Mr. Gustafson talked about in
     his closing today some issues based on this
     generic evidence that, although they made an
     issue out of it, although Dr. Proctor said
     these things, these are the admissions he gave
     us.  These are the admissions he gave us.  We
     resolved three days of testimony on issues --
     you heard Mr. Gustafson talk about
     R.J. Reynolds designed cigarettes for
     addiction, they engineered cigarettes to
     enhance addiction, they add things to boost
5290 addiction.
          What did their own experts say about these
     things?  Cigarettes were inhalable decades
     before Reynolds ever made a cigarette.
     Mr. Gustafson said inhalability was a secret.
     Dr. Proctor admitted on cross-examination
     that's not true.  We saw in opening statement.
     Saw on Dr. Proctor's cross-examination
     something called Florida Health Notes 1906,
     saying that basically the Surgeon General of
     Florida telling the public that they know you
     inhale cigarettes.  You saw documents back into
     the 1800s about inhalability.  This is no
     secret.
          Cigarette inhalability was not a secret.
     Cigarettes were always dangerous and addictive
     before R.J. Reynolds ever made a cigarette.
          A lot of testimony in this case about
     Camels coming out in 1913.  Dr. Proctor told
     you long before Camels, long before Reynolds
     ever made a cigarette, cigarettes were
     addictive and dangerous and inhalable.  Back in
     the 1800s, talking about smoker's cancer, mouth
     cancers, throat cancers, other dangers of
     smoking, as well as the addictiveness of
5291 smoking.  This is not a secret.  This comes
     from their witness.
          There is less nicotine in cigarette
     tobacco than in natural tobacco.  Dr. Proctor
     talked to you, you can go to a field anywhere
     they grow tobacco, pick it out of the ground,
     roll it up and smoke it.  That cigarette, that
     roll-your-own is going to have more nicotine in
     it than a manufactured cigarette.
          By the same token, this concept of
     additives -- you heard in closing, in the
     plaintiff's closing, ammonia, levulinic acid, a
     lot of talk about rat brains.  Well, what did
     Dr. Proctor say about those things?  He said
     none of those things impact the cigarettes in
     any way to change the dangers of them or the
     addictiveness of them.  They had nothing to do
     with Mr. Wilcox.
          And so the plaintiff puts these things in
     front of you, this generic evidence, and it
     doesn't help you answer the questions you're
     here to decide.
          The bottom line, cigarettes are dangerous
     and addictive by nature.  Reynolds did not
     design them or make them that way.  They were
5292 that way before Reynolds ever came around.
     That's what their experts said.
          Another issue they talked about,
     advertising.  You got an instruction this
     morning, that's actually on page 19 of your
     instructions, advertising is legal.  You can't
     hold Reynolds liable because they advertise.
     Reynolds advertised, like other companies
     advertised.  It's a legal activity.
          More importantly, for the claims, because
     we're focusing on Mr. Wilcox, there's no
     evidence he began smoking because of
     advertising.  You all know, every witness that
     came that knew him didn't know him when he was
     a youth, when he was young.  The first witness
     in the case who knows him is Mrs. Wilcox.  She
     met him in 1945 when he was 21 years old.  So
     nobody knows anything about him before that
     point.  Nobody came in and said he began
     smoking because of advertising.  There's no
     evidence that he continued smoking because of
     advertising or that he chose any brands based
     on advertising.  There's simply no evidence in
     the case.
          This is the type of specific evidence that
5293 the plaintiff would have to bring you to carry
     their burden, and they haven't done it.  So
     they brought you generic evidence that doesn't
     help you on any of the claims in the case.
          No witness told you about any ad that
     Mr. Wilcox ever saw.
          That's the bottom line.  You all took
     notes during the trial.  There was no evidence
     of that.  And that is the specific evidence
     they need.
          Another slide on that.  You saw this, I
     think, in the plaintiff's closing today, some
     of these Salem ads.  There's a lot of
     discussions about Salems became kind of a big
     part of the trial, you know, when and whether
     he switched to Salem or Salem Lights.
          You look at all of the evidence, I think
     it kind of uniformly establishes that to the
     extent if he switched to Salem, when he did, it
     would have been sometime in the 1970s.  You all
     heard Dr. Proctor say after 1971, every
     cigarette ad contained a warning.  Surgeon
     General's warning:  Cigarette smoking is
     dangerous to your health.  Every ad that he
     would have seen, if he saw any, for Salem, that
5294 would have been the health message on it.
     There's a lot of talk about whether he thought
     filters and lights or Salems were healthier or
     safer or better for him.
          You have all these ads in evidence.  When
     you go back to the jury room, if you want to
     look, see if you can find an ad that says those
     things.  All of the ads that he could have seen
     said it's dangerous to your health.  That's the
     health message.  Ms. Henninger is going to talk
     to you more about that when she gets up here.
          Then you heard from Dr. Strauss.
     Dr. Strauss was the witness we ended our case
     on.  We read his deposition designations.  He
     told you that no tobacco company ever marketed
     filters and lights as safe or safer.  He said
     that in the short excerpts that we read
     yesterday.
          Then we get to plaintiff's youth marketing
     case.  And, again, I just told you this, there
     is no evidence of what Mr. Wilcox did when he
     was a youth.  You have medical records saying
     he started smoking at age eight.  That's the
     extent of the evidence you have.
          They showed you a Reynolds document from
5295 1927 when he was three years old.  No evidence
     that he saw that.  Nobody knew him at that
     time.  Nobody can say when he became a regular
     smoker.  Nobody can say why he started smoking
     or what brand he smoked or whether it was a
     roll-your-own brand or a manufactured brand.
          No evidence of seeing any advertising.
     The first evidence we have about him is at age
     21.  That's the evidence in the case.  That's
     the evidence that you have to use to decide his
     claims.  Not about generic smokers or impact on
     the public or anything like that.  Mr. Wilcox's
     specific claims.
          And then filters.  This was talked about
     in plaintiff's closing.  But what did
     Dr. Proctor tell you about this on
     cross-examination?  First, there was no
     conspiracy to market filtered cigarettes as
     safer.  Anything -- they talked about the
     conspiracy, the arms of the conspiracy.  It
     didn't involve concealing the risks of filtered
     cigarettes.  Dr. Proctor admitted that.
          Then Dr. Proctor told you that there's no
     evidence that R.J. Reynolds concealed
     information about whether filtered cigarettes
5296 are safer.
          And then he told you the flip side of
     that.  He had seen evidence.  Dr. Proctor had
     seen documents where Reynolds actually believed
     that filters were safer.  And most importantly,
     again from Dr. Strauss -- Dr. Strauss is
     someone we took his deposition before trial.
     And then he didn't show up at trial, so we had
     to play his deposition.  Had to go depose him,
     read his deposition --
          MR. SALES:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  I had to get these admissions
     from him.  I had to get the --
          MR. SALES:  Objection.
          MR. BAYUK:  These are admissions he made
     in the deposition.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BAYUK:  I had to get these admissions
     out of him that he's reviewed the science on
     this, he's reviewed the science, the
     epidemiology studying whether filters and light
     cigarettes are actually safer.  Actually pose
     less risk to smokers in terms of lung cancer
     than smoking full-flavored cigarettes like
5297 Camels.  And he admitted it.  He said the
     evidence that you showed me actually supports
     that, and I don't know anything else.
          That's what the public health community
     recommendations were based on when they told
     people to switch to filtered and lights.
     Ms. Henninger is going to talk to you about
     that a little bit more when she gets up.
          But these issues, these are things that
     the plaintiff has put in front of you that
     don't help you answer the questions in this
     case.  We need to look at the evidence specific
     to Mr. Wilcox.
          There's no questions about this on the
     verdict form.  The questions are about him.
     And so I want to talk to you about the evidence
     that's going to help you.
          They spent three and a half weeks
     reproving the Engle findings.  They have the
     Engle findings if they prove class membership.
     They have those findings, and what they chose
     to do with their time was to bring evidence to
     simply reprove them instead of bringing
     evidence as to whether they would be connected
     to Mr. Wilcox.  And that does not meet their
5298 burden of proof.
          That does not meet their burden of proof.
     They need to bring you guys evidence, specific
     evidence about Mr. Wilcox.
          Their case by the numbers, they spent
     eight days, 13 witnesses, and I don't even know
     if that counts Dr. Villa, who came twice.  50
     hours of testimony, 184 exhibits.  And how much
     of that -- you all have this in your notes.
     How much of that, what evidence did they bring
     you to show that anything R.J. Reynolds said or
     did had an impact on Mr. Wilcox?
          It's a pretty simple answer.  You're going
     to have all the evidence back in the jury room.
     You're going to have it all back there.  You're
     going to have your notes, you're going to have
     the evidence.
          Their burden in this case is to link up
     conduct to Mr. Wilcox, not to prove conduct in
     general.  That's what this trial is about.  And
     they have not carried their burden on that
     issue.
          By the same token, what evidence did they
     bring you that R.J. Reynolds or any other
     tobacco company caused Mr. Wilcox's death?
5299 Nothing.
          Again, you have all the evidence.  You
     will have it back there.  They did not bring
     you any evidence.  You won't find any back
     there.  You won't find anything showing any
     connection between Reynolds causing harm or
     death to Mr. Wilcox.  That's just a fact.
          What is the evidence?  What is the
     evidence?  First place I want to start is I
     have a board, it's very important evidence for
     you in the case, and it came directly from
     Mr. Robert Wilcox.  Obviously, there are a few
     different Wilcoxes in the case.  I don't mean
     any disrespect if I refer to somebody as
     Lieutenant or Bob or Mr. Wilcox, meaning the
     smoker.  It could get a little confusing.  So I
     don't mean any disrespect to anybody, to try to
     keep it clear.
          So these came from Mr. Bob Wilcox, the
     plaintiff in the case.  He admitted these.
     Judge Lindsey told you about these in the
     instructions before opening statement.  When
     Mr. Wilcox was on the witness stand and talking
     to Ms. Henninger, he admitted these during his
     cross-examination.  And then Judge Lindsey read
5300 these to you -- the instructions, this morning.
     You're going to have these when you go back to
     the jury room.
          Mr. Wilcox admitted that his father, the
     smoker, Cleston Wilcox, could have tried harder
     to quit smoking.  He could have tried longer to
     quit smoking.  And because of that, because of
     that fault that he admits on behalf of his
     father, Mr. Wilcox was a legal cause of his own
     death.
          We're here about what caused Mr. Wilcox's
     death.  And the plaintiff in the case, the
     person that is driving the case, admits that
     Mr. Wilcox himself was the cause of his death.
     This is an admission that's going to help you
     answer questions.  This is a specific admission
     relating directly Mr. Wilcox.
          It's going to help you answer questions
     about class membership and the other issues in
     the case.  But we have more admissions.  And so
     what else did Mr. Wilcox, the plaintiff, Bob
     Wilcox, testify to on the stand?
          And this puts back into perspective where
     I began, talking about why Dr. Proctor was here
     so long, why there's all this generic evidence
5301 in the case.  How is any of it connected to
     Mr. Wilcox?
          Remember Dr. Proctor chose to ignore the
     evidence about Mr. Wilcox.  But this is what
     Plaintiff Bob Wilcox told us.  And he's the one
     bringing the concealment claim.  He's the one
     bringing the conspiracy claim, and he knows he
     needs to have evidence to prove those claims.
     And this is the evidence we got on the stand
     during trial.
          He admitted there's no evidence Mr. Wilcox
     ever heard, read or saw any statements by
     tobacco company.  There's no evidence that
     Mr. Wilcox ever saw any specific cigarette
     advertisements.  No evidence he ever relied on
     any statement by a tobacco company about the
     dangers or addictiveness of smoking.  No
     evidence he ever questioned the risks of
     smoking.  And no evidence that he was ever
     confused about the dangers or addictiveness of
     smoking.  Simply put, there is no evidence, by
     plaintiff's own admission, to meet the claims
     in the case, to meet the concealment and the
     conspiracy claims in the case.
          This tells you all you need to know.  I
5302 don't think you're going to get to this part of
     the verdict form.  I think these are
     questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form.  I don't
     think you'll get there.  But if you do, all you
     need to know is this.  Coming from the person
     who is bringing the claims.
          Ryan, can I have the projector again,
     please?
          And so what else do we know?
     Ms. Henninger showed you this in opening.  We
     told you these were the five fundamental facts
     that you need to know -- I'm sorry.  Sorry
     about that.  Thank you for letting me know.
          The five fundamental facts that you need
     to know about Mr. Wilcox's case.  Because these
     will, in addition to these admissions we showed
     you on the boards, these will answer every
     question that you have to answer.
          Mr. Wilcox did not start or continue
     smoking because of anything R.J. Reynolds said
     or did.  We see the plaintiff's admission.
     This is undisputed.  We see what plaintiff
     admitted about this.
          Number two, Mr. Wilcox understood the
     dangers of smoking for decades and never
5303 questioned the risks.  That's undisputed.  You
     have your notes, you'll have the evidence.  Try
     to find evidence that he was confused.  There
     is none.  Mr. Wilcox admitted it on the stand.
          Number three, Mr. Wilcox did not make a
     serious effort to quit until 1992 when he was
     able to quit the first day he tried.  You heard
     the evidence about this both from Dr. Herkov
     and Dr. Abramson.  There's going to be no
     dispute about this.  You're going to see
     Dr. Herkov says, a serious quit attempt is
     stopping smoking for a day.  And Mr. Wilcox
     never did that.  Their own expert will say
     Mr. Wilcox never made a serious or genuine
     attempt to quit smoking before he quit the
     first day he tried in 1992.  It's undisputed.
          Number four, plaintiff cannot prove that
     Mr. Wilcox died from a primary lung cancer
     caused by smoking.  Ms. Henninger is going to
     talk to you a lot about that.  When we walk
     through the evidence on that point, I think you
     will see that there has been a failure to carry
     the burden of proof on that issue, a failure to
     prove that Mr. Wilcox had a cancer that started
     in his lung and that was caused by smoking and
5304 caused his death.
          And then finally, number five, plaintiff
     admits that Mr. Wilcox was a legal cause of his
     own death.  It's the same thing we showed on
     the board.  Ladies and gentlemen, you wouldn't
     admit that the smoker was the legal cause of
     their own death if they were controlled by
     nicotine or they were confused about the
     dangers, why would that person be at fault?
     Why would you admit fault for causing your own
     death if that was the case?  But that's not the
     case.  That's why they admitted fault.  We're
     going to talk more about that.
          But we have more specific evidence than
     this.  We have statements, you've heard them
     from the witness stand, of things that
     Mr. Wilcox said or descriptions of how he was
     and descriptions of how he viewed his smoking.
     And these are undisputed.  Every witness who
     knew anything about this admitted to these
     things.  Undisputed, uncontroverted in the
     record.  Things like, mind your own business,
     and don't ever question me again.  That is what
     the plaintiff says his father would have said
     if someone questioned his smoking.  That's
5305 clear and unequivocal.  He did what he wanted
     to do.  He made choices about what he wanted to
     do.  Things were done his way.  He lived his
     life the way he wanted.
          Now, the plaintiff comes in and says
     Mr. Wilcox was a nicotine addict.  He was
     controlled by nicotine.  He was confused about
     things.  Other people influenced him.
          Does that sound like Mr. Wilcox?  This is
     the evidence in the case.  Ladies and
     gentlemen, the only person who was in control
     of Mr. Wilcox was Mr. Wilcox.  Nobody could
     question his smoking, not Mrs. Wilcox, not
     either of his sons, not his friends, not
     doctors who would tell him to quit, and he
     would leave the doctor.  He's the one who was
     in the driver's seat.  He's the one who made
     the decisions about his smoking, and he didn't
     let other people dictate his behavior.  And
     when you go back to deliberate, there is no
     contrary evidence to this.  There's none.
          He didn't want to have anybody tell him he
     shouldn't smoke.  It doesn't get any more clear
     than that.  Nobody could tell him about his
     smoking.  Nobody could dictate what he was
5306 going to do about his smoking.
          You've heard, and we're going to discuss
     it in some detail, when he quit in '92, that's
     the first time he let anyone do anything about
     his smoking.  He told his wife, throw the
     cigarettes out now.  Throw the ashtrays out
     now.  I'm quitting smoking.  That's the first
     time.  Before that, these are the statements
     you have.  This is what he thought about his
     smoking.
          And so when you are going to come into
     court and you're going to ask for $10 million
     and you're going to ask for 5 percent fault or
     10 percent fault, you have to take a step back
     and not rewrite history.  You have to look at
     what the person was like.  You have to look at
     what every witness in the case said about him.
          This is the specific evidence that helps
     you answer the questions you're going to
     decide, not generic documents, not things that
     are unconnected to Mr. Wilcox, not things that
     are just based on argument.  You've got to base
     your decision on evidence.  They have to carry
     their burden based on evidence.
          And so the verdict form question 1, this
5307 is the class membership question, first
     question you're going to get.  Was Cleston
     Wilcox addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a
     legal cause of his lung cancer and death?
          We're going to talk about what this
     entails.  You all may remember from opening,
     there are three hurdles, there's three
     components of this issue.  There's addiction,
     there's addiction causation, and there's
     medical causation.
          I'm going to talk to you about the first
     two things, addiction and addiction causation.
     Ms. Henninger is going to get up and talk to
     you about medical causation and the rest of the
     verdict form.
          But it's important to remember, and this
     is an instruction you have at page 9, that the
     Engle findings they talked about cannot be
     considered in any way when determining whether
     Mr. Wilcox was a class member.
          In other words, you all have to put those
     out of your mind when you're determining
     whether he was addicted, whether addiction
     caused his death, and whether he had a primary
5308 lung cancer caused by smoking.  You can't
     consider them, you're instructed on page 9 of
     your jury instructions.
          And so the hurdles I talked about.  Three
     components to class membership, addiction,
     addiction causation, medical causation.  The
     plaintiff has to meet their burden, they have a
     burden to bring you evidence to prove each one
     of these things to get into the class.  And I
     submit to you, as we walk through it, you're
     going to see that they failed to carry the
     burden.
          And the burden is important because, it
     was explained to you in jury selection, the
     plaintiff is the one with the burden.  The
     defense doesn't have a burden.  So if the
     plaintiff doesn't carry the burden, we never
     have to get up from the table.  We never have
     to get up to cross-examine witnesses.  We don't
     have to bring you evidence.
          But we've done that.  We've done that
     because that's what we have in the case.  We've
     brought you this evidence.  Not only has the
     plaintiff failed on their burden, we've brought
     you evidence to show why they can't meet their
5309 burden.  And that's what you're going to have
     in the jury room.
          And so, you know, I showed you the
     instruction that you can't rely on guesswork,
     you can't rely on speculation.  And
     Mr. Gustafson when he was talking to you, you
     know, he said something, and I wrote it down in
     my notes, about, you know, before the subpoenas
     went out, before lawsuit, what the doctors were
     trying to do, what the doctors were trying to
     do for Mr. Wilcox to save him.  Dr. Lamelas and
     Dr. Tershakovec, one of the surgeons, and the
     pathologist, Dr. Riemer and Dr. Milian.
          Did you hear from any of those witnesses
     in the case?  Dr. Villa came to the stand and
     told you he knew those people.  They're in
     Miami.  Mr. Barnhart like to cross-examine
     people about how many people they flew over in
     the airplane.  Well, they didn't have to fly
     anyone in the airplane for the people that
     treated Mr. Wilcox in Miami.  Why didn't they
     bring them?  Why didn't you hear from these
     people?  They're local.  They're the ones who
     know about Mr. Wilcox.  It's the plaintiff's
     case.  Why didn't you hear from those treaters?
5310 Think about that when you think about
     whether the plaintiff carried their burden of
     proof in the case, whether they brought you
     sufficient evidence.
          So I'm going to talk to you about
     addiction first.  Plaintiff must prove
     Mr. Wilcox was addicted to nicotine, addicted
     to cigarettes containing nicotine.
          And what was the evidence on that?  You
     heard a lot of fact witness testimony on that.
     You heard both sons, you heard some family
     friends come in and tell you that in their
     opinion, Mr. Wilcox smoked cigarettes for a
     long time, and while they're not medical
     doctors, they thought he was addicted.  That's
     the evidence the plaintiff brought you.
          But the plaintiff realized that's not
     enough to carry their burden, and this is what
     Mr. Wilcox told you on the stand.  He admitted
     this to you on cross-examination, that he too
     believed his father was addicted to nicotine,
     but he conceded, the plaintiff in the case,
     that addiction is a medical diagnosis, it
     requires expertise.  It's not a lay opinion
     that you have Aunt Deborah or Cousin Joe come
5311 in and that carries the burden.  They know they
     needed expertise.
          So what the fact witness said isn't enough
     for you to carry their burden on this claim.
     That's why they brought you additional
     evidence.  That's why they brought you some
     experts.  They brought you a treater and an
     expert.  We're going to talk about that.
          The first thing they could look to,
     though, was the medical records.  You heard
     1500 pages, I think, of medical records in the
     case, or maybe more.  You can look through
     every single one of those medical records when
     you get back in the jury room, and you won't
     find a single page where there's any diagnosis
     of addiction, any mention of addiction.
          And you heard about a lot of treaters.
     Dr. La Rocha, family doctor, who prescribed the
     patch for Mr. Wilcox.  Dr. Caruso, who treated
     Mr. Wilcox in the hospital in 1988 or '89.  A
     nurse who documented agitation because he
     wanted a cigarette.
          You saw those medical records, and you
     didn't see anywhere where anyone diagnosed him
     as addicted.
5312 Maybe the clearest example is Dr. Barrio.
     Dr. Barrio did come talk to you all.  He came
     live.  And we saw some of his medical records.
     Dr. Barrio testified that back in 1993, he was
     diagnosing patients as addicted, and yet he
     never diagnosed Mr. Wilcox as addicted back at
     the time.  The first time that Dr. Barrio
     testified Mr. Wilcox was addicted was 20 years
     after the fact when he was being paid $500 an
     hour.  He testified he didn't do it at the
     time.  This is the first time he did it, when
     he found out there was a lawsuit and he came to
     court.  That's the first time.
          And this goes back to the instruction I
     asked you all to pay attention to, the
     believability of witnesses, the credibility of
     witnesses.  Because what did Dr. Barrio know
     about Mr. Wilcox?  Well, there's a lot he
     didn't know.  He didn't know when Mr. Wilcox
     became a regular smoker, when he smoked his
     first cigarette of the day.  Let's pause on
     that point.
          Mr. Gustafson said, we brought you experts
     who knew these things.  And Dr. Barrio is one
     of them.  He knew that Mr. Wilcox smoked the
5313 first thing of the day.  There is no evidence
     of that.  He didn't know because he had no
     knowledge of that.  It's simply not anywhere in
     the record.  It's not in the evidence.
          He didn't know if Mr. Wilcox avoided going
     places if he couldn't smoke, if he ever
     experienced withdrawal symptoms, if he ever
     wanted to quit smoking, if he ever tried to
     quit smoking, if he ever failed to quit
     smoking.  He didn't know any of that.  Instead,
     he uses some test that's based on how much you
     smoke and how long you smoke.  And no one ever
     said that's any kind of validated test.
          If the plaintiff thought that was a
     validated test, they wouldn't have brought you
     Dr. Herkov.  Dr. Herkov was their addiction
     expert they brought from the University of
     Florida, from Gainesville.
          Let me point out this yellow box.  The
     only thing Dr. Barrio knew was that Mr. Wilcox
     did quit smoking.  That's when he quit, in '93.
     That's the only thing he knew.
          So they brought you Dr. Herkov.
     Dr. Herkov, Ph.D., psychologist.  And
     Dr. Herkov, he came down and gave some
5314 interesting lectures to you all on the brain
     and different cells and the synaptic
     connections and neurotransmitters, but then on
     cross-examination, it became pretty clear what
     kind of expert Dr. Herkov was.  And he was a
     nice man, but he's not a medical doctor.
          So immediately you got to think back to
     the plaintiff's admission that I showed you on
     the stand, that he considers, to meet his
     burden in this case, he considers addiction to
     be a medical diagnosis.  Not a lay diagnosis,
     not a psychological diagnosis, a medical
     diagnosis.
          Dr. Herkov is not a doctor.  He can't
     prescribe any medications.  He has no
     certifications in addiction.  He's never
     counseled anyone on quitting smoking.  He's
     never treated anyone for nicotine addiction.
     He's never treated a smoker in his career.
          Look at the admission in the box.
          "In 22 years of practice, you've never
     treated any patient for any issue related to
     smoking?"
          "That's correct."
          That is the expert they brought you on
5315 nicotine addiction, someone has never treated
     anyone, ever?
          This goes back to the instruction on
     credibility of witnesses.  This is the type of
     thing you all have to assess when you decide
     what evidence you're going to credit and what
     evidence you're not going to credit.
          But, you know, Dr. Herkov, he was up there
     for a little bit.  He talked about nicotine
     addiction.  He made some admissions on behalf
     of the plaintiff, and he told you on direct, he
     told you when Mr. Sales was talking to him, he
     thought that Mr. Wilcox was addicted, and he
     said because he had trouble quitting and he had
     withdrawal symptoms, he had failed quit
     attempts, he had these brain changes, he had a
     relapse, he had cues, and all of those things
     led him to believe, led Dr. Herkov to believe
     that Mr. Wilcox was addicted.
          But what did he admit on
     cross-examination?
          Nonaddicted smokers can have difficulty in
     quitting.
          That is not a function of addiction.
     Difficulty quitting.
5316 Nonaddicted smokers relapse and return to
     smoking.
          That is not a function of addiction.
          Nonaddicted smokers can smoke and relapse
     because of cues, cues in their environment that
     trigger them to want to smoke.
          That's not a function of addiction.  It
     happens in nonaddicted smokers.
          Withdrawal symptoms.  Dr. Herkov admitted
     to you that nonaddicted smokers can have
     withdrawal symptoms like irritability,
     agitation, and so on.  All the things he talked
     about on direct, he says that is not a function
     of addiction.  It's a function of smoking.
          This is their expert on nicotine
     addiction.
          And then he says this increase in brain
     receptors -- this is maybe the clearest
     admission yet -- it has nothing to do with
     nicotine addiction.  It's a function of
     nicotine in the brain.  It has nothing to do
     with addiction.
          This is what the expert they brought told
     you about people who smoke.  Addicted and not
     addicted.  This is what he based his opinion
5317 on.
          And he said, all of these things I'm
     talking about happen in people who are not
     addicted.
          So you have to assess how you're going to
     weigh this evidence.  You have to assess how
     you're going to assess his testimony.
          And then there was this issue with the
     DSM-5, and you were shown both of these books.
     This issue kind of took on a life of its own in
     this trial.
          Dr. Herkov took the stand and talked to
     you about a gray book, he called it DSM-IV,
     published in 2000, DSM-IV-TR, and he presented
     his opinions based on that.
          And Mr. Sales asked him some questions.
     You've heard of this thing called the DSM-5.
     You would never use that.  You wouldn't use
     that to diagnose addiction.  You wouldn't use
     that in your practice.
          And then on cross-examination, what did he
     admit?  He admitted it's the first thing that
     he used in the case.
          In the plaintiff's closing today, they put
     up this score sheet, his handwritten paper that
5318 he used to assess Mr. Wilcox, and the very
     first column on there was the DSM-5.
          And they tried to hide it from you.  Why
     would they do that?  Why would they try to not
     tell you about it on direct and let me bring it
     out on cross-examination?
          And then we had to go through this process
     of impeachment, and you all became familiar
     with that watching the trial, where witnesses
     give depositions, and then they come and
     testify --
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor.
     There's an instruction the Court gave the jury
     about speculating on the basis for court
     rulings with respect to objections.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BAYUK:  This is discussing
     impeachment.
          So then they come to trial and testify and
     they say something different than they said in
     deposition.  You show them their deposition and
     then they look at the inconsistent statement.
          We had to do that a few times with
     Dr. Herkov.  And one of the things we had to
     talk to him about was the fact that he uses the
5319 DSM-5 in his practice, that he agrees the DSM-5
     correlates with nicotine addiction, and that it
     does show when you have six or more criteria.
     He admitted those through the impeachment.  He
     wouldn't admit them to you on the stand.  But
     we showed him his prior testimony.  We read it
     correctly.
          And then Mr. Sales on the redirect, after
     he got done with Dr. Herkov on direct exam,
     impugning the disparaging in the DSM-5, took up
     your time going through a DSM-5 analysis after
     they tried to hide it from you.
          Why would they do that?  Why would they do
     that?  So that's another thing you have to
     think about when you weigh this evidence, when
     you weigh Dr. Herkov's testimony.
          Now, Dr. Abramson came.  In contrast to
     Dr. Herkov's qualifications, Dr. Abramson is a
     medical doctor.  He practices 20 miles up the
     road in Aventura.  He's treated thousands of
     smokers.  He's found half of them to be
     addicted.  He's come into court in these cases
     and found a smoker to be addicted.  He told you
     that.  And he told you and he explained to you
     how he applies this.  He applies it in his
5320 practice.  It's the state of the art, it's the
     standard.  And he walked you through, step by
     step, the criteria.
          And the interesting thing was, Mr. Sales
     cross-examined him, and there was a lot of
     discussion about money made and scripts and
     videotapes and testimony, but there was no
     cross-examination on the foundation for the
     addiction claim.  There was no
     cross-examination about the criteria.
          Questioning him, why did you give him
     this, why didn't you give him that?  Didn't you
     see this evidence?  There was no challenge to
     the addiction claim.  And it's really no
     surprise.  Because unlike Dr. Herkov,
     Dr. Abramson is a board-certified addiction
     psychiatrist.  He is a specialist in treating
     addiction and has treated thousands of smokers
     over the course of his career.
          No challenge to his opinion about
     addiction.  He found that Mr. Wilcox did not
     meet the criteria for nicotine addiction.  He
     did not have a severe Tobacco Use Disorder.  He
     did not have an addiction.  He had no
     impairment in his daily life, no impairment or
5321 distress.  He controlled his smoking.
          There was discussion during the
     plaintiff's closing that Mr. Wilcox, there were
     no times when he could go without a cigarette,
     that he wasn't wanting a cigarette or having a
     craving.
          You've heard about these two periods,
     after the 1974 heart attack and 1989 surgery
     for the abdominal aortic aneurysm.  He's in the
     hospital for 7 to 14 days, and the witnesses
     are asked, did he say anything about wanting a
     cigarette?  Did he say anything about I wish I
     could smoke?  Did you notice any personality
     changes?  Did you notice anything differently
     about him?
          And uniformly the testimony was, no, there
     was none of that.  These are sustained periods
     of time when Dr. Herkov says withdrawal
     symptoms would be peaking.  And there's no
     evidence at those times.  There's no evidence.
          And so these are the things you have to
     consider when you think about whether the
     plaintiff met their burden of proof on this
     issue of addiction.
          And finally, you know, and we're going to
5322 talk more about this in some detail, but
     there's this issue of the quitting in 1992.
     And Dr. Abramson explained it to you.  There's
     really a contrast between what happened before
     '92 and what happened in 1992.  And we'll talk
     a little bit more about that when we talk about
     the next section, which is addiction causation.
          But first I want to address this issue
     that was brought up in the plaintiff's closing
     argument, this issue of depression and whether
     this was a withdrawal symptom.  This is the
     type of thing I'm talking about where the
     plaintiff put this evidence in front of you and
     it wasn't connected to smoking.
          But it was argued that it was, it was
     argued that this is because of smoking, when in
     reality, the evidence we got from the stand was
     Mr. Wilcox went and saw treaters for this
     issue.  He went and saw a psychologist and some
     psychiatrists.  And nobody ever found out what
     was causing his issue.  His depression.
          Dr. Abramson reviewed all of his medical
     records and said, this was a man who at times
     had depression and anxiety with no connection
     to smoking.  And so that is the evidence you
5323 have, that's the evidence you're going to bring
     back in the jury room, that there's no
     connection to smoking.  You never heard from
     anyone who treated him for depression or why
     was he experiencing it.
          In fact, the only thing you did hear was
     that he was having all kinds of medical
     problems, fainting, going to the emergency
     room.  At this time, he was having depression.
     That's what the evidence is in the case.
          Second hurdle of class membership,
     addiction causation.  This looks at if the
     person is addicted, if Mr. Wilcox is addicted,
     did the addiction play such a role, such a
     significant role in his smoking that you could
     say not just the smoking caused his cancer and
     death, but that the addiction caused his cancer
     and death.  It's a distinction.
          And it's spelled out in the first question
     on the verdict form.  Did the addiction cause
     the death?  Judge Lindsey read you an
     instruction on it.  This is actually in the
     jury instructions you're going to get on page 7
     about legal cause.  Addiction had to be a
     but-for cause.  But for the addiction, the
5324 death would not have occurred.
          Now, the plaintiff talked about
     alternative causes or other causes that factor
     into it.  Respectfully, you don't have any
     evidence of that.  This is an issue about what
     controlled Mr. Wilcox.  Why did he smoke.  Even
     if he's addicted, why did he smoke if you
     assume that he had a cancer caused by smoking.
     If you assume that -- and Ms. Henninger is
     going to talk about that -- even assuming he
     did, what drove him to smoke.  Was it
     addiction?  Or was it the other evidence that
     you've seen about how he approached his
     smoking?  The choices he made about his
     smoking.  Whether he let other people dictate
     his smoking behaviors.  That's the evidence you
     have to consider.
           And when you think about this issue, I
     mean, a big issue is, can addicted smokers
     quit.  Because if you can quit in time to avoid
     your death, if you're going to die of a
     smoking-related disease, then how can addiction
     be the cause?  If you can control your smoking,
     and you decide when you are going to be
     motivated and persistent in quitting, the
5325 addiction can't cause the death.  That's common
     sense.  The instructions tell you, you can use
     common sense.
          More importantly -- this is an issue the
     plaintiff has the burden on as well, and I
     submit to you the only person who talked about
     addiction causation was Dr. Abramson.
     Dr. Abramson told you even if he was addicted,
     these are the reasons why addiction didn't
     cause his death.  The plaintiff, when they got
     up to cross him, didn't ask him a single
     question about that as it related to Mr.
     Wilcox.  The plaintiff in their case put on no
     evidence of this.
          You all have taken notes.  Please, when
     you go back to the jury room, look at your
     notepads.  Look to see who in the plaintiff's
     case said this.  Who gave this opinion for
     them.  No one.  You won't find it.  The only
     time you heard it was during the plaintiff's
     closing argument.
          And Mr. Sales may get up here after me,
     because he's going to do rebuttal, and he may
     say, this is common sense, if you're addicted,
     look at the documents, it's common sense that
5326 if you're addicted, that causes your smoking,
     that caused your lung cancer.
          But the plaintiff has the burden on this
     case.  Now they're asking you for $10 million.
     Ten million dollars, and they want you to do
     the work for them.  They want you to link the
     dots for them, when they brought no one to tell
     you this.
          As I said, please don't believe me, check
     your pads.  See if you wrote down any evidence
     of this in what you recorded paying attention
     to the trial, because there's none.  I think
     you'll find that there's none.
          So what do we know from the experts?  Any
     smoker can quit.  Addicted smokers can quitted.
     Anyone can quit.  There was a discussion during
     the plaintiff's closing, addiction prevents
     quitting, addiction makes it harder.  But
     that's not the evidence.  That's not the
     evidence in the case.
          The plaintiff's experts, along with
     Dr. Abramson, admit any smoker can quit.
     Dr. Herkov says people who would be highly
     addicted, highly dependent, those people quit.
     Not there's some smokers who can't quit.
5327 There's no evidence of that.  Every smoker can
     quit.
          But the key is you actually have to stop.
     You actually have to stop smoking to quit.  And
     that is a key issue in this case.  That's a key
     issue on the evidence you all have before you
     in the case.
          Because we have this issue.  We have this
     issue of 1992 and what happened in 1992.
     Dr. Abramson explained this to you.  All of the
     things he looks for in his practice when he's
     trying to motivate people or assessing whether
     they actually want to quit smoking and whether
     they're ready to make a motivated and
     persistent effort, all of these things.  And
     none of them Mr. Wilcox did before 1992.
          We had a lot of evidence about his heart
     attack in '74.  Before then, there is zero
     evidence you have that Mr. Wilcox was ever even
     interested in quitting.  There's evidence he
     knew smoking was dangerous and addictive,
     there's evidence he knew about the '64 Surgeon
     General's Report and its connection to smoking
     and lung cancer, but no evidence he did
     anything about it.
5328 His wife quit two times, including in 1965
     for good for health reasons for their son, for
     the plaintiff.  Mr. Wilcox, no evidence he was
     even interested in quitting.
          And yet you have the same descriptions of
     him about how he viewed his smoking, don't
     question it, don't talk to me about it, he did
     what he wanted to do.  And you have 1974, you
     have -- you start to see descriptions from the
     witnesses that he's making attempts.  And you
     heard about the Aqua Filter and nicotine gum
     and hypnosis and cold turkey and smoking half
     cigarettes and cutting down.  You hear all
     these things, but every witness in the case
     told you, and the plaintiff confirmed, and
     Mrs. Wilcox confirmed, he never quit smoking.
     He never even changed his smoking behavior at
     all.  Even for an hour.  He never changed the
     normal amount he was smoking.  He smoked on
     nicotine gum.  He was too strong-minded to go
     to hypnosis.  He never changed his smoking
     behavior.
          Mr. Wilcox, this is his admission from the
     stand:
     "Question:  At no time did he ever stop smoking

    except for 1992?
     "Answer:  That's correct.  Yes, ma'am."
          And then Dr. Herkov, I said he admitted on
     cross-examination, to make a serious and
     genuine quit attempt, you have to stop smoking
     for a day.  Dr. Abramson agreed with that.
     There's no dispute.  This is undisputed in the
     case.  It's also undisputed that Mr. Wilcox
     never did this.  He never did this before 1992.
     He only made one serious and genuine attempt,
     and that's when he quit.  That shows you who
     was in control of the smoking when he was ready
     to be committed to quitting.  That's undisputed
     evidence.
          There is discussion -- there was evidence
     during the case and a reference during
     plaintiff's closing to tapering, adjusting the
     amounts that Mr. Wilcox was smoking.  You're
     going to have the medical records, you're going
     to have thousands of pages, and there are
     different amounts in the medical records.  But
     the plaintiff has latched onto this like it's
     evidence of a struggle to go up and down with a
     cigarette amount.  Constant trying to quit.
          These are records that I just picked out,
5330 four from the same day from the same
     hospitalization.  This is during the aortic
     aneurysm.  Four from the same day.  The one on
     the bottom left, he smokes three-quarters of a
     pack a day.  To the right of that, he smokes
     one to two packs a day.  Above that, he smokes
     one pack a day.  And to the left of that, he's
     a nonsmoker.
          So this is what you have to think about
     when you're going to look at the medical
     records and see was he really trying to taper
     the amount he was smoking?  Are the medical
     records accurate among all the people he saw in
     terms of the amount he was smoking?  And can
     you base a decision that he was trying to quit
     on that?  When you have four people seeing him
     in the same day with all different amounts,
     including that he never smoked.  So that's the
     evidence you have to keep in mind.  You have to
     think about whether that helps the plaintiff
     meet their burden of proof.
          This is what Dr. Abramson described as
     contrast between 1974 and '92, and then after
     '92.  Everything changed in '92.  Threw his
     cigarettes away, told his wife to get rid of
5331 them.  He threw away the ashtrays for the first
     time.  He stopped smoking for the first time.
     And he did all that before he ever was with the
     patch.  He did all that before he ever knew the
     patch was going to work for him.
          Dr. Abramson said that illustrates more
     clearly than anything the commitment he had at
     this time, that you never saw before.  You had
     a lot of people come to the witness stand and
     say, I talked to Mr. Wilcox.  Mr. Wilcox said,
     I can't quit smoking.  I can't quit.
          What did Mr. Abernathy say?  We're going
     to look at that.  In fact, we'll look at it
     right now.  This deposition was read to you.
          "When he announced that he was going to
     quit, it was like they won the lottery.  It was
     a big announcement.  Apparently it was a big
     deal that he actually decided to go ahead and
     try."
          To go ahead and try.
          This was the difference between what was
     happening then and what was happening
     previously.  He was committed to it.  His
     friends knew it.  His friends knew there was a
     change.  He was actually going to try to quit.
5332  You know what happened the first time he
     tried, that there was this big announcement?
     He did.  He did quit.  That's the difference.
     That shows that he was in control.  That shows
     you whether addiction was driving him or
     whether he was making the decisions about it.
          So what did Mr. Wilcox do in 1992 to quit?
     What did he do that he had never done before?
     He stopped smoking.  Kind of -- their expert
     admits it, our expert admits it.  To quit, you
     have to stop.  And that was the first time he
     did it.
          I've talked to you about this already.  He
     threw away the cigarettes, the ashtrays.  He
     stopped saying, I can't quit, and he said, I'm
     going to quit.  I'm quitting now.
          And you know what the evidence is after
     that?  There is zero evidence that after he
     said that and after he quit, he ever said, I
     can't quit, again.  There's no evidence of
     that.  Nobody said that.
          After he decided he could do it and he did
     it, he never said, I can't quit.  Even when he
     resumed smoking after Hurricane Andrew, if you
     credit what Mr. Bob Wilcox said, because of the
5333 stress, because of the stress of it, he resumed
     smoking five cigarettes a day, he never
     complained about his smoking.  He never said, I
     can't quit, ever.  You have no evidence of
     that.
          That is the type of evidence that
     plaintiff has to bring you to meet their burden
     on whether addiction played such a role that it
     could say it caused his lung cancer.  And they
     don't have that evidence.  They haven't carried
     their burden of proof.
          Go back -- you've heard this evidence.
     You know, if you're looking for reasons, why
     was 1992 different?  You've heard this
     consistently from the witness stand.
     Mr. Wilcox got a personalized health warning in
     1974 with his heart attack.  There's a dispute
     in the record about whether he did anything to
     quit after that.
          According to one place where his wife
     testified, the doctor told him to quit, and he
     did nothing to do that.  He made no effort to
     quit.
          But what happened in 1992?  His brother
     passed away from lung cancer.  His brother was
5334 a smoker.  And nobody ties it to that's why
     Mr. Wilcox decided to get serious and motivated
     and persistent at this time.  You can use your
     common sense.  The events, the dates correlate.
     You can use your common sense about it.
          So what prevented Mr. Wilcox from
     quitting?  Was it addiction?  Did addiction
     prevent him from quitting?  Well, we know the
     experts say addiction doesn't prevent people
     from quitting.  The only thing we have evidence
     of is Mr. Wilcox, and that's no criticism of
     Mr. Wilcox.  I'm not here to criticize him or
     cast blame on him or say anything derogatory
     about him or anyone in the family.  We haven't
     done that at all during this trial, and we
     won't do that.
          You can't rewrite history.  You know what
     you saw about Mr. Wilcox, the descriptions you
     saw of him, he was the one who was driving his
     smoking decisions.  There's no evidence of
     anything else.  In fact, the evidence of him is
     he wouldn't let anyone else do that.  That's
     the evidence you all have in the case.
          Why was he different?  Why was he
     different than the other people, the other men
5335 in his generation, other people during the time
     he was smoking?  We know, Dr. Proctor told you,
     people were quitting by the millions over time.
     17.6 million in those ten years, '55 to '65.
     30 million people in just the 15-year period
     after the 1964 Surgeon General Report.
     Quitting by the millions.
          You saw this chart, because there was a
     lot of discussion about Mr. Wilcox's specific
     birth cohort, his five-year cohort when he was
     born, tracking the men.  Mr. Gustafson said
     again in closing today, it would have been
     unusual for him to not have been a smoker.
     80 percent of people smoked.
          And then Mr. Gustafson said it would have
     been really unusual for him to have quit.  Does
     that -- does the chart say that?  Did
     Dr. Proctor show that?  It would have been
     unusual for him not to have quit.  Dr. Proctor
     told you four out of five men in his birth
     cohort quit smoking and quit smoking for good.
          He would have been unusual to not know
     that.  And he would have been unusual to not do
     that at a time that would have prevented his
     lung cancer and death, if you assume he had
5336 lung cancer.
          I'm going to show you the admission from
     Dr. Barrio on that, that if he had quit smoking
     by 1978, he wouldn't have had an excess risk of
     lung cancer above that of a nonsmoker.  He
     would have reduced his risk down to that of a
     nonsmoker.  He had the ability to quit and
     prevent his death.
          What did Dr. Proctor tell you?  People who
     were quitting during this time, millions of
     people who were quitting smoked more than
     Mr. Wilcox.  The men, on average, smoked a pack
     and a half a day, 30 cigarettes a day in the
     1960s and '70s.  Heavy smokers, addicted
     smokers were quitting by the millions.
          Why was Mr. Wilcox different?  Why was he
     different?  What's the evidence of that?
     Addiction does not prevent quitting.  You heard
     from everyone, 60 million people quit, most of
     them would have been addicted.  30 million quit
     before 1970.  And they showed you the document
     in their closing about the psychological
     crutch.
          And we talked to Dr. Proctor about this.
     Why don't you pay attention to quitting,
5337 Dr. Proctor?  Why don't you see if what you're
     coming to talk about had an impact on people?
     All these people quit during the time when you
     see these internal documents.  This is why I
     say it's generic evidence.  This is why I say
     the plaintiff has to bring you a connection to
     Mr. Wilcox, and they haven't done that.  They
     haven't done that.  That's what they need to
     bring to carry their burden.
          Try to think about this as a football fan,
     you know, how you get your mind around this
     number, 60 million people.  A lot of people.
     There was a discussion about people filling up
     the courtroom.  I want to talk about a football
     stadium.  Smokers would fill Sun Life Stadium
     about 750 times over a sellout every day, every
     Sunday going back about a hundred years, back
     to 1920.  Quitting by the millions.  Quitting
     by the millions of addicted smokers.
          Why was Mr. Wilcox different?  Every
     smoker you heard from in the case quit smoking.
     Every one.  Why was Mr. Wilcox different?
     These give you the answers.  These give you the
     answers.  These are unrebutted, unrefuted
     descriptions of him and his personality.
5338 Dr. Herkov told you what an important role
     personality plays in smoking.  And no one could
     do anything to talk to him about his behavior.
     He always had the ability to quit, more
     specific to his smoking.  He was the king of
     the castle, he made his own decisions, he was
     in the driver's seat.
          Now they want to come in and say addiction
     controlled him, he was a helpless nicotine
     addict.  That's not how he was in life.  These
     are the descriptions of how he was in life.
     These are what people said about him, and no
     one said anything different.  This is the
     evidence.
          And it's no surprise, because that's the
     evidence, that the plaintiff admits fault.  The
     plaintiff admits that he could have quit and
     prevented his death.  The plaintiff admits that
     he was a cause of his own death.
          Why would you do that if you had no
     control?  Why would you do that if you were
     misled?  You wouldn't do that.  Why would you
     ever take blame if you had no blame?  That's
     what the plaintiff's admission means.  It means
     he had the ability to quit, it means he had the
5339 keys to be successful, he had the
     responsibility to quit, and he could have
     prevented his own death.
          It's not a question of that he could quit.
     We know he could quit when he got serious about
     it.  That's what the evidence is.  So the
     plaintiff has failed to carry their burden on
     addiction causation.
          Then Dr. Barrio -- this is what I
     referenced earlier, he could have quit at a
     time and prevented his own death four years
     after his heart attack at a time when
     Mrs. Wilcox was saying he didn't do anything in
     response to the doctor's advice.
          He could have quit.  He could have thrown
     away his cigarettes.  He could have gotten rid
     of the ashtrays.  He could have asked his
     family for help.  He could have sought
     professional advice.  But he didn't.  He
     didn't.
          And so I submit to you, ladies and
     gentlemen, there has been a fundamental failure
     of the plaintiff to bring you the evidence that
     you need in the case.
          Ms. Henninger is going to get up and talk
5340 to you.  I want to thank you for your time.
     It's been a privilege to work in front of you
     for the last three and a half weeks.  Thanks so
     much.


                  CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MS. HENNINGER:  Thank you.  May it please
     the Court, Lieutenant Wilcox, Mrs. Wilcox,
     ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
          Well, once again, I find myself, what,
     2:30, after lunch, everybody's tired, tired of
     hearing from the lawyers.  I appreciate your
     time and attention.  This has been a long time.
     Everyone has thanked you.  Both sides truly,
     truly thank you for your time and attention,
     and we just ask you to hang on just a little
     bit more, because we're almost there.
          And I promise that -- I have a lot to get
     through -- I'm going to try to do it without
     getting, you know, too fast.  I tend to talk
     very fast, as you guys might have figured out.
     These ladies have.  And then you'll get a
5343 chance to deliberate after Mr. Sales gets to
     talk with you.
          But thank you very much, each and every
     one of you.  We started this, gosh, a little
     bit over three weeks ago, and you guys have
     given it great attention, and I appreciate you
     giving up your personal lives to be here with
     us.  So thank you.
          I want to pick up where Mr. Bayuk left
     off.  You remember he showed you the hurdles
     and he talked to you about the first two
     hurdles, addiction and addiction causation, and
     he promised you that I would get up and talk
     about medical causation.  That's where I'm
     going to start.  This is the last thing we're
     going to talk about with regard to whether or
     not Mr. Wilcox was a member of the Engle class.
          If you look on the instructions when you
     get them and take them back into the jury room,
     on page 6 of the instructions, it's going to
     say that plaintiff must prove that Mr. Wilcox
     had cancer that originated in his lungs that
     was legally caused by smoking.
          And you guys know by now, you've heard it
     for three weeks straight, originated in his
5344 lungs means primary lung cancer.  It means that
     the cancer started in the lungs versus started
     somewhere else and metastasized or grew or
     spread to the lungs.  That's what the plaintiff
     has to prove, and that's what we submit they
     have failed to prove.  They haven't met their
     burden of proof on that issue.  Let's talk
     about why.
          You've seen this before.  We've talked
     about it with experts.  I showed it in opening
     statement.  But one of the reasons, just one of
     the reasons why plaintiff did not meet their
     burden of proof and has not in this case,
     because they can't bring you all the evidence
     that's necessary.  They can't bring you
     everything necessary to prove that Mr. Wilcox
     had a cancer that started in his lungs.
          There are 1700 or so pages of medical
     records, 15-, 1700, but a lot of them have
     nothing to do with the cancer and the surgery
     in 1993.  You'll have those available to you.
     So we have missing records.
          Importantly, we do not have radiology.  We
     don't have the actual films.  We have some
     reports.  We don't have the actual pathology.
5345 And we're going to talk about why that's so
     important here in a minute.
          There are no MRIs.  They weren't available
     back then.  And we don't have -- in the
     pathology reports that we do have, we don't
     have the benefit of a description of the cells
     provided by the pathologist at the time so that
     we can see, are they producing glands like
     adenocarcinomas do, or mucin, et cetera.  We
     just have a diagnosis, adenocarcinoma.
          There's no staining that was done on the
     tissue taken from Mr. Wilcox's lung, and there
     were stains available in 1993.  You heard
     Dr. Villa talk about it as well as Dr. Bennett.
     There were stains that were available that
     could help, not definitive, but could help
     determine whether or not this was a primary
     lung cancer, and they were not done.
          And importantly, there was no autopsy, and
     we're going to talk about why that was
     important.  Because Dr. Bennett talked about
     it, Dr. Barrio talked about it, and Dr. Villa
     talked about it.  So we'll talk about that as
     well as we go through this issue.
          So let's start first with Dr. Bennett and
5346 what he told you I believe just two days ago or
     maybe just yesterday, I forget, my days are
     running together.
          But recall Dr. Bennett was the only
     board-certified forensic pathologist and
     medical examiner that came into this courtroom
     and talked to you.  And why is that important?
     Because he is the only witness who has special
     training and board certification in determining
     the cause of a person's death.  That's what
     he's trained to do is to determine the cause of
     death.
          And what he did is he looked at all of the
     medical records and he said, first of all, his
     opinion is that Mr. Wilcox had a cancer of
     unknown primary.  That was his opinion.  That
     he couldn't tell you where it started, but he
     can tell you in his opinion it didn't start in
     the lungs.
          Now, I want to stop for a second.  You
     remember the chart or the things that
     Mr. Barnhart wrote down that were supposedly
     from the Mayo Clinic website, and there's some
     symptoms, and he said, are these signs or
     symptoms of an unknown primary cancer?
5347 Do you remember that thing that they
     flipped up there?
          Well, as Dr. Bennett explained, none of
     those were specific findings, they could be for
     any cancer, any ailment, and half of them the
     treating physicians didn't even look for in
     this case, there's no record showing that they
     looked for in this case.
          So we don't know whether they existed or
     not.  It has nothing to do with the conclusion
     that this is an unknown primary cancer
     according to Dr. Bennett.
          He also talked about how the pathological
     diagnosis was not specific to Mr. Wilcox's
     lungs.  How the presentation -- remember the
     boards and the chest figures that he showed
     you -- how that was more consistent with a
     cancer that spread to the lung rather than one
     that started in the lung.
          He talked about how there were some workup
     done following his cancer, following the CT
     scans that showed the cancer in the lungs, and
     how that was insufficient to establish a
     primary lung cancer.
          And there were other CAT scans that looked
5348 for primary sites, and they even saw some
     potential primary sites, but they weren't
     investigated any further.
          And the fact of the matter is that the CT
     scans that were taken, taken of his abdomen,
     his brain, the bone scan, all of those things
     could have missed the primary site just like
     the CT scans in this case missed the extent of
     disease in Mr. Wilcox's lungs.
          There is no dispute, whether or not you
     believe this is a primary lung cancer or a
     cancer that metastasized to the lung, there is
     no dispute that the CT scans done before the
     surgery did not tell the doctors the extent of
     the disease present in Mr. Wilcox's lungs.
          There was significant nodal involvement.
     There was more than one nodule located in the
     lung.  All of that was missed on the CAT scans
     because the CAT scans were done without
     contrast.  That was all explained to you.
     Nobody disagreed.
          So let's talk a little bit more about the
     experts we brought.  First of all, we had
     Dr. Bennett, a specialist in the cause of
     death.  Less than 200 doctors in the United
5349 States that have those qualifications.
          And then we brought to you Dr. Brooks, who
     is a board-certified pulmonologist and critical
     care specialist.  And he talked to you --
     remember, we had to bring him out of turn
     because he had to be somewhere, he had to treat
     some patients -- but he told you that in the 25
     years of practice in diagnosing thousands of
     patients with lung cancer, he's never seen a
     primary lung cancer that presented or looked
     like this.
          Those were the opinions of Dr. Brooks and
     Dr. Bennett.
          Now, clearly, plaintiffs brought some
     experts, as well, we're going to talk about
     them.  But one thing all the experts in this
     case agree on, both the plaintiffs and the
     defense experts, are these facts:  Cancer can
     spread to the lung, and, in fact, it does
     spread to the lung.  The lung is one of the
     most common places for metastatic cancer to go
     to.
          And if you see a tumor in the lung, it is
     more likely to be from somewhere else than
     primary to the lung, because lung cancers -- or
5350 cancers that start -- let me back up.
          Tumors in the lung, just by ratio, odds,
     are more likely to be from somewhere else than
     primary to the lung.  Everybody agreed on that.
          They also agreed that multiple nodules in
     both lobes of the lung would be consistent with
     a metastatic process versus a primary cancer.
          There were thousands of patients who had
     what was known as a cancer of unknown primary
     in the year 1993, the year Mr. Wilcox was
     diagnosed with cancer.  And cancers of unknown
     primary are usually poorly differentiated
     adenocarcinomas, just like the type that the
     pathologist diagnosed Mr. Wilcox with in this
     case.
          Now, I want to look at the pathology
     reports in this case.  You've seen them a
     thousand times.  You probably feel like you're
     semi pathologists at this point because we've
     been over them ad nauseam with a variety of
     witnesses.
          But the first pathology report was from
     the biopsy, and what that found was that it was
     a cancer and it was consistent with
     adenocarcinoma.
5351 Everybody says, not a definitive
     diagnosis.  But when they looked at the
     pathology from the lung, when they actually
     took out the lung following the pneumonectomy,
     they had the ability to look at it with more
     detail, and they found that it was a poorly
     differentiated cancer or adenocarcinoma, and
     they found that it was subpleural
     adenocarcinomas in each lobe.
          Now, I want to stop here and just remind
     you briefly, yesterday, how I had to walk you
     through with Dr. Bennett the pathology reports,
     and we talked about the gross and the
     microscopic.
          And Dr. Barrio told you that the
     microscopic portion of the pathology report was
     the most important for a clinician or a
     treating physician such as himself.
          And in that microscopic diagnosis is where
     Dr. Riemer, the pathologist, says that he had
     nodules, cancer, in both lobes of his lung.
     And how did he know that, because he marked
     them with a Roman Numeral I and a Roman Numeral
     II as Dr. Bennett explained on the stand.
          But what's really important about these
5352 two pathology reports is that neither of them,
     neither of them, they may say "adenocarcinoma,"
     but they don't say "lung cancer."
          They don't say any of the synonyms that
     Mr. Gustafson showed in his closing statement
     for lung cancer.  In fact, you heard from every
     doctor that testified in this case that
     adenocarcinomas are the most common cancers in
     the human body and can arise almost anywhere.
          Now, I want to talk about the fact that
     Mr. Wilcox had cancer in both lobes of his
     lung.  And you heard about this operative
     report, and then we also talked about the
     pathology report.  And I want to stop, because
     both of these, both of these reports talk about
     how there was cancer in both the lower lobe and
     the upper lobe of Mr. Wilcox's left lung.
          Now, I thought I heard Mr. Gustafson say
     something about the operative report today in
     his closing statements, something along the
     lines of maybe we shouldn't rely on this
     because it was written what, 18 months or so
     after the surgery.  And then he wanted to show
     you the handwritten note that was scribbled out
     that had two lines and he wanted you to ignore
5353 this very detailed report where the surgeon
     describes, Dr. Lamelas describes, exactly what
     he did.
          And I was really, really puzzled about
     that because Dr. Lamelas is the surgeon who
     throughout this case plaintiffs are urging you
     to rely on for the opinion that he had a
     primary lung cancer, but yet he's telling you,
     don't pay attention to this operative report
     because it was written so long after.  Just pay
     attention to the three lines that he scribbled
     right after the surgery.
          Then there was also some comment made that
     Dr. Lamelas clearly wouldn't have seen cancer
     in both lobes of his lung, because if he did,
     it would have been a contraindication to take
     the lung out.  He would have been committing
     malpractice is what Dr. Villa said and
     Mr. Gustafson.
          Well, you may ask yourself why this record
     was written so long after Mr. Wilcox's death.
          You may ask yourself, remember, Dr. Barrio
     also wrote records months after Mr. Wilcox's
     death.  Could it be because they knew that they
     shouldn't have taken out the lung because he
5354 had cancer in both lobes?
          MR. SALES:  Objection.  Order in limine.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. SALES:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Granted.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Now, I want to talk a
     little bit more about this specifically, and
     we're going to get to how Dr. Villa talks about
     how he comes one week and says that there's
     nothing, it's all just in one lobe, and then
     the next week he comes and he says that it's in
     the upper and the lower lobe.
          Well, let's look at some more things, and
     we'll get to that in a minute, but I want to
     talk about some of the CT scans that were done
     prior to the time that Mr. Wilcox actually had
     his surgery.
          Do you remember he had the abdominal CT
     and the brain CT?  And clearly, Dr. Bennett
     came in here and he told you the cancer of
     unknown primary, doesn't necessarily know where
     it started, but when going through the CAT
     scans and available material in this case, he
     specifically said, look, they did an abdominal
     CT right before surgery in 1993 and they found
5355 that the prostate was mildly enlarged.
          Okay.  Well, they also did that prostate
     stain of Mr. Wilcox's tissue, and that didn't
     come back with any kind of answer.  It just was
     inconclusive.
          So clearly, 69-year-old man, maybe his
     enlarged prostate isn't so abnormal.  But what
     makes it a little bit quizzical is the fact
     that, what, four years earlier Mr. Wilcox had
     an abdominal CT that had a normal prostate.
          So what you have is the fact that he has a
     normal prostate and then a slightly enlarged
     prostate.  But they could have examined that,
     they could have biopsied it, they could have
     done some kind of just examination, but that
     wasn't done.
          Not saying the prostate was the primary
     source of his cancer, but it's just something
     to think about in assessing whether or not the
     plaintiff has met their burden of proof.
          The same with this scalp lesion noted on
     the brain CAT scan.  Remember, they saw
     something on the CAT scan that wasn't supposed
     to be there on the outside of Mr. Wilcox's
     scalp.  Dr. Barrio then saw it in person, five
5356 days before Mr. Wilcox passed away.
          It was so important to him, he described
     it as angry when he was sitting in that stand
     right there, that he said, I'd recommend a
     biopsy.  And he did that, he said you need a
     biopsy, and he put two exclamation points after
     it.  He did that at the time that Mr. Wilcox
     was in dire straits.  He thought it was
     important.  He wanted to investigate it.  It
     never was investigated.
          Again, not saying that this is the primary
     source of the cancer, but something to consider
     when assessing whether or not plaintiff has met
     their burden of proof.
          Now, I want to talk a little bit about
     Dr. Barrio who came in here because he was the
     self-proclaimed captain of Mr. Wilcox's ship
     because there wasn't an oncologist that took
     care of Mr. Wilcox, you heard about that.
          And Dr. Barrio came in and testified
     that -- he admitted, first of all, that he
     wasn't the treating physician for Mr. Wilcox's
     cancer, that he did not ever, when he was
     treating him or any time, review the pathology
     slides.  He never talked to Dr. Riemer, the
5357 pathologist, about what he saw in the
     pathology.  Never talked to him about how the
     lungs looked.  Never talked to him about the
     microscopic diagnosis.  He never talked to
     Dr. Lamelas after the surgery.
          And that's going to be very important, as
     you're going to hear in a second.  And he never
     got together with any of these other doctors
     that were involved in the care and treatment of
     Mr. Wilcox and agreed after the surgery that
     this was a primary lung cancer.  He told me on
     cross-examination that never happened.
          Now, Mr. Gustafson says, you know, you've
     got to put yourself back in the position of
     these treating physicians in 1993.  That's very
     important to do.  And you know what, I agree
     with him on one point there.  Because in 1993,
     when Dr. Barrio was treating Mr. Wilcox, he had
     no idea that there was more than one nodule in
     the lung.  None.  And he admitted it wasn't
     until he was getting ready for this litigation
     that he found that information out.
          So the self-proclaimed captain of the ship
     didn't have all of the information.
          Now, he also seemed to have a little bit
5358 of confusion when he was on the stand.  And you
     recall Mr. Bayuk read to you the credibility of
     the witness instruction.  That's going to be on
     page, I think, 33.  You have to assess whether
     or not the witness was frank, whether their
     memory was good, whether they had the ability
     to remember, did they know the facts?
          Well, this slide says it all.  Because on
     the left-hand side were all the things that he
     told Mr. Gustafson, and on the right-hand side
     are the counter opposites of what he told me.
          For example, he said -- he called himself
     the captain of the ship when talking to
     Mr. Gustafson.  And then I said, well, hey,
     isn't it true you were not even the treating
     physician for his cancer?  And he admitted
     that.
          He admitted to me that he never reviewed
     medical records from prior hospitalizations
     before May 1989.  Just told Mr. Gustafson right
     before that that he had.  He never got together
     with Mr. Wilcox's physicians after the surgery
     and agreed that Mr. Wilcox had a primary lung
     cancer.
          Remember, there was some kind of an
5359 insinuation that all of the treating physicians
     got together after the surgery and said, yeah,
     this is still a primary lung cancer.
          And I asked him, and he said, that never
     happened.  I never talked to Dr. Riemer.  I
     never talked to Dr. Lamelas.  He didn't know he
     had more than one nodule.
          And then one interesting thing was he told
     Mr. Gustafson on direct examination, yeah, I
     could have been the one that prescribed that
     nicotine patch that he was wearing in the
     hospital.
          And then on cross-examination, I said,
     well, isn't it true you didn't even know what
     the Habitrol patch was?
          And he said, yeah, I don't remember what
     the heck Habitrol is.
          So that's the treating physician they
     brought you in this case.  Someone who didn't
     remember anything about the care and treatment
     of Mr. Wilcox, and he tried to get ready so he
     could come in here and testify about it, but
     the facts are that he had more information
     sitting in this courtroom than he did when he
     was treating Mr. Wilcox.
5360 That's what they want you to base your
     opinion and all of the conclusions in this case
     that he had a primary lung cancer.  And that's
     insufficient.  They cannot meet their burden of
     proof.
          Now, there is one person who talked to
     Dr. Lamelas after the surgery, and that is
     Lieutenant Wilcox.  And you will recall in his
     deposition, which was January of this year, he
     said twice he said that surgeon told him that
     both lungs were covered in cancer and they had
     to take out the worst one.
          Now, that answer was never changed by any
     errata sheet or anything like that.  But he
     said on the stand, that doesn't make sense to
     me; in all fairness, he says, that didn't make
     sense to him.
          Well, it probably didn't make sense to him
     because he sat in a courtroom while Dr. Villa
     testified a couple days earlier that cancer in
     both lungs means metastatic cancer.
          Now, I want to make something very clear
     here.  Dr. Bennett's opinion about an unknown
     primary cancer has nothing to do with whether
     or not there was cancer in the right lung at
5361 all.  In fact, he said he doesn't know what's
     in the right lung.  But the fact of the matter
     is, if there was cancer in both lungs, like
     Mr. Wilcox, Lieutenant Wilcox reported
     Dr. Lamelas saying, if, in fact, there was
     cancer in both lungs and they took out the
     worst one, to use his words, that that's
     definitive proof that there is a metastatic
     cancer to the lungs.
          Why, because even Dr. Villa agrees that if
     you have bilateral presentation, remember that
     word, it would be a metastatic or more
     consistent with a metastatic cancer.
          Now, they brought Dr. Villa back, I got to
     see him twice, a nice man, came in here twice,
     both on a Monday.  I enjoy talking to him.  And
     I'm actually really glad he came back yesterday
     because when he did, he changed his opinion,
     and he told me something new that he didn't
     tell me a week before.  And it's very important
     information.
          Because on Monday, August 18, when he was
     first here, his opinion was that the cancer was
     only in Mr. Wilcox's lower lobe, that there
     were two tumors -- remember, he kind of said
5362 they were kind of hiding behind each other,
     they were really close.  That was his opinion,
     Monday, August 18.
          Well, on August 25, a week later,
     yesterday, he came in here to -- what he did is
     he came in here to reinterpret what Mr. --
     Lieutenant Wilcox heard Dr. Lamelas say.  He
     wasn't there, he didn't talk to Dr. Lamelas,
     but he was going to interpret it.
          And what he said in trying to interpret
     that is he said the cancer was in Mr. Wilcox's
     upper and lower lobes.  That's important.
     That's consistent with a metastatic cancer to
     the lung versus a primary lung cancer.
          Now, one more point about Dr. Villa, who
     is generally a nice guy.  I mean, I have no
     problems with him and you know that we've
     actually had cases together because we talked
     about that on cross-examination.  And I enjoy
     talking with him because he's had cases that
     he's reviewed, Engle cases like this one, where
     the smoker's diagnosis was adenocarcinoma, just
     like this case.  Adenocarcinoma.  But in those
     cases he had the pathology to review.
          And this is why it's so important that we
5363 have this pathology available to us in this
     case.  Because once he reviewed that pathology,
     he looked at it and said, you know what, I
     don't agree that this is an adenocarcinoma.
     This is something else.  It's a type of lung
     cancer, not caused by smoking.  You heard the
     BAC.  And when he said that, he said that
     because he could look at the pathology.
          And then I asked him, I said, hey,
     Dr. Villa, if you didn't have the pathology in
     that case but you just had the report that said
     adenocarcinoma, you would have told us that
     smoking caused his lung cancer in that case.
          He said, yeah, you're right, I probably
     would have.
          That's why it's critical that we have the
     pathology to review.  You heard Dr. Villa.  He
     trusts himself above all others.  Every
     pathologist has a subjective interpretation.
     That's why they need to bring you the pathology
     in order to meet their burden of proof.
          Now, everybody agrees, and I think even
     Mr. Gustafson said this this morning, that the
     cause of Mr. Wilcox's death was complications
     from surgery.  All -- every medical doctor that
5364 came in here to talk about the cancer agreed
     that Mr. Wilcox died because of the surgery.
          And the experts also discuss whether or
     not Mr. Wilcox would not have died when he did
     if not for the surgery.  In other words, the
     surgery and the complications that followed are
     what caused Mr. Wilcox's death.
          Now, you'll recall Dr. Bennett's testimony
     about autopsies.  He's a medical examiner, so
     of course he's familiar with autopsies.  You
     would expect him to want to rely on autopsies.
     But what's important is the two medical experts
     brought to you by plaintiff also thought an
     autopsy would be important in this case.
          In fact, Dr. Barrio said -- I said:
     "Question:  Correct me if I'm wrong, you would
have recommended an autopsy in Mr. Wilcox's case?"
          And he said:
     "Answer:  Yes."
          And I said:
     "Question:  That would give the family some
closure."
          And he said:
     "Answer:  Correct."
          And I said:
5365 "Question:  The reason you would recommend an
autopsy is so you can determine the person's cause
of death?"
          And he said:
     "Answer:  Correct."
          And Dr. Villa testified when he came that
     first Monday, he testified that autopsies are
     so important that they should be a requirement
     to bring a civil lawsuit.  Autopsy's also
     something, a piece of information you don't
     have available to you in this case.
          So, for these reasons -- Mr. Bayuk started
     out with addiction and addiction causation, and
     I just ended with the third hurdle -- plaintiff
     failed to prove that Mr. Wilcox was a class
     member.
          They failed to prove that Mr. Wilcox was
     addicted under medically diagnostic criteria.
     Plaintiff failed to prove that addiction to
     nicotine was the legal cause of Mr. Wilcox's
     death.  And plaintiff failed to prove that
     Mr. Wilcox died of a primary lung cancer and
     that it was caused by smoking.
          Plaintiff spent two weeks reproving the
     Engle findings, but failed to prove Mr. Wilcox
5366 was a class member.
          MR. SALES:  Objection.  Same objection
     that was made previously during the break.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. SALES:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Granted.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Now, you remember in
     opening statements, I showed those chains to
     you guys to try to explain legal causation and
     causation in general.  And this is the chain
     between whether or not Mr. Wilcox was addicted
     and addiction causing his death.
          And there's an important reason why this
     chain will remain broken at the end of this
     case and is broken.  They can't provide the
     links.  This is something that Mr. Bayuk talked
     to you about, and it's the fact that plaintiff,
     Lieutenant Wilcox admits that Mr. Wilcox was a
     legal cause of his death.
          If I can have the ELMO, please.  And for
     these reasons, when you get to -- for these
     reasons, when you get to the first question on
     the verdict form, "Was Cleston Wilcox addicted
     to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so,
     was such addiction a legal cause of his lung
5367 cancer and death," that's the question as to
     whether or not Mr. Wilcox is a member of the
     Engle class.  And I submit to you that based on
     the evidence in this case, you should check
     this no.
          You check it no, case is over.  Your
     verdict is for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          But I can't stop, assuming that you're
     going to do that, right?  I have to do my job
     and assume that maybe, just for argument's
     sake, I think you're going to stop there, I
     think the evidence stops there.  But in case
     you don't and you disagree, I need to go on.
     So I'm going to talk about the rest of the
     verdict form.
          I want to make clear -- Mr. Gustafson said
     something earlier about it would be
     inconsistent because I'm going to say it's not
     a primary lung cancer, but if it's a primary
     lung cancer, he's not addicted, but if he's
     addicted.  That's just the way I have to go
     through the verdict form, quite honestly.
          Because the defense position is Mr. Wilcox
     is not a member of this Engle class.  But I
     wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't talk about
5368 the rest of the verdict form.  So let's try to
     do that here.
          If I can get -- thank you, please.
          Okay.  There is a question 2.  Clearly,
     I'm not going from 1 to 3 to 4.  There's a
     question 2 that relates to comparative fault,
     and I'm going to come back to that.  I wanted
     to talk about questions 3 and 4 before
     addressing question number 2.  All right?  I
     won't leave 2 alone.
          Questions 3 and 4 are:  "Did Cleston
     Wilcox reasonably rely to his detriment on any
     statement made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
     that concealed or omitted material facts not
     otherwise known or available to Cleston Wilcox
     regarding the health effects of cigarettes or
     their addictive nature; and, if so, was such
     reliance a legal cause of Cleston Wilcox's lung
     cancer and death?"
          All right.  That's number 3.  They kind of
     sound similar, so I'm going to read number 4 to
     you just in case.  You'll have this back with
     you.
          "Did Cleston Wilcox reasonably rely to his
     detriment on a statement made in furtherance of
5369 an agreement between and among R.J. Reynolds
     Tobacco Company and other tobacco companies and
     organizations to conceal or omit material facts
     not already known or available to Cleston
     Wilcox regarding the health effects of
     cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, if
     so, was such reliance a legal cause of his lung
     cancer and death?"
          That's what I'm going to walk through
     right now.  I'm going to start, again, with the
     chain that I showed you in opening statement.
     And you will recall, again, this was going to
     explain to you, or hopefully help explain to
     you, how the chain will remain broken because
     the plaintiff cannot provide any link between
     any fraudulent concealment or agreement to
     fraudulently conceal in Mr. Wilcox's death.
          Now, I want to stop here and just address,
     there were a lot of documents shown to you
     throughout this trial, lots of internal company
     documents.  R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's
     documents, B&W, American Tobacco, Lorillard,
     Philip Morris.  You name it, you saw internal
     documents.  Tobacco Institute, et cetera.
          But the issue is not what's in those
5370 documents.  The issue is whether or not the
     tobacco companies, specifically R.J. Reynolds,
     or others, concealed information from
     Mr. Wilcox regarding the health effects or
     addictiveness of smoking that caused his death.
          They have to connect the chain.  And they
     can't, because you cannot conceal something
     already known.  And you've heard abundant
     evidence in this case that Mr. Wilcox knew the
     dangers of cigarette smoking.  He knew that
     they could be addictive and hard to quit.
          You heard that there was public
     information out there.  I'm going to have to
     show you some newspaper articles just to
     refresh your recollection.  But there was also
     evidence specific to Mr. Wilcox that he knew.
     Never confused.  So the chain remains broken
     because you can't conceal something that's
     already known.
          Now, I want to talk about one of the jury
     instructions in this on page 10.  This is
     really important because this is one that, you
     know, you heard from Mr. Gustafson, if you find
     he's a class member, if you answered yes on
     question number 1, the Engle findings apply.
5371 But as Judge Lindsey told you this
     morning, that the findings that I just read to
     you do not establish that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company is liable to the plaintiff in this
     case, nor do they establish whether Mr. Wilcox
     was injured by R.J. Reynolds' conduct or the
     degree, if any, to which Reynolds' conduct was
     a legal cause of Mr. Wilcox's lung cancer and
     death.
          So the findings don't connect that chain
     for you.  The findings don't establish
     liability.  The findings are what the findings
     are.  You heard the instructions; they say what
     they say.  But you can't use them to establish
     liability.  They have to connect the dots.
          Now, the dangers of smoking were not a
     secret.  You heard Dr. Proctor came in here,
     and he talked about what was available in the
     public knowledge.  And just generally, there
     was a lot of information available to the
     public about the dangers and addictiveness of
     smoking throughout time.  And while he didn't
     have anything specific to Mr. Wilcox, there was
     evidence in this case that I'm going to get to
     about what he specifically knew.
5372 But remember Dr. Proctor told you that for
     hundreds of years, people have known that
     smoking can be life threatening.  For hundreds
     of years, people have written and talked about
     how tobacco can be addictive and bad for you.
          Addiction -- "addicted to smoking" shows
     uncommonly starting in the 1850s.  Smokers'
     cancer was listed as an official cause of death
     more than 100 years ago.  Schools have taught
     about the dangers, and not just recently, not
     just recently, schools have been teaching about
     the dangers and difficulty quitting for over a
     hundred years.
          You heard about the -- you probably never
     want to see another Reader's Digest in your
     life.  You saw lots of Reader's Digest in this
     case, but they are important, because as
     Dr. Proctor told you, they're important sources
     of information that the public health
     community, the Surgeon General and the American
     Cancer Society said gave an important -- they
     were an important part of the information that
     the American public had about the dangers of
     smoking.  One in four households had this.
     They were very anti-tobacco.  No tobacco
5373 advertising in these things.
          Starting in 1924, they started publishing
     articles about the dangers and addictiveness of
     smoking.  This is the one from 1924, the very
     first one, the very year that Mr. Wilcox was
     born.  And the conclusion is "Tobacco is
     injurious to the human body.  Its use sometimes
     induces cancer."
          Now, I can promise you right now, we're
     not going to look at every one of the Reader's
     Digest we went through during Dr. Proctor's
     examination, but they are in evidence.
          School textbooks, 1928, Illinois, where
     Mr. Wilcox went to school, "Heavier users of
     tobacco show a death rate 50 percent higher
     than abstainers."
          And then in 1932, "The average life is
     shortened as much as seven years by the use of
     tobacco.  The lungs also suffer directly from
     the effects of tobacco smoke if it is inhaled."
          Textbooks, Reader's Digest.  There were
     Reader's Digest continued, textbooks continued,
     magazines articles continued, newspaper
     articles continued.  You saw all of that during
     Dr. Proctor's cross-examination.
5374 One thing I did want to talk a little bit
     about were the newspaper articles that were
     available to Mr. Wilcox.  And one such
     newspaper that was available to him were the
     Stars and Stripes.
          Now, Stars and Stripes started in 1940 to
     publish articles about the dangers of smoking.
     And that is the newspaper -- you remember
     Dr. Proctor testified that that is the
     newspaper that servicemen received while they
     were overseas serving our country at war.
          And I found it interesting that
     Mr. Barnhart asked both Lieutenant Wilcox and
     Mrs. Wilcox if they remember Mr. Wilcox reading
     the Stars and Stripes.  Clearly, they said no.
     But there's a really good reason why they said
     no.  Because Mrs. Wilcox, while she was married
     to him, never went overseas with him.  And
     Lieutenant Wilcox was never born while
     Mr. Wilcox served in the military.
          So, Dr. Proctor told you that this was a
     newspaper, the only English paper that
     servicemen received overseas.
          Lieutenant Wilcox and Mrs. Wilcox tell you
     that Mr. Wilcox was an avid reader of the
5375 newspaper.  This would be the only newspaper he
     would have gotten when he was serving our
     country overseas.
          And these newspapers carried the same
     articles that were in the United States
     newspapers.  In fact, here's one from St.
     Louis, the very same article from St. Louis
     which, coincidentally, is where Mr. Wilcox is
     from, also talks about -- appears in the Stars
     and Stripes.  This is in 1940s.  Talks about
     cancerous tar, cigarettes cause disease.
          Now, these continue throughout the '50s
     and the '60s.  And the Reader's Digest
     continued.  Last Reader's Digest I'm going to
     show you, but I'm showing it to you because it
     had a very powerful title.  Dr. Proctor talked
     about how powerful this title was.  "If you buy
     a carton of cigarettes, you're buying a carton
     of cancer."  He said it was a powerful message,
     and it was.  That was 1952.
          Now, Canastas Pajamas.  I think you guys
     never want to hear about Canastas Pajamas
     again.  Some of us didn't know what they were,
     including Dr. Proctor.  But we do know that
     inside the edition with the Canastas Pajamas on
5376 the front cover, you found Dr. Wynder's 1953
     mouse skin-painting studies.  You saw graphic
     pictures of it.
          You recall Dr. Proctor telling you that
     this was -- first Dr. Wynder did epidemiology
     studies in the 1950s.  That was the first kind
     of link to smoking and cancer.  Then this.  And
     this was the first animal study.  This received
     enormous publicity, and it also lead to
     enormous quitting rates.
          Dr. Proctor told you that.  The publicity
     around these types of studies led to awareness
     of the American public of the dangers of
     smoking and led to quitting, and he said
     definitely.
          Now, I want to talk about something that
     Mr. Gustafson said during his closing
     statement.  I think I heard him, and I wrote it
     down, he said that the question on the
     concealment or fraudulent concealment claim,
     the question is whether the false controversy,
     the fraudulent concealment was a substantial
     contributing factor in Mr. Wilcox's death.
          He told you that was the question you were
     here to answer.  And then the first thing he
5377 showed you or talked about was Dr. Teague's
     survey of the cancer research, a 1953 document.
          That was R.J. Reynolds -- you may remember
     Dr. Proctor talked to you about it.  Because I
     asked him, I said, okay, this survey of cancer
     research, that wasn't secret, was it?
          I mean, what Dr. Teague did -- remember
     Dr. Proctor told you he lived in Winston-Salem
     where Reynolds is, he went to Wake Forest
     medical school library, he looked at articles,
     publicly available articles, and he summarized
     them in a memo that he provided to
     R.J. Reynolds.
          He didn't conclude that smoking caused
     cancer.  He summarized publicly available
     literature.
          That's what Dr. Proctor told you.  And
     that's the concealment they're talking about,
     summarizing publicly available literature.
          They also showed you a 1956 document about
     Winstons versus Camels and the levels of PAHs,
     et cetera.  And you will recall that
     Dr. Proctor said that, you know, he didn't know
     if those were even the dangerous levels of PAH.
     But the important part is that there's nothing
5378 specific in any of those articles or documents
     that would have changed the fact that
     Mr. Wilcox knew smoking was dangerous, knew
     that it was difficult to quit.
          The public health campaign worked.  You
     recall in 1957 there were some congressional
     hearings where you had some of the public
     health officials, the Surgeon General and the
     director of National Cancer Institute talking
     about the excellent job that the TV press and
     radio have done covering and informing the
     public about the dangers of cigarette smoke.
          That all followed the Wynder and Graham
     studies, the mouse skin-painting studies, et
     cetera.  It led to a very significant event, as
     you will recall Dr. Proctor talking about it,
     was the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
          This was the first report by the Surgeon
     General that concluded that smoking caused lung
     cancer in men.
          Now, what's really important about this,
     not only did it get widespread publicity, but
     the fact of matter is, Mrs. Wilcox told you
     that her and Mr. Wilcox discussed this report.
     They discussed it and they discussed the
5379 findings.  And the conclusions were that
     smoking caused lung cancer in men.  They knew
     it at the time in 1964.
          Widespread publicity.  I'm not going to go
     through all of this.  We spent days doing it.
     I was crossing Dr. Proctor on it.  But it made
     it in the newspapers, Miami News, Miami Herald.
     And what happened was people started quitting,
     and they started these smoking cessation
     clinics or groups that you could go join, like
     Alcoholics Anonymous.  They publicized that and
     there were articles written about that.
          And they were in the Miami News and the
     Miami Herald, and the evidence is that
     Mr. Wilcox never went to one of those.  Never
     tried any of the steps that they outlined in
     the newspapers.  Never went to one of those
     groups.
          Now, the Florida equivalent.  The Florida
     Surgeon General, Florida Health Notes, in 1965,
     the year after the Surgeon General's Report,
     concluded that nearly all Floridians have heard
     about the Surgeon General's Report on smoking
     and health, which was released in 1964.
          We know Mr. Wilcox heard about it because
5380 him and Mrs. Wilcox talked about it.  But
     nearly all Floridians heard about it as well.
          Now, after this, in 1966, you heard that
     warnings went on the packs of cigarettes.  And
     the first warning is up there.  "CAUTION:
     Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
     health."  The fact that the warning went on the
     pack was news.  It was on TV news, it was in
     newspapers.
          But, importantly, then you had some public
     health officials also starting to publicize the
     fact that warnings were on the packs of
     cigarettes.  You remember the TV commercials
     that we showed with Dr. Proctor where they said
     there's a warning on the pack, there was
     beeping lights and the train going through, and
     it advised people to pay attention to those
     warnings.  So there's warnings on the packs,
     warnings in the news, and publications or
     public service announcements by public health
     agencies telling people, there's warnings, you
     should quit.Now, before I leave this, 1966,
     first warning label.  Not only did they talk
     about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report;
     Mrs. Wilcox also testified that when she saw
5381 that warning label on the pack of cigarettes,
     she talked to her husband about it.  1964 they
     did that, and 1966.
          Now, 1968, Daniel Horn, who was in charge
     of trying to get all the information out to the
     American public, made this statement:
          "You could stand on a rooftop and shout,
     smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs,
     and you would not be telling anyone anything
     they did not already know."
          1968.
          And this public information continues.
     The '70s and '80s, there's still articles about
     how to quit smoking, you know, smoking
     cessation clinics, et cetera.  And, again, no
     evidence that Mr. Wilcox went to any of these
     or tried any of these methods.
          And we know that the information got out
     to people.  And how do we know that?  Because
     people started quitting.  Millions of people
     quit.  And nothing about what Dr. Proctor
     talked to you about or what Mr. Gustafson
     talked to you about in his closing statement
     about this false controversy or counter
     messages stopped people from smoking -- I mean
5382 stopped people from quitting smoking.
     Millions, millions of Americans quit.
          Mr. Wilcox could have done the same.  And
     how do we know that?  Well, the proof is in
     this birth cohort.  Mr. Bayuk showed you this.
     It's very important to keep in mind, yes,
     80 percent of his generation smoked, but three
     out of four of those individuals had quit by
     1990.
          Those men -- these are all men, same
     five-year birth window, they were all exposed
     to the same information, the same advertising,
     the same counter messages that Mr. Gustafson
     and Dr. Proctor liked to talk about, the same
     false controversy.  They had all the same
     exposures, but yet they quit, and Mr. Wilcox
     did not.
          Now, before I leave this, I just want to
     make the point that Mr. Sales asked Dr. Proctor
     when he got back up on direct examination,
     redirect, he said, well, couldn't that be
     explained by the fact that some of these guys
     are dying.  Dr. Proctor told you no, this
     controls for that.
          So these are men just like Mr. Wilcox,
5383 living men, exposed to the same information,
     quitting, and quitting in great numbers.
          Now, let's talk about Mr. Wilcox.  There's
     some general information out there.  We know it
     was out there.  But let's talk about what he
     knew, because the fact of the matter, like
     Mr. Bayuk pointed out to you, every single
     question on the verdict form has his name on
     it.  And that's what we need to really focus on
     in this case.
          And the fact is that Mr. Wilcox did not
     die because the dangers of smoking were unknown
     to him.  We're going to talk about some of the
     specifics.  Everyone agrees, there's not been
     any disagreement that Mr. Wilcox knew and
     understood the dangers and addictiveness of
     smoking.
          No one came in here and told you he was
     confused.  Not a single person.  Not one.
     Mr. Wilcox never questioned the dangers of
     smoking.  You didn't hear a witness say, you
     know, he didn't know smoking would cause lung
     cancer to him.
          Mr. Wilcox never doubted the dangers of
     smoking.  He was never confused about the
5384 dangers of smoking.  And the dangers of smoking
     were not a secret to Mr. Wilcox.
          No dispute.  Mr. Gustafson likes to say
     undisputed evidence.  This is undisputed
     evidence.
          Why is it undisputed?  Because throughout
     his lifetime, starting in 1947, Mr. Wilcox
     received warnings and information about the
     dangers of smoking.  He was told from every
     source possible, from his friends, his family
     members, from his doctors.  Recall in 1947
     [sic] Mrs. Wilcox quit smoking when she was
     pregnant because her doctor told her to for her
     baby's health.  Now, in all fairness, she's not
     sure if she told Mr. Wilcox that, but he knew
     that she quit.
          Mr. and Mrs. Wilcox clearly discussed the
     '64 Surgeon General's Report.  We talked about
     that.  Mrs. Wilcox in 1965 quit smoking for
     good.  In 1966, they discussed the pack warning
     labels.  And in 1974, you've heard about the
     heart attack, and his doctors told him he
     needed to stop smoking.  That was a
     personalized warning from his doctors to
     Mr. Wilcox, stop smoking, it's harming your
5385 health.  And then that very same year, his wife
     told him that she wished he would quit smoking
     so he could live a longer life.
          And in 1983, Mr. Wilcox told his son
     Michael that he needed to quit because it was
     bad for his health.
          And, again, during any of these
     discussions, conversations, Mr. Wilcox never
     said, but smoking's not bad for me.  He never
     questioned it was bad for him.  He understood
     it.
          One of the reasons why he may have
     understood it is because of the very cigarette
     warning labels.  The cigarette warning label,
     portion of that slide in the middle, that's in
     evidence.  It's AKM001319.  Those are all the
     warning labels that appear on packs of
     cigarettes.
          You saw -- Dr. Proctor and I talked about
     that.  They started in 1966.  They changed in
     1970.  Starting in 1971, they weren't
     advertising.  And then in 1985, that's when we
     had those rotated warnings that change every
     couple of months.  And the warnings that are on
     there now say that smoking causes lung cancer,
5386 heart disease, emphysema, may complicate
     pregnancy.  They also talk about quitting
     smoking now greatly reduces the risk to your
     health.
          These warnings would have been on every
     pack of cigarettes that Mr. Wilcox picked up
     from 1966 until he stopped smoking in 1992 or
     whenever that happened.  Every pack of
     cigarettes had that warning.
          Now, I want to point out to you that on
     page 18, Judge Lindsey read to you an
     instruction about these warnings that I didn't
     want to leave without talking about.
          The instruction is on page 18.
          "The warning labels placed on cigarette
     packs and advertisements by R.J. Reynolds
     Tobacco Company complied with federal law, and
     Reynolds had no obligation to place additional
     warnings on its cigarette packs and
     advertisements after July 1, 1969."
          And the plaintiff does not claim that
     Reynolds should have given additional or
     different warnings on its cigarette packs or
     advertisements after 1969.  So to the extent
     that there's any confusion as to whether or not
5387 we should have said anything different on our
     cigarette packs, that instruction says it all.
          Again, Mr. Wilcox never disputed those
     warnings.
          So, I want to go to some other
     instructions that relate to questions 3 and 4,
     that I think are pretty important to keep in
     mind.  I'm going to start with instruction
     number -- page number 12, and this is -- the
     first one is:
          "On plaintiff's claim for fraudulent
     concealment against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company, the issues for your determination are
     whether Mr. Wilcox reasonably relied to his
     detriment on any statement made by
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company that concealed or
     omitted material facts not otherwise known or
     available to Mr. Wilcox regarding the health
     effects of cigarettes or their addictive
     nature; and, if so, whether such reliance was a
     legal cause of his lung cancer and death."
          This instruction is what I'm referring to
     when I say that you can't conceal something
     that they already know because you can't
     conceal or omit material facts not otherwise
5388 known or available to Mr. Wilcox.  That's
     important, because we know he knew the dangers
     of smoking.
          On page 14 it talks about how reliance has
     to be reasonable.  You need to have reasonable
     reliance.  And reasonable reliance on a
     statement that concealed or omission of
     material facts was a legal cause of
     Mr. Wilcox's lung cancer and death if it
     directly and in natural and continuous sequence
     produced or contributed substantially to
     producing such lung cancer and death so that it
     can be reasonably be said that but for
     reasonable reliance on the concealment or
     omission of that fact, the lung cancer and
     death would not have occurred.
          In other words, is there anything in any
     of those documents that, had Mr. Wilcox known,
     but for, he would not have developed his lung
     cancer.  I submit to you the answer to that is
     no.  He knew smoking was dangerous.  He knew
     smoking was addictive.
          He knew what he needed -- all the
     information he needed to know about the dangers
     and addictiveness of smoking.  He heard from a
5389 variety of sources, as we discussed.
          There's one other instruction on here,
     which is on page 13, that I think is important,
     and it's very short.
          "A material fact is one that is of such
     importance that Mr. Wilcox would not have acted
     as he did but for the concealment or omission
     of that fact."
          So you have to ask yourself, whatever
     they're claiming was concealed from him,
     whatever information the tobacco companies had
     in those secret documents they like to talk
     about, was it of such importance that
     Mr. Wilcox would not have acted as he did but
     for the concealment or omission of that fact.
          Plaintiff hasn't met their burden of
     proving that to you with regard to any of the
     material that they've showed you.  Because what
     they want you to do is infer reliance.  They
     want you to infer based on their argument.
     They want you to connect the dots for them.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, objection.
     Reynolds versus Martin, First DCA.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MS. HENNINGER:  We heard from Dr. Proctor.
5390 He provided generic testimony.  He didn't know
     anything about Mr. Wilcox.  He couldn't tell
     you what he knew or what he didn't know.  He
     knew his name.  He knew the brands of
     cigarettes he smoked.  He knew the year he was
     born.  But he didn't know anything specific to
     Mr. Wilcox.
          They spent time and talked to him about
     what generally was available to smokers.  We
     talked in general terms, but we never talked
     with Dr. Proctor, who was here to talk about
     the information environment, as to what
     Mr. Wilcox knew or believed.
          And so they want you to connect the dots
     for them.  They want you to take Dr. Proctor's
     generic testimony and connect it to Mr. Wilcox
     without any evidence that it does connect.
     They tried to supply it by argument, by
     rhetoric.  But there's no connection.
          Now, you can't infer any connection
     either, because the simple fact remains that
     Mr. Wilcox knew the dangers of smoking.
          Generic testimony about tobacco industry
     conduct that has nothing to do with Mr. Wilcox
     does not answer the questions you have on your
5391 verdict form.  That doesn't help you.
          That case was tried.  That was the Engle
     case.  You're here to listen to the evidence
     related to Mr. Wilcox, and they didn't provide
     you with any evidence about concealment or how
     that concealment affected Mr. Wilcox.
          But they brought you some generic
     testimony, and it was pretty expensive generic
     testimony, because Dr. Proctor came in here and
     told you that provides this testimony case
     after case after case.  And, in fact, the 13
     days before he was here, he made $62,400
     testifying in cases just like this one in South
     Florida where he knows nothing about the
     smokers.  He provides the same testimony case
     after case.  And he gets paid a lot of money to
     do it.
          And what's interesting is he says, "I'm a
     professor of the historical record, and I know
     what public awareness is and public knowledge
     and how the information environment affected
     smokers."
          But when I asked him about how some of the
     information affected smokers and made them quit
     smoking, remember what he told me?
5392 He said, "Well, you know what, that's not
     my principal area of focus."
          He wants to come in here and tell you
     about how the tobacco companies' internal
     company documents affected people, ones that
     they never saw, but when you ask him about how
     the information about the health risks caused
     people to quit smoking by the millions, he
     says, "That's not my area of focus."  He
     doesn't answer the question.
          And then when he does answer the question,
     sometimes you have to listen to the right tone
     that Dr. Proctor provides.
          Do you remember the question, I showed him
     some depositions when we were impeaching him,
     and I said, "You said that's right."
          And he said, "Well, yeah, I said that's
     right, but it didn't capture my tone because
     sometimes that's right is that's right, and
     sometimes it's that right."
          And I said, "Okay.  So it didn't capture
     your tone?"
          And he said, "Yeah, that's right."
          So it just depends on Dr. Proctor's tone
     and what he wants to relay.  But he knew
5393 nothing about Mr. Wilcox.
          But when you look at the evidence
     specifically related to Mr. Wilcox, you will
     see that there is no evidence that
     R.J. Reynolds caused Mr. Wilcox to start
     smoking.  No evidence that R.J. Reynolds caused
     Mr. Wilcox to continue smoking instead of
     quitting.  No evidence that R.J. Reynolds
     caused Mr. Wilcox to change his smoking
     behavior.  No evidence that Reynolds withheld
     any information that would have affected his
     decision to start smoking.  No evidence that
     R.J. Reynolds withheld information that would
     have affected Mr. Wilcox's decision to continue
     smoking.  Mr. Wilcox, in short, you've heard it
     earlier, did what he wanted to do.
          Dr. Proctor spent a lot of time talking
     about internal company documents of a variety
     of tobacco companies, from The Tobacco
     Institute, CTR, et cetera.  He talked to you,
     showed you a bunch of cigarette advertising.
          But the fact of the matter is that there
     is absolutely zero evidence in this case that
     Mr. Wilcox saw any of these ads or heard
     anything about the CTR or TIRC or even
5394 R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          Mr. Gustafson talked today about the open
     debate campaign from R.J. Reynolds in the '80s.
     There's no evidence in this case that
     Mr. Wilcox ever saw that.
          So let's talk about the very first thing
     that they showed you when they were talking
     about this conspiracy to conceal information.
     They talked about how it all started with the
     publication of the Frank Statement after that
     meeting at the Plaza Hotel.  And they talked on
     and on about where that was published,
     et cetera, and how this was important
     advertisement that Reynolds and other tobacco
     companies put out where they made various
     promises.
          And then the first thing I told you when I
     stood up in opening statement was, you know,
     that's interesting because Mr. Wilcox could not
     have seen it.  And Dr. Proctor confirmed it.
     Because he wasn't living in the United States
     at the time, and the only newspaper he had
     access to didn't take advertising.  No evidence
     connecting what they want to show you to
     Mr. Wilcox.  And that's a perfect example.
5395 Now, there's something to keep in mind
     about this conspiracy claim because it's
     important when we're assessing the facts in
     this case to remember that Dr. Proctor told
     you, in his opinion, this conspiracy began in
     1953 at the Plaza Hotel.
          Now, there's no claim that there was any
     conspiracy to withhold information or hide
     anything from any smokers, including
     Mr. Wilcox, before 1953.  And that's important
     with regard to when Mr. Wilcox became a smoker.
     Because you will note from the evidence in this
     case, no witness saw Mr. Wilcox smoke until
     1945.  No witness knows why Mr. Wilcox started
     to smoke.  There's no evidence that Mr. Wilcox
     smoked R.J. Reynolds cigarettes until he was 21
     years old.  And there's no evidence that
     Mr. Wilcox started smoking because of anything
     R.J. Reynolds said or did.
          Why do I bring this out?  Because if you
     get to questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form,
     anything that happened before 1953 or 1945 we
     don't have information about.  We don't have
     any information about why Mr. Wilcox started to
     smoke, how much he smoked, or the brands of
5396 cigarettes he smoked.
          But what we do know about his smoking
     before 1945 is that two of plaintiff's
     witnesses, their addiction expert and
     Mrs. Wilcox, testified that in their opinion,
     he was addicted, and if he was addicted, he was
     addicted before 1945.
          During this period that we know nothing
     about what he was smoking, what brands he was
     smoking, how much he was smoking, but if he was
     addicted in their opinion, it was before 1945.
          So we're going to talk about advertising a
     little bit.  And generic evidence about
     advertising has nothing to do with Mr. Wilcox.
     There's zero evidence that R.J. Reynolds'
     advertising affected Mr. Wilcox's decisions to
     start smoking, continue smoking, the brand that
     he chose, or his quitting efforts.
          So let's talk about some of the specific
     ads that you saw.  We're going to get to those
     later.  But one of the things mentioned were
     filter and light cigarettes.
          Do you remember Dr. Strauss said that no
     tobacco company ever said filtered and light
     cigarettes were safer or safe, that if
5397 Mr. Wilcox heard that, he heard that from the
     public health community, and that they base
     their recommendations on the time of scientific
     studies that showed that low-tar cigarettes
     were safer.  And keep in mind, Mr. Wilcox
     smoked unfiltered Camel cigarettes for 20 years
     after filters were released.
          So let's talk about the evidence about why
     Mr. Wilcox, specific to Mr. Wilcox, why he
     smoked filtered cigarettes and why he smoked
     low-tar cigarettes.
          First let's look at the filter ads that
     were shown to you.  Now, the ads that were
     introduced in evidence are all Salem ads and
     R.J. Reynolds ads, but this was shown to you
     with Dr. Proctor, some filter ads.  Now, you
     were shown the ads and you were talked to about
     how the ads made filters look safer.  They
     talked about modern filter technology.  You'll
     recall that testimony by Dr. Proctor.
          But what's the evidence in this case about
     why Mr. Wilcox started smoking filters?
          Joe Wasilewski came in here and told you
     exactly why Mr. Wilcox started smoking filters.
     You recall the story.  He sat there and he
5398 testified that Nephew Dave came down from
     Chicago, and he was smoking Kools, and he told
     Mr. Wilcox that Kools were smoother and they
     weren't as harsh as unfiltered Camels and that
     the filter filtered out the nicotine.
          Dave told Mr. Wilcox that, not
     advertising, Dave told him that.  He gave him
     one of his Kool cigarettes.  And Mr. Wilcox
     started smoking Kools after that.  That's the
     only evidence you have, ladies and gentlemen,
     as to why Mr. Wilcox started smoking filtered
     cigarettes.  That's what's in this case
     specific to Mr. Wilcox.
          What about low-tar cigarettes?  Well,
     you'll have all of them.  All of the Salem
     Lights ads are in evidence.  You can look at
     them if you want.  But I will tell you what,
     I've looked through them, just like everybody
     else has looked through them.  You were shown a
     bunch of them.
          But the theme of these ads are Salem
     Spirit, you've got what it takes.
          And I looked through them.  See where in
     here, any of these ads, see where it says that
     they are safer because they're lower in tar or
5399 nicotine.
          Look at them, because they don't say that.
     Where was Mr. Wilcox getting that message?  It
     wasn't from Salem Lights ads, it was from the
     public health community.
          (Thereupon, the videoclip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
          JAMES EARL JONES:  A few moments of
     silence for people who are still smoking.
          Now, if you're still smoking, here is the
     next thing to think about.  Just how bad is
     your cigarette?  It matters quite a lot.  You
     see, bad as they all are, some are worse.
     There are 118 different kinds and brands of
     cigarettes.  Short ones, long ones, longer than
     longs, cotton filters, air filters, activated
     charcoal filters, and some with no filters at
     all.  You can buy yourself all kinds of trouble
     with up to 31 milligrams of tar, up to
     2.2 milligrams of nicotine.
          The least you can do, and goodness knows
     it isn't much, is get a low tar and nicotine
     cigarette and cut down.  You've got a tar and
     nicotine list.  Send for it.  It's free.  Get
     to know your enemy before you strike a match.
5400 (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  Proof that Mr. Wilcox was
     receiving this information from the public
     health community came from two witnesses that
     came into court and talked to you.  That was
     his son Michael and Joe Wasilewski.  You
     remember both of them told similar stories how
     Mr. Wilcox would tell them, "I only smoke the
     cigarette halfway down.  I do that because all
     of the bad stuff is in the other end of the
     cigarette."  His son Michael told him that and
     Joe Wasilewski told you that.
          Well, where did he get that information?
     Well, the public health community told him
     that.  Remember, these five ways to reduce the
     risks of smoking.  If you smoke, this American
     Cancer Society brochure.  Talked about it with
     Dr. Proctor.  We went through all five steps,
     I'm not going to do it here, but let's look at
     number one:  "Choose a cigarette with less tar
     and nicotine."
          And then number two:  "Surprise, don't
     smoke your cigarette all the way down.  The
     most tar and nicotine is found in the last few
     puffs."
5401 Sounds a lot like the message that
     Mr. Wilcox was telling Joe Wasilewski and his
     son Michael, and it was a message coming from
     the public health community, not the tobacco
     companies.
          Then we had Diana Huckstep, his niece,
     that came down here and said that Uncle Red
     heard that low-tar cigarettes were safer from
     something on the news.
          Well, the question is, where did he learn
     that on the news?  The tobacco companies
     weren't advertising.  It was after 1971 when
     Salem cigarettes came out, Salem Lights.  There
     weren't any ads on TV.  What was on the news
     that told him that low-tar cigarettes were
     safer?
          (Thereupon, the videoclip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
          NARRATOR:  A cancer expert said today that
     the new low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes are
     safer than regular cigarettes, although people
     who smoke these cigarettes still have far
     higher death rates than people who don't smoke
     at all.  This news comes at a time when
     Americans are smoking more cigarettes, more
5402 than 600 billion of them last year.
          Brian Ross has more on the story.
          MR. BRIAN ROSS:  Low-tar and nicotine
     cigarettes now account for 11 percent of all
     the cigarettes smoked in the country.  As sales
     have grown, it is believed that such brands are
     less likely to cause lung cancer and heart
     disease.
          The American Cancer Society says today's
     report is the first solid proof that low tar
     and nicotine cigarettes are safer.
          DR. HAMMOND:  Tar and nicotine is being
     further reduced.  And it is far better that
     people don't smoke, but if they're going to
     smoke, as many people are just plainly going to
     do, then they're better off smoking the
     cigarettes with low-tar and nicotine than with
     higher-tar and nicotine.
          I'm hoping that people who never smoke
     anything but the low-tar and nicotine
     cigarettes, by the time they reach 40, 50, 60,
     that they will not have the death rate of
     cigarette smokers of my generation.
          MR. BRIAN ROSS:  The Cancer Society report
     is based on a 12-year study of tens of
5403 thousands of smokers.  Low-tar and nicotine
     cigarette users had a 26 percent less chance of
     lung cancer and a 14 percent less chance of
     heart disease than those who smoked high-tar
     and nicotine cigarettes.  But the study also
     found that smokers of low-tar and nicotine
     cigarettes had a death rate much higher than
     those who don't smoke at all.
          Brian Ross, NBC --
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  You remember that.  That
     was Dr. Hammond, who was talking about an
     American Cancer Society study that showed that
     lower-tar cigarettes were safer, and it was
     publicized and it was on the news.  That's the
     news that his niece talked about when he
     learned that low-tar cigarettes were safer.
          Now, I want to end back at the chain that
     I showed about this fraudulent concealment.
     And I'm going to show you, again, just this
     board, and I apologize, if I put it up,
     hopefully you can still see the screen.  And
     I'm not going to go through all this because
     I'm starting to have to talk fast, I'm running
     out of time a little bit.
5404 But you remember, I had Mr. Wilcox,
     Lieutenant Wilcox was on the stand, and I asked
     him, "As personal representative of your
     father's estate, you understand that you're
     bringing claims for fraudulent concealment and
     conspiracy to conceal, and I want to ask you,
     do you have any evidence of these things?"
          And he said no to each and every one of
     them.
          And because of that, ladies and gentlemen,
     the chain remains broken.  They can't connect
     the concealment or the conspiracy to conceal
     from the fraud to Mr. Wilcox's death.
          And if I may have the ELMO, please.
          And for that reason, on question 3, I
     submit that you should answer no, and for
     question 4, the answer is no.
          Now, I told you I would come back to
     question number 2, and that's what I'm going to
     right now is talk about comparative fault.  If
     I can have the slides back.
          Thank you.
          And the question on number 2 is the
     percentage of fault that you would assign
     Mr. Wilcox versus R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
5405 Company.
          And I want to briefly point you to an
     instruction on page number 11 because it's very
     important.  And what it says essentially is
     that the assignment of fault -- sorry.  The
     assignment of fault relates only to actions
     that were a legal cause of Mr. Wilcox's death.
          And Reynolds cannot be assigned fault for
     actions that were not a legal cause of
     Mr. Wilcox's death.  So if there's some kind of
     evidence that doesn't connect to Mr. Wilcox and
     didn't cause his death, Reynolds can't be at
     fault for it.  The plaintiff has to prove to
     you each and every one of the percentage points
     that they want to assign R.J. Reynolds in this
     case.
          You remember when we started, we don't
     start out at 50/50.  We start out at zero.  To
     get us above zero, they have to meet their
     burden of proving that to you, and they haven't
     done it in this case for the reasons I'm going
     to talk about.
          Now, Mr. Wilcox made a choice to start and
     continue to smoke and not to go more than 24
     hours without stopping smoking.
5406 And -- oops, I went too fast, didn't I?
          And he also, as the personal
     representative of his estate, Lieutenant Wilcox
     has admitted he hasn't tried hard enough or
     long enough to quit.
          And what does that mean?  It means he
     chose to start smoking, he knew that smoking
     was dangerous, and he continued to smoke.  We
     know he wasn't confused about smoking.  He was
     responsible for his own quitting of smoking and
     he was able to quit earlier and he could have
     quit earlier.  As Dr. Barrio said, had he quit
     four years after his heart attack, he could
     have prevented his cancer in his lung, if it
     was lung cancer.  He could have prevented it.
          Is there anything that's different about
     Mr. Wilcox than the 60 million other Americans
     who quit smoking?  The answer is no with the
     exception of the bottom one.  Mr. Wilcox smoked
     for over 50 years without making a serious
     effort to quit.  That's the difference between
     him and the 60 million Americans who did quit.
          And you will recall Lieutenant Wilcox's
     testimony.  Before 1992, your father never went
     for more than a day without smoking in any
5407 effort to quit?
          And he said, yeah, that's right.
          Now, all these quit attempts that the
     plaintiffs talk about, the chewing of the gum
     or the cutting down of cigarettes, he continued
     to smoke.  He never went 24 hours without
     smoking a cigarette.
          And as Mr. Bayuk talked to you about
     earlier, to be a serious quit attempt, you have
     to try to quit smoking, you have to put the
     cigarettes down, and you have to do so for more
     than 24 hours.  The fact of the matter is that
     Mr. Wilcox did not do that until 1992, and when
     he did it in 1992, he quit smoking.
          So again, on page number 11, a very
     important instruction.  Plaintiff has the
     burden to prove each and every percentage point
     of R.J. Reynolds' fault.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  That's
     not in the instructions.  I object.  "Each and
     every percentage point," the part highlighted.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Let me read to you what's
     in the instructions --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MS. HENNINGER:  -- to be clear.
5408 So again, Mr. Barnhart and Mr. Gustafson
     have some differences of opinion as to how much
     fault they want to assign Reynolds, be it
     90 percent or 95 percent, but they have the
     burden of proving each and every one of them to
     you.
          So they haven't met their burden to you of
     proving one because the fact is, Mr. Wilcox
     knew the dangers and he didn't quit.
          And I tried to prepare a little animation.
     I'm going to apologize right now because I'm
     going to have to talk really fast to get
     through it, but this is why we say that
     Mr. Wilcox was a hundred percent responsible.
          First, he could have quit and prevented
     his own death.  Plaintiff admits that
     Mr. Wilcox could have tried harder and longer
     to quit.
          Mr. Wilcox did not try to quit in 1947
     when Mrs. Wilcox quit.
          Also, in 1964 with the Surgeon General's
     report, they discussed it, he didn't try to
     quit.
          Same with 1965 when Mrs. Wilcox quit.
          1966, the pack warnings, they talked about
5409 it.  He didn't try to make any effort to quit.
          Mr. Wilcox did not try to quit after his
     heart attack in 1974.  His wife warned him,
     also his doctors warned him.  His wife warned
     him.  No attempts to quit smoking.
          He didn't stop smoking when he went to
     hypnosis.  He didn't stop smoking when he used
     the Aqua Filter.  He didn't stop smoking when
     he was smoking half a cigarette.  That's kind
     of obvious because he's still smoking.  And he
     didn't stop smoking when he was using the
     nicotine gum.
          Mr. Wilcox stopped using the nicotine gum
     even though he was cutting back on the amount
     he was smoking while he was chewing it, and he
     never tried to quit between the time he used
     the gum in the '80s and when he put the patch
     on in 1992.
          He did not stay quit after he couldn't
     smoke while he was hospitalized either for his
     heart attack or the abdominal surgery.
          And he never threw out his ashtrays.
          He ignored and rejected doctors who told
     him to quit.
          He never went to a stop-smoking clinic.
5410 He never stopped smoking for even a day
     before 1992, and he never made a serious
     attempt to quit before 1992 because he never
     went 24 hours.
          And I'm going to briefly say that Harry
     Reasoner, you heard this earlier --
          (Thereupon, the videoclip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
          HARRY REASONER:  It comes down to you
     whether you like it or not.  No one is going to
     forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite
     clear that no one is going to tell him it's
     good for him either.  The decision is his, the
     decision and health that may depend on it.
     This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night.
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  Okay.  So Mr. Wilcox's
     choices were the only legal cause of his death.
     Nothing Reynolds could have done could have
     prevented his death.  He was the one who had
     the ability to quit, and he was a hundred
     percent responsible for the choices he made.
          If I can have the ELMO, please.
          And for that reason, we submit that
     100 percent of fault belongs to Mr. Wilcox and
5411 0 percent of fault belongs to R.J. Reynolds.
          Again, there's an instruction right here.
     If you put a 0 there, you don't have to go any
     further.
          But then we're going to talk about two
     more questions on here as fast as I can.  And
     the next one is question number 5, and that's
     damages.
          I'm sorry, can I have the slides?  I'm
     sorry.  Thank you.
          Question number 5 is damages.
          There's one thing defense lawyer doesn't
     like to do is have to get this far down the
     verdict form where they're talking about
     damages, but I'm going to talk about them just
     because I have to cover everything, as I told
     you.  And what I'm going to tell you is look at
     the instructions you have on this.  The damages
     on page 23 of the instructions say damages must
     be fair and just in light of the evidence.
          You are to consider on this same
     instruction, it talks about the joint life
     expectancy of Mr. and Mrs. Wilcox.  And there
     are mortality tables that were introduced into
     evidence by the plaintiff on that.
5412 The instructions also talk about sympathy.
     We talked about this, you will remember, in
     voir dire, when we were asking questions as to
     whether or not people could put sympathy aside
     in reaching a verdict in this case.
          There is no doubt that Mrs. Wilcox, who is
     a 90-year-old widow, I had the opportunity to
     speak with her when she was on the stand, a
     very nice lady.  My heart goes out to her.  You
     felt sympathy.  That's understood.  But you
     have to remember an instruction on page 37,
     that the law tells you to put your sympathy
     aside.
          It's naturally legal to have it, but
     that's not a reason to base damages.  Damages
     must be based on the instructions that Judge
     Lindsey gives you.
          And let's talk about what the damages are
     in this case.  Just to make clear, plaintiff is
     not seeking damages for any economic loss like
     lost wages or financial support, no medical
     expenses, funeral expenses.
          And these three things are incredibly
     important.  Mr. Cleston Wilcox's pain and
     suffering are not part of the damages.
5413 Lieutenant Wilcox's pain and suffering are not
     part of the damages.  Michael Wilcox's pain and
     suffering are not part of the damages.  The
     only damages you are being asked to assess are
     the damages of Mrs. Lorraine Wilcox for her
     loss of companionship and protection and for
     her pain and suffering.
          And plaintiff has the burden to prove the
     damages to you.  They have the burden of proof
     to prove why they're asking for $10 million.
          Now, no one is questioning that this is a
     nice family.  That's not the issue.  The
     question is whether or not plaintiff has proven
     to you that they deserve $10 million.  Have
     they shown you anything to support their claim
     for $10 million for these injuries?
          So the last question on the verdict form
     is punitive damages.  Entitlement to punitive
     damages.  Now, page 27 of your instructions
     talks about there's a different standard,
     different burden of proof on punitive damages.
     It's not -- it's clear and convincing evidence.
     This is different than the greater weight of
     the evidence that Judge Lindsey instructed you
     on earlier in the case.
5414 Punitive damages must be found by clear
     and convincing evidence.  That means that the
     evidence must be more compelling and
     persuasive.  The evidence that is precise,
     explicit, lacking in confusion and of such
     weight that it produces a firm belief or
     conviction, without hesitation, of the matter.
          That's the burden of proof to answer
     question number 6 yes.  And we've tried to
     demonstrate this because the burden of proof
     for all the other issues is the greater weight
     of the evidence.  That's when plaintiffs were
     talking about weighing the scales and getting
     to 51 percent.  But clear and convincing
     evidence is a very different burden, and it's
     outlined in the instructions that I just read
     to you and Judge Lindsey read to you.
          Punitive damages can be awarded only for
     any conduct that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Wilcox's death.  Punitive damages can be
     awarded only to the plaintiff, Mrs. Wilcox.
     And they are in addition to damages that fully
     compensate her for whatever loss you would
     determine she had.
          Important.  These are in your
5415 instructions.  The Engle findings may not be
     considered in any way -- in any way in
     determining whether punitive damages may be
     warranted.  The Engle findings do not establish
     that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages.
     That's on page 10 of your instructions.
          And then I'm going to go quickly through
     this.  There's some question as to whether or
     not R.J. Reynolds should be punished.  You
     heard a lot about Council for Tobacco Research.
     Dr. Proctor talked about how it was distraction
     research, and that they were actually members
     of the conspiracy.
          But keep in mind, there were actually
     $350 million awarded in research grants that
     ended up with 7,000 publications, that 600
     articles were cited by the Surgeon General's
     Reports, ten Nobel Prize winners had funding
     from CTR, universities all over the country,
     including right here in Florida, had funding.
     They funded all four lines of evidence.
          Remember Dr. Proctor called them the
     causation lines of evidence or the stools of
     causation, and they were published in highly
     respected journals, sometimes published with
5416 funding with the National Cancer Institute or
     the American Cancer Society.
          So CTR had some valid, very valid
     contributions to the scientific knowledge and
     data regarding the dangers of smoking.
          Now, another thing you heard a lot about
     is how the tobacco companies went out of their
     way to try to say the Surgeon General's wrong
     or dead wrong and tried to downplay the report.
          But you heard Dr. Proctor talk
     specifically about R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company and a scientist named Dr. Rodgman who
     was a chemist.  Dr. Rodgman did a lot of work
     before the 1964 Surgeon General's report where
     he found various carcinogens in tobacco smoke,
     and he turned that over to the Surgeon General,
     and it was in the 1964 Surgeon General's
     report.
          And Dr. Proctor said that it is true that
     the Surgeon General's committee in 1964
     identified the carcinogens in cigarette smoke,
     in part, through the work of Dr. Rodgman, who
     was an employee of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company.
           Now, I wanted to show you, there's two
5417 instructions that are very important here, page
     26 and 30.  It basically says that you may not
     impose punitive damages on Reynolds for the
     basis of plaintiff's claims for strict
     liability or negligence.
          So what does that mean?  It means that
     punitive damages, if warranted, must be based
     on the conduct that constituted fraudulent
     concealment or an agreement to fraudulently
     conceal.
          So designing cigarettes is not a basis for
     punitive damages.  Negligence is not a basis
     for punitive damages.  It's only if you find
     the concealment or the agreement to conceal
     that would lead to punitive damages when you
     get to question 6.
          So let's look at some of this.  You've
     heard this from Mr. Bayuk.  R.J. Reynolds did
     not make cigarettes inhalable.  They didn't
     make them more addictive.  And the fact of the
     matter is that punitive damages cannot be
     awarded for cigarette design.
          Cigarettes, Dr. Proctor told you, from the
     1800s were just as dangerous.  Cigarettes in
     the 1800s were just as dangerous and addictive
5418 as the cigarettes Mr. Wilcox smoked.  We didn't
     invent inhalability.  We didn't invent
     flue-curing.
          Same with these additives.  They didn't
     make them more addictive.  Dr. Proctor told you
     that they don't make them more dangerous.  That
     includes ammonia, that includes levulinic acid,
     all of the things that have been talked about.
     There is no proof that they made cigarettes any
     more dangerous or addictive.
          Mr. Wilcox's cigarettes were no more
     dangerous or addictive than cigarettes in the
     1800s, according to Dr. Proctor, plaintiff's
     expert.
          So keep in mind, punitive damages cannot
     be awarded for cigarette design, such as strict
     liability or negligence.
          So, let's go to another jury instruction
     on page 31.  In determining whether punitive
     damages may be awarded -- or may be warranted,
     you should also take into consideration any
     mitigating evidence.  Mitigating evidence is
     evidence that may demonstrate that there is no
     need to impose punitive damages.
          Well, there's one piece of mitigating
5419 evidence that you did hear from Dr. Proctor.
     Remember he said it would be great if cigarette
     companies, tobacco companies would try to make
     a less mutagenetic cigarette, a cigarette that
     didn't cause -- or have as many carcinogens in
     it as other cigarettes.  Then you also heard
     him talk about Premier and how R.J. Reynolds
     spent billions of dollars trying to make
     cigarettes safer.
          Since the 1950s, they've worked to reduce
     the levels of carcinogens in cigarettes.  They
     actually succeeded in reducing the levels of
     carcinogens in cigarettes.  And that the
     Reynolds scientists genuinely believed that
     low-tar and filtered cigarettes reduced risks,
     and they spent millions and hundreds of
     millions of dollars on this technology called
     Premier.
          It was a cigarette that heated, not
     burned, tobacco.  They spent a lot of money
     doing it.  You heard about how it was released
     in the 1980s, and I think Dr. Proctor said it
     tasted like dead fish.  Do you remember that
     cigarette, the dead fish cigarette?  And he
     told you how it was a big flop.  It was a big
5420 flop even though it was less carcinogenic.
     They tried.  They didn't give up.
          So, ask yourself if punitive damages are
     warranted in this case, and the answer is that
     they are not.  Reynolds has worked for decades
     and spent billions of dollars trying to make
     cigarettes safer.
          Cigarettes have carried warning labels
     since 1966.  And punitive damages are not
     needed to prevent R.J. Reynolds from concealing
     the dangers of smoking.  The dangers of
     smoking are known.  Mr. Wilcox knew them.  And
     R.J. Reynolds now admits everything.  There's
     no need for punitive damages.
          MR. SALES:  Objection, Your Honor, there's
     no evidence of anything that happened after
     1994.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. SALES:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Granted.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Ask yourself, would
     punitive damages -- what would they do?  What
     would a verdict for Mr. Wilcox or his estate do
     in this case?  Would they make smokers aware of
     anything that they are not already aware of?
5421 Would they make cigarettes safer?  Would they
     have any impact on whether people chose to
     smoke?  Would they decrease the number of
     people who smoke cigarettes?  Would they ban
     the sale or manufacture of cigarettes?  And
     would they improve public health?  The answer
     is no to all of those questions.
          Last jury instruction I want to show you
     is an instruction on page 28.  And I just
     fibbed, because that's not the last one.  But
     it's that in determining whether punitive
     damages are warranted, you may not seek to
     punish R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for any
     harm suffered by any individuals other than
     Mr. Wilcox.  That's instruction on page 28 of
     your instructions.
          One more instruction on page 26 I wanted
     to show you, and that is the instruction
     regarding punitive damages.
          If you find that punitive damages are
     warranted, you will proceed to a second part of
     that issue, during which the parties may
     present additional evidence and argument on the
     issue of punitive damages.
          Now, there's more to come if you answer
5422 number 6 with a yes.  But for the reasons I
     submitted, the answer to number 6 is no.
          If I may please have the ELMO.
          "Please state below whether you find by
     clear and convincing evidence that punitive
     damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds
     Tobacco Company under the circumstances of this
     case."
          The answer to that, ladies and gentlemen,
     is no.
          Now, I want to end by summarizing some
     of -- can I have the thing back?  I'm sorry.  I
     didn't give you any warning.
          (Thereupon, the videoclip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
          DR. HAMMOND:  It is now established, in my
     opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that
     cigarette smoking greatly increases the
     probability of developing lung cancer.
          In my opinion, people should be warned of
     the dangers, and they are being warned.  What
     they then want to do, whether they wish to
     smoke or not, is their own business.
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  That was the words of
5423 Dr. Hammond in 1955, and these are the words
     people used to describe Mr. Wilcox.  Mind your
     own business and don't ever question me again,
     he did what he wanted to do, he made his
     choices about what he wanted to do, things were
     done his way, and he lived his life the way he
     wanted to live.
          And, importantly, he didn't want to have
     anybody tell him he shouldn't smoke.
          Ladies and gentlemen, again, I have,
     apparently, a second left to thank you for the
     last time.  Thank you very much for your
     attention and your patience and for your
     deliberations later this afternoon.  Thank you.
