         MR. UITERWYK:  May it please the Court.
         Good morning.  When I was getting ready this
    morning, I looked in the mirror and I said, God, Henk,
    you look tired.  And then I thought, you know, I'm
    tired because I've been talking for three and a half weeks, and then I thought, you know, talking is easy,
    listening is what is hard.
         And then I imagine, you know, you all sitting
    here for three and a half weeks listening to a
    tremendous amount of testimony, many, many documents,
    exhibits, and so forth, and a lot of repetitive
    things.  And for that reason I want to give a special
    thanks not only on behalf of myself, my client, and
    all the attorneys and everybody in this courtroom.
         If it wasn't for people like you who are willing
    to give almost four weeks out of their lives and
    listen for those four weeks, our system wouldn't work.
    And it's because of people like you that our system
    does work.
         Now, fortunately or unfortunately, depending on
    the perspective that you look at it from, you're going
    to have to listen to us a little while longer.  And
    you're going to have to listen to us talk to you about
    what you've heard and what you have seen over the last
    three and a half weeks.
         Starting with that if a company in its zeal to
    make profits and increase their profits causes harm to
    its customers and to others because of their actions,
    they should and must accept responsibility for those
    actions.  The Defendants, as you have heard throughout
    this entire case from voir dire on, still do not
    accept responsibility for their actions.  They will
    attempt to make this case about Mr. Willis' choices.
         They are doing this for obvious reasons.  They
    are doing it to divert your attention away from many
    of the real issues in this case.  Which real issues
    are their choices and their decisions and how it led
    to what happened to Jimmie Willis; hoping that you
    won't focus on their choices and their decisions but
    only focus on choices or decisions that Mr. Willis
    made.
         And because we have seen and it is now apparent
    after three and a half weeks, they have not presented
    a single shred of evidence, a single corporate
    representative, a single witness, to give any evidence
    regarding the decisions and choices they made and how
    those decisions and choices affected people like
    Jimmie Willis.  Shame on them.  No one to explain the
    choices and decisions that they made during most of
    the 20th century.
         The choice, for instance, to design, engineer a
    cigarette in such a way that it was easy to inhale so
    that you could take the smoke and the nicotine that is
    in it deep into their lungs, a choice to design and
    manipulate the cigarettes early on to obtain the 8
    optimum level of nicotine to cause and sustain
    addiction; choosing early on to actually design a
    perfect drug delivery device, and the drug being
    nicotine.
         They chose to design and manipulate their
    cigarettes in a way that it made it easy for teenagers
    to inhale, made it easy for them to overcome the
    initial distaste for a cigarette, and they maintained
    the optimum level of the nicotine that once they
    started to smoke it, it caused them to become addicted
    and would sustain their addiction throughout their
    life.
         And they did this for young people particularly
    in the 1940s and 1950s like Jimmie and others his age,
    so they would become addicted, as I'll explain to you
    more a little later.  Because once they became
    addicted, as a result of their manipulation of the
    product, they knew that they stayed addicted, that
    they would remain addicted.  And they knew if they
    stayed addicted and remained addicted, they were
    customers and they were somebody they could make money
    from.
         The Defendants also at the same time as they
    manipulated their products to appeal to the youth of
    this country, they also designed their marketing
    program, their ads, to appeal to people like Jimmie as
    teenagers.  And then when it got out that their
    product could cause you some harm, they chose and they
    decided that they not only were going to deny it that
    it could cause you harm, they only were not going to
    deny it that their product was addictive, they were
    going to cover it up, they were going to conceal and
    cover up what they knew and what they should have told
    all young Americans and people in that generation.
         They chose and decided to enter a well planned
    and well designed, just like their cigarettes,
    coverup, to fraudulently conceal and hide the
    addictiveness of their product and the harm that it
    could cause.
         And when they got caught, which didn't occur
    until the '90s, when their documents were forced out
    of their hands and they had to disclose their internal
    documents -- when they got caught at that particular
    time they said, oh, it's not our fault; it's all the
    smokers' faults.  It was his choice.  No different
    than what they are doing here today.
         The amazing part, instead of having someone
    explain and defend their choices and their decisions,
    they use arguments and manipulation of words.  No one
    answered the overwhelming evidence that indicts them for causing the death and sickness of millions of
    Americans.
         As they said in their opening and as they
    probably will say today in their closing, that this
    case is about three questions, and they will actually,
    as we remembered last time -- the first question was
    why did Mr. Willis smoke?  They say it was his choice,
    but at the age of five when he tried his first
    cigarette was it an informed choice?  No.  When he
    started at the age -- regularly at the age of 15, 16,
    was it informed choice?  No.
         At that time the cigarette companies chose and
    decided that they were not going to tell anybody, put
    any warnings, or disclose anything about their product
    that they already knew about.  They decided at that
    time to not put anything on their packages regarding
    the addictiveness of their product or the harm that it
    can cause you.  Whose decision was that?  Whose choice
    was that?  Who should be held responsible for those
    choices and decisions?  A time when they chose -- when
    Jimmie was at the age of 5, 15.  When they chose and
    they decided to make their ads appear sexy and
    healthy, cool, the thing to do, be big.
         Whose decision and choice was that?  And who
    should be responsible for that choice and that
    decision?  A time when they marketed to youth and
    people Jimmie's age, whose decision was that and who
    should be held responsible for that?  A time when they
    chose and decided to intentionally make their
    cigarette easy to inhale, kept the level of nicotine
    at the optimum level, so once they got people of
    Jimmie's age using their product, they had a customer
    for life and they had them hooked and addicted, whose
    choice and decision was that?  Who should be
    responsible for that decision?
         The second question:  Why didn't he quit earlier?
    They're going to say it was all his choice.  Again,
    they actually probably will not say anywhere in their
    closing nor have they said in this courtroom about
    their decisions and their choices.
         Well, he did try to quit, but he failed.  He
    failed because of the choices the Defendants made in
    choosing to design and manufacture the cigarettes in
    the way they did to cause and sustain his addiction.
    They will argue that he never made serious quit
    attempts, and we agree that he should have tried
    harder.
         You've heard from the very beginning we have
    agreed that he should have and could have tried
    harder, and for that he bears some fault.  But why did 9
    those quit attempts fail?  Because he wanted them to
    fail?  No.  He was unable to stop and relapsed every
    time because of the addiction to designed -- perfect
    drug delivery device that they designed.
         They will argue that he wasn't the motivated
    enough and he didn't try hard enough and that it was
    his choice, but it was their choice to intentionally
    undermine motivation and diminish his choice when they
    designed the perfect drug delivery device so that he
    was -- when he did try to quit, he was in the grip of
    the addiction which caused him to relapse.
         They refused to take any responsibility for the
    addiction that they created and sustained as a result
    of the perfect drug delivery device.  They refused to
    accept any responsibility for the choices they made
    and the decades of deceit and denial which provided a
    crutch for people like Jimmie, oh, it's not that bad,
    they're saying there's nothing wrong with it, oh,
    they're saying if there's anything wrong with it we'll
    take it out, they'll say if there's anything wrong,
    we'll go out of business.  Providing a crutch, the
    rationalization of denial for people like Jimmie who
    were addicted.
         Then the third question is what if anything did
    Philip Morris or RJR that could cause Jimmie Willis --
    to cause Mr. Willis to be sick?  The question should
    be whose defective, manipulated, designed and
    specifically marketed product was it that got him
    sick?  This case is not only about Jimmie's choice, as
    they want you to believe, it's actually primarily
    about the Defendants' choices.
         Let's go over what you are going to decide as it
    relates to that.  Before I do that, I need to remind
    you that the Defendants have actually admitted after
    denying for decades, for decades, certain things --
    they have come in here in this courtroom and admitted
    certain things.
         They have admitted that nicotine in cigarettes is
    addictive.  They have admitted after ten years -- ten
    years -- after decades of denial -- that smoking
    cigarettes causes laryngeal cancer, bladder cancer,
    lung cancer, including small-cell lung cancer, and
    COPD.  And you have as part of the exhibits back
    there, you have that stipulation, you have -- and let
    me deviate for a minute, you have reams of exhibits
    there.
         And I actually urge you to look at some of these.
    As difficult as it may be, I think it will be an
    eye-opener because you'll be able to spend some time
    rather than us having to do it to get this trial done. Finally they admit that cigarette smoke was a medical
    cause of Jimmie Willis' laryngeal cancer.  They have
    admitted that.
         Also remember in this type of case and in these
    cases as the Judge explained to you and as you have in
    your instructions that we have the burden of proof,
    but we have to do it by the greater weight of the
    evidence.  And if you remember, we talked about that
    in voir dire at length -- we talked about the tipping
    of the scales.  It doesn't require like this; it
    requires the greater weight of the evidence.
         It's not beyond a reasonable doubt, like you hear
    in criminal cases.  It's okay to have doubts, as long
    as it's a greater weight of the evidence.  With that
    all in mind, with these stipulations and that burden
    of proof, let's decide -- what time did I start?
         VIDEOGRAPHER:  9:10.
         MR. UITERWYK:  I got scared for a minute.
         And you'll see that happening because we've got a
    certain time limit, and I'm sure you're glad to hear
    that.  But for all of us -- but anyway, we have a
    certain time limit, and so we do have a certain time
    limit we need to get through some of these things, and
    so I may all of a sudden talk real fast, I'm not going
    to do that to you.
         Anyway, the first question on the verdict form --
    and I'm going to actually put the verdict form up here
    because it's somewhat difficult to see up there.  You
    all have the verdict form as part of your package of
    instructions and you will have it back there, one
    verdict form.  And this is the verdict form.  Can you
    all see this?  You can see it up there, too.  You can
    see it better up there.
         The first question is, was an addiction to
    cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of Jimmie
    Willis' laryngeal cancer?  That question is not about
    who caused it; that will come later.  That question is
    not about whose fault it is; that will come later.
    That question is about -- is not about whether
    Defendants' choices or decisions caused his laryngeal
    cancer; that will come later.
         The only question there, and I need you to look
    at it carefully, is was his addiction a legal cause of
    Jimmie P. Willis' laryngeal cancer, not the legal
    cause, a legal cause.  And so in order to do that you
    have to do two things.  Number 1, you have to
    determine whether he was addicted.
         On the issue of addiction, try to think of a
    single witness who testified in this courtroom who
    said he was not addicted; there wasn't one.  As a 10
    matter of fact, when we tried to ask their witness,
    Dr. Goodman, about addiction, he tried to skirt around
    that like a rabbit in a cornfield.
         MR. COFER:  Objection, Your Honor, improper
    argument and (inaudible) the Court's ruling.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  Ladies and gentlemen,
    this is argument, as you know.
         MR. UITERWYK:  Every witness who testified on the
    subject of addiction said there was no doubt that
    Jimmie Willis was addicted, heavily addicted.  You
    will remember Dr. Benowitz -- and that's probably
    what's the hardest thing about this case to do is to
    go back three weeks -- and I know some of y'all took
    great notes -- go back three weeks and try to remember
    what some of these witnesses said three weeks ago is
    quite a burden.
         We're going to try to help you with that a little
    bit.  Because you'll remember Dr. Benowitz, he was the
    world-renowned authority on addiction who came in here
    and testified about what addiction was, how Mr. Willis
    was addicted, what addiction caused, and we'll go over
    that in a minute.  He was a senior scientific editor
    of the 1988 Surgeon General report on addiction.  And
    we have Dr. Cummings who headed the largest in the
    country quit line.
         You will recall that Dr. Benowitz defined
    addiction, and he defined it as, loss of control of
    drug use.  Loss of control of drug use.  That is the
    definition of addiction.  He explained that what
    happens is, particularly with nicotine, is that it's
    not a psychological thing; it's actually a thing that
    has an effect on the physical part of your brain,
    that, in fact, is not a psychological, it affects the
    structures of the brain.
         I'm sure you all remember him talking about how
    the nicotine goes up and affects the nicotine
    receptors, which actually replaces acetylcholine, and
    I'm not going to get into detail, because I don't have
    the time to do that -- and it talks about how that
    changes the brain, and particularly if you remember he
    talked about when somebody started young in their
    adolescence, that they in particular not only had the
    changes in the brain but the changes were permanent.
         He then showed, and we have one board showing
    actually what happens when it goes in the lungs, how
    the cigarettes it rapidly -- Debbie?
         CLERK:  Yes, sir.
         MR. UITERWYK:  Thanks.  Thank you.
         How the manipulated cigarettes cause the
    nicotine -- because you inhale it deeper, the way they designed it, and because of the adjusting of the pH
    makes it go quicker to the brain and hits the
    receptors.  That's exactly what happens and that's
    exactly what happened to Mr. Willis.
         And then once it hits the receptors, you have
    these receptors firing off until a period of time, and
    then you start feeling withdrawals, and then you light
    up again because the receptors require it.  He told
    you how it releases dopamine and other hormones.
         And he also explained to you that once they get
    to be a regular smoker, once they have the nicotine
    kicking off the brain, that the smoker, the addicted
    smoker is no longer a total free choice; it's a
    diminished choice, driven by their addiction and their
    need for the nicotine hitting the receptors.
         Let's see what Dr. Benowitz said during his
    testimony.  What effect does the physical changes of
    the brain have on the loss of control?  The loss of
    control occurs because exposure to the drug has
    produced physical changes to the brain.
         What about the issue of choice as it relates to
    the definition of nicotine addiction or addiction?  Do
    people really have a free choice once they become
    addicted?  No.  Why?  They keep on smoking because
    they need to have nicotine to feel normal.  So that
    really drives their choice.
         "And in your opinion, does the addiction
    contribute substantially to driving and determining
    the choice?"
         "Yes."
         "So is it the addiction that is the substantial
    contributing reason that people continue to smoke?"
         The answer:  "Yes."
         "In your opinion, based on your research, what
    have you determined as to whether or not -- why
    smokers keep smoking, even though they know it's bad
    for them?"
         "Even though they know it's bad for them --
    because they are addicted to nicotine."
         "So in your opinion, does the body or brain
    become dependent on being stimulated by the nicotine?"
         "Yes."
         "And is that part of the addiction process?"
         "Yes."
         "In your opinion, is that one of the reasons that
    people quit and then start again?"
         "Yes."
         "Or relapse?"
         "Yes."
         And you will remember he showed Exhibit No. 2003, 11
    which is the demographics of smoking in the United
    States.  How 70 percent of smokers want to quit.
    They're not committing suicide when they relapse; they
    just don't have the free choice and the control
    anymore.  Each year 17 million try to quit, and how
    many succeed, 3 percent.  97 percent -- 97 percent
    basically relapse because of the addiction.
         Unfortunately Jimmie was one of them.  In fact,
    you will remember that he said that in the morning the
    first thing he did -- first thing he did was light a
    cigarette because of the addiction.  He smoked between
    one to three packs for 37 years, a pack and a half
    average.  He smoked -- got up in the middle of the
    night, his wife told you, former wife.  He smoked when
    he was sick and he talked about all the withdrawal
    symptoms when he tried to quit:  Anxiousness, the
    irritability, the loss of the concentration; typical
    signs for addiction.
         And let's look at the slide which displays the
    addiction power and depth, the power and depth --
    addictive power and depth -- and let's look where we
    put him, older start is down at the bottom, younger at
    start at the top.  Lighter smoker, heavier smoker,
    near the top.  Shorter duration, longer duration, at
    the top.  Longer the first cigarette, shorter the
    first cigarette, at the top.
         You know, the Defendants argued that since he
    quit once he had his larynx removed he wasn't
    addicted.  Of course it's possible to quit an
    addiction.  We're not going to be standing up here and
    telling you the person is addicted, that they can't
    quit, that they can't even try to quit and that they
    don't quit.  Some do, some can't.  Even heroin addicts
    can quit.  Does that mean they're not addicted?
         Secondly, even Dr. Goodman admitted that
    90 percent of his patients come in are still smoking.
    He admitted that almost all of his patients, if not
    all, who have had a laryngectomy have no withdrawals
    after they had their larynx amputated.
         We also heard from Dr. Cummings -- testify on the
    issue of addiction.  He said Jimmie Willis was heavily
    addicted and the evidence didn't stop there.  It
    didn't stop with Dr. Benowitz, didn't stop with Dr.
    Cummings.  It also went on to Dr. Civantos, who you
    remember is the ear nose and throat doctor from the
    University of Miami.  He said Jimmie was addicted, and
    also Jimmie -- his three treating doctors who have no
    dog in this hunt, paid employees of the VA
    administration, who said without exception that Jimmie
    Willis was addicted to cigarettes.      So now you are left with the second part of the
    question:  Was his addiction a legal cause?  And in
    order to do that we need to look at the definition of
    legal cause.  You have this definition, but I'm going
    to point out some things to you with regard to the
    definition of legal cause.  And these are important
    words to remember when you recall the testimony.
    Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal
    cause of loss, injury, medical conditions to Jimmie
    Willis, if -- and then it goes, or contributes
    substantially to producing.
         I don't know if you recall, there was tremendous
    amount of questions where the question was, did his
    smoking, did his addiction, contribute substantially
    to producing?  The reason those words were used is
    because that's the words that's required to get legal
    cause:  Contribute substantially to producing such
    loss.
         And then you need to read on with that
    instruction -- in order to be regarded as legal cause
    of loss, injury, medical condition or damage,
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not
    be the only cause.  Addiction to cigarettes containing
    may be a legal cause, even though it operates in
    combination with the act of another, some natural
    cause, or some other cause, if -- if the addiction to
    cigarettes containing nicotine contribute
    substantially to producing such loss.
         Note that it doesn't have to say it has to be the
    only cause -- only -- the magic words are contribute
    substantially to producing.  Let's look at the exact
    testimony from the witnesses on that exact question:
    Did his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
    contribute substantially to causing his laryngeal
    cancer?  Dr. Benowitz:
         "Do you have an opinion, Dr. Benowitz, within a
    reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether
    or not Mr. Willis' addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine contributed substantially to producing his
    laryngeal cancer."
         "Yes, I do."
         "What is that opinion?"
         "That it did."
         And here:  "Without his addiction to nicotine he
    would never have been smoking the way he smoked and
    would not have developed laryngeal cancer."
         We all know that the nicotine doesn't cause the
    cancer, that's not what caused the cancer.  The
    nicotine is what causes the addiction, the addiction
    is what causes the person to continue to smoke, and 12
    they designed it in such a way so that you do continue
    to smoke, they make it easy to inhale so you do
    continue to smoke, they make -- manipulate the level
    of the nicotine so you do continue to smoke, and then
    when you continue to smoke, it continues to bathe and
    bring the carcinogens into the system.
         That is why -- how you connect the addiction to
    the disease, and that is why these doctors are telling
    you that it's the addiction that, in fact, causes the
    disease because the addiction leads to smoking,
    smoking leads to disease.  And it is their product,
    that they made it exactly that way to happen, not to
    cause you diseases.  They didn't intentionally cause
    you disease.  I am not representing that here.  They
    did intentionally cause you to be addicted.
         Then, sure, "in your opinion, but-for his
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, would he
    have gotten laryngeal cancer?"
         "No."
         Then we go on to Dr. Civantos, let me cover some
    opinions, and I'm going to kind of go through this
    really quick.
         "Do you have an opinion within a reasonable
    degree of medical certainty as to whether Mr. Willis'
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
    contributed substantially to producing" -- the exact
    words that we're looking for.
         "I believe it did."
         "But-for his addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine, would he have gotten laryngeal cancer, in
    your opinion?"
         "I don't believe he would have gotten a total
    laryngectomy, I believe it's extremely unlikely he
    would have gotten laryngeal cancer if he hadn't been
    addicted to laryngeal cancer -- if he hadn't been
    addicted to cigarettes."
         Now, let's look at who the Defendants presented
    on this subject, as to whether the addiction to
    cigarettes contributed substantially to causing
    laryngeal cancer.  Doctor Goodman, did he answer that
    question?  No.  Dr. Stonesifer?  No.  Dr. Rosenbach?
    No.  Dr. Epstein?  No.  Anyone else?  No.
         What they will argue is that had he quit earlier
    he wouldn't have gotten laryngeal cancer.  Now, this
    is a trick, and don't be swayed by this trick.  It's
    possible to quit an addiction, we don't deny that.
    Like I said, all heroin addicts, just because they
    quit, doesn't mean they're addicted.
         But on this question -- on this question -- the
    first question of class membership, there's nothing -- there's nothing in that question about quitting; it's
    whether his addiction was a legal cause which led.
    The issue comes in later on the verdict form when you
    allocate fault as to what his choice played a part in
    it.  It doesn't come into play here; it's not part of
    the first question.
         It's undisputed that stopping is possible.  We
    know that.  It's true with all addicts.  The roles,
    however, of choice and addiction are not an either/or
    proposition; they both play a role.  Jimmie's role
    will be allocated in question number 4 where we
    allocate the fault.  The Defendants' role we allocate
    in number 4 where you allocate fault.
         They raise it here incorrectly in this particular
    question, the issue of choice.  The reason they do
    that, because they know they don't have any defense to
    addiction.  They have no witnesses to addiction, they
    have no witnesses on addiction and causation.
         One of the documents that they were forced to
    disclose and you will have back there will explain why
    they're doing that, why they're raising this issue of
    choice on the question of causation.  It's Exhibit
    No. 2184, and that document, in fact, says, we can't
    defend continued smoking as free choice if the person
    was addicted.  That explains to you why they're
    raising the issue of free choice, but they don't --
    and why they don't touch the issue of addiction --
    because they can't defend these cases, continue
    smoking as free choice, if the person was addicted.
         It is undisputed evidence that he was addicted
    from six different doctors:  Dr. Civantos, Benowitz,
    Cummings and the three treating doctors -- undisputed
    from two doctors who addressed the issue of causation,
    and contributed substantially to causing, that it was
    -- in fact produced his laryngeal cancer.
         They didn't ask one witness that question.  He
    continued to smoke their cigarettes because of his
    addiction, which caused his laryngeal cancer.  The
    substantial reason he continued was because of the
    addiction.
         So once the Judge told you -- once you first find
    him a member of that class, once you find him as a
    member of that class and that he was addicted, his
    addiction to cigarettes contributed substantially to
    producing his laryngeal cancer, you then go -- the
    findings come into play and those findings then are
    binding you on.  They're part of the case.
         And it may be difficult for you all to accept
    that, but as you remember during voir dire, we went
    over that quit a bit, about your willingness to accept 13
    it, if he's found to be a member of the class.  Keep
    in mind that that jury heard thousands and thousands
    of testimony -- hours of testimony -- and saw
    thousands of documents.  And it actually saved you all
    a lot of time.  Could you imagine being here for a
    year like they were here?  I notice I didn't get a
    disagreement on that one.
         They actually saved you a lot of time so you
    didn't have to go through those thousands of pages of
    testimony -- hours of testimony and thousands of
    pages.  You will have these findings with you in the
    jury room.  I'm going to summarize them briefly
    because I got 25 minutes -- I'm okay.  Those findings.
         Number 1, the last finding was that they failed
    to use -- exercised reasonable care, which basically
    means they were negligent.  That's actually the
    Defendant, that's -- the definition of negligence.  So
    RJR was negligent and PM were negligent.  RJR and
    Philip Morris -- and this is a finding that the jury
    made, cigarettes were defective and unreasonably
    dangerous.
         Now, these findings don't come into play unless
    he's a class member.  That we need to be clear on.
    But once you find him a class member -- were defective
    and unreasonably dangerous, and fraudulent practice --
    RJR and Philip Morris concealed and conspired with
    others in business to hide the harmful health effects,
    addictive properties or both.  And then part of the
    findings:  Cigarettes are addictive, cigarettes cause
    laryngeal cancer, bladder cancer, lung cancer, and
    COPD.
         Now, where do we go from here?  We could go to
    question 2, but I'm going to skip for a moment
    question 2 and question 3 of the verdict form.
    Question 2 has to do -- whether cigarettes cause
    diseases -- it doesn't mean we're not coming back to
    it, I can assure you, we're coming back to them -- and
    question 3 has to do with how the conspiracy, whether
    or not it caused Mr. Willis' diseases and injuries and
    so forth.  That's whether their concealment caused it.
         I'll come back to those, but I think from a flow
    point of view that you need to look at actually the
    fourth question, which is the allocation of fault.
    And here is what you do is you actually define the
    percentage of fault attributable to each party as
    being the cause of his injuries.  How much was
    Reynolds, how much was Philip Morris, and how much was
    the Plaintiff's?
         And you'll note that he says right here, in
    determining the total amount of damage, do not make any deduction -- reduction because of the fault of the
    Plaintiff.  The Court, in entering judgment, will do
    that later on.
         Now, in this question you will determine how much
    of what the Defendants did played a part in causing
    Jimmie Willis' diseases.  In that regard, the
    Defendants chose to have a strategy that had three
    goals.  They became a success with this strategy, and
    unfortunately at the expense of millions of Americans.
         They made it as easy as possible to start by
    telling everybody no proven health risk, smooth,
    satisfying, cool, sophisticated with athletes and
    stars.  Made it as hard as possible to stop, look for
    greater addictive effects, enhance deep inhalability
    -- we talked about, control the nicotine levels.
         Those are decision and choices they made to
    accomplish this strategy.  And then they make it as
    easy as possible to start again by saying, anyone can
    quit anytime.  Feed denial, provide a psychological
    crutch, which you will hear.  Make wishy-washy,
    watered down and weigh way off any harm that may be
    caused by the product.  Eliminate the clear and
    present danger, which we will talk about a little bit
    longer, and appeal -- by doing that, appeal to the
    addicted smoker's rationalization and denial, which
    we'll talk about.
         How did they implement that strategy?  And we
    will look at four different factors in doing this.
    They physically manipulated, they marketed to youth in
    advertising, and they did mental manipulation.  And
    then we will look at the choice they made with regard
    to what evidence that they presented on those issues.
         The physical manipulation -- and I'm going to
    put -- do we have the physical manipulation board
    here?  Well, we have it on the screen, and the reason
    I want the board is we're going to go back and forth
    here a minute.  You'll remember Dr. Henningfield, the
    first witness to testify in this case.
         Dr. Henningfield was the Ph.D. from the Johns
    Hopkins Medical School who worked for the National
    Drug Institute, who worked with the FDA -- and worked
    with the FDA on the number of factors -- who has
    actually written three books on the subject of
    tobacco, addiction, and cigarette design.  And you
    will remember that he was the one who interviewed by
    Dan Rather, looked a lot different than he did on the
    stand.  He was also the one who dissected the
    cigarette and showed us in a video how the smoke is
    inhaled and goes up to the lungs to the brain.
         Now, what he did -- dissected the cigarettes and 14
    explained to you at the same time how they added
    chemical compounds to tobacco to allow the easier
    inhalation and altered the natural tobacco.  And at
    the same time how they controlled the nicotine level
    to keep it above the addiction threshold.  And you
    remember he talked about -- and the documents show
    that they actually knew what the addiction threshold
    was, and you will have those documents back there.
    Exhibit 1920 is one of them that we'll talk about in a
    little bit.
         And what did he say regarding the physical
    manipulation?  I'm not going to show you everything he
    said because we spent some time.  And there was an
    answer there, cigarettes are among the most addictive
    delivery systems in the world and the risk of
    progressing from any use to -- from what?
         "The risk of progressing from initial use to
    addiction is higher than we see for any other
    addictive drug."
         "Including cocaine and heroin?"
         "Including cocaine."
         Next, Exhibit -- and then he explained about a
    drug delivery device, and he told you how it was, in
    fact, designed to be a drug delivery device.  And this
    is actually from their own document, a tobacco
    product, and this is their own researcher who's saying
    this, and their secret document that didn't get
    disclosed until the 1990s.
         The tobacco product is in essence a vehicle for
    delivery of nicotine designed -- designed to deliver
    the nicotine in generally acceptable and attractive
    form.  Our industry is based upon design, manufacture,
    et cetera.  And then I asked Dr. Henningfield on that,
    and he explained to you how the Defendants in this
    case designed the cigarettes to deliver the nicotine
    at the optimal level to cause and sustain addiction.
    Let's see how he answered that.
         "What is your opinion as to whether or not the
    cigarette company have historically controlled the
    level of nicotine to make sure it's delivered at the
    optimum level to sustain addiction and cause it?"
         "They have for well over a half a century."
         Unfortunately that half a century includes
    Jimmie's life.  He dissected the cigarettes and he
    explained how the Defendants for decades manipulated
    the compounds and added flavoring to make it easier to
    inhale.  And he explained -- "what effect the allowing
    of easier inhalation by adding chemicals -- does that
    have on the effect of nicotine and the ultimate
    addiction?"      "It makes it easier to get the drug, easier to
    get high doses of the drug, and easier to get the drug
    deep into the lung where the most explosive kick or
    impact would occur."
         And then Exhibit 3291, their own document, this
    is where they talk about -- and I'm just going to --
    because of time, I'm going to summarize what this
    said, but you will have Exhibit 3291.  I urge you to
    look at 3291.  I urge you to look at 1920.  I urge you
    to look at 3065.  And I may give you some more
    numbers.  I urge you to look at all of them.
         But particular, this document talks about how
    they designed the cigarette to actually give a
    freebase effect, and you remember him talking about
    the manipulation of the pH.  So, in fact, it becomes
    freebasing.  Freebasing like what?  The same way
    freebasing cocaine -- gets the high quicker, gets the
    addiction quicker; it gives a kick.
         They knew it, they studied it, and there's
    indication they did it.  Now, they didn't stop there.
    They then add flavoring compounds for taste,
    smoothness, bronchial dilations to overcome the
    aversion.  An example, menthol.  And if you look at
    that exhibit that we just talked about, 3291, you will
    see they actually talked about Kool cigarettes, which
    is the cigarette that Mr. Willis smoked for most of
    his life from the early '60s to the mid 1980s.
         They did it so they could overcome any harshness,
    so they could bring it deeper into the lungs.  They
    also -- and this is -- I don't know if you remember
    this from Dr. Henningfield -- they controlled the size
    of the smoke particles, and they did that to make sure
    that it would be absorbed by the lung easier, meaning
    the nicotine.
         I think you remember Dr. Henningfield saying --
    how do you compare a cigarette of early 20th century
    from the cigarette in the mid 20th century, I believe
    he said it's like a kite to a rocket ship.  They
    highly engineered, highly designed the cigarette to do
    what they wanted to do.  I think Dr. Henningfield said
    it best, and let me let you look at this quote.
         "The way I have described it with friends and
    relatives and others is, I live in two different
    worlds.  In one world I've worked with pharmaceutical
    companies, that in this area -- I'm not saying that
    everything they do is great, but in this area, they're
    doing everything possible to make it less addictive,
    safer, and the tobacco companies are working them out
    to make them more addictive."
         They called no one, no one to explain why they 15
    manipulated their product, why they made it easier to
    inhale, why they adjusted the level of pH, why they
    adjusted the level of nicotine.  They didn't need to
    make their cigarettes easier to inhale.  As a matter
    of fact, like that, they could make it less easier to
    inhale today.  Have they done it on any of their major
    brands?  No.
         They didn't have to manipulate the level of
    nicotine to keep it at a perfect level, optimal level
    to sustain addiction.  They have the ability and have
    had the ability since the 1920s to remove all nicotine
    from their cigarettes.  Should they remove it all?
    No, but reduce it below the level to sustain
    addiction, keep it above that -- instead of what they
    do, keeping it above it.
         And why do they do this?  Because as Dr. Dunn
    said in his speech, 3605, which is another exhibit
    that I ask you to look at carefully, particularly
    pages 4 and 5 -- without nicotine, the argument goes,
    there would be no smoking.  No one has ever become a
    cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without
    nicotine.  Why did they do it?  They don't want to
    lose money.  They knew that by doing that it may be
    better for their customers and may be better for the
    Americans, but it couldn't put that cash in their bank
    account.
         And then in Exhibit 1920 -- this is the RJR
    document, and I kind of shortened parts because of
    time.  They said, we are a specialized, highly
    ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical
    industry.  This is their statement, not mine.  This is
    their document, not mine.  I urge you to look at this
    entire document; it's enlightening.  The cigarettes
    are designed to deliver nicotine in a generally -- an
    acceptable and attractive form.  And then he goes, if
    we remove nicotine from our products, then we shall
    eventually liquidate our business.
         Greed, that's what this is all about, greed.
    Unfortunately, they put -- Judge, we're not at an hour
    yet, I got ten more minutes.
         THE COURT:  Yeah, we'll do a little bit more.
         MR. UITERWYK:  They have always put profit above
    the health of their customers and the Americans.  The
    worst part about it, they chose to do so intentionally
    and for exactly the purpose that they accomplished.
    The engineering and manipulation was done
    intentionally; that's what caused Jimmie Willis to get
    addicted.  And which undermines his motivation and
    determined his free choice, causing him to relapse.
         But-for his addiction, he would not have continued smoking.  But-for his addiction, he would
    not have gotten sick.  The choice was theirs when they
    designed the cigarette that way.  Jimmie's choice was
    diminished by their choices and their decisions.
         But then that wasn't enough for their greed, for
    their profits.  That wasn't enough for the
    manipulation of the product and the highly engineering
    nicotine delivery device, that wasn't enough.  So what
    they did then, let's get the kids in.  Let's bring the
    kids in.  Let's get them when they're young, and what
    they did, they marketed to youth.  They designed their
    ads to market to youth.
         And you know what they called them?  They called
    them replacement smokers.  Do you know why they were
    replacing smokers?  The ones they were killing, the
    ones that were dying from their product.  The ones
    they did that to in the '40s and the '50s are the ones
    like Jimmie who are sick and dying today.  The ones
    who they appeal today -- the 440,000 deaths we have
    per year are actually the kids that they appealed to
    during that time frame, that they recruited in those
    years passed.
         They know not only how to market -- I mean not
    only how to manipulate the cigarette, they knew
    exactly how to market to the kids in the '40s, '50s,
    and '60s.  Unfortunately as I explained to you, the
    earlier they do that to somebody, the more addicted
    they become.  The earlier they do that to somebody,
    the more heavily they're addicted.  They knew this.
    The earlier they do that to somebody, the more they
    relapse.  The earlier they do that to somebody, the
    more likely they're getting a smoking-related disease.
         As Teague from RJR said -- and because of time
    I'm going to actually -- and this is another document
    I ask you to look at, this is a Document 1040, and
    it's an important document because what it shows you,
    this is -- here, what qualities and image the new
    brand aimed at the youth market should have.
         First of all, moderate level of nicotine
    delivered at pH -- see the right pH, the right level
    they got in there, to ensure slow absorption.  Bland,
    soft, moist mouth feel, with minimal irritancy.
    Highly -- very lightly mentholated, some visible
    novelty in the product, cool, sexy, neat.
         In the direction of greater manipulation,
    convenience for the beginning smoker.  They knew
    exactly what they were doing.  And then they talk
    about the product image and how they should do the --
    designing the ads to make it adventurous, different,
    adult, those kinds of things.  They knew exactly what 16
    they were doing.  And, you know what -- this document,
    the next one is going to be taking a little longer,
    and it's Document 4051, Exhibit 4051, and this was the
    1967 FTC report about advertising.
         And I'm going to take a few minutes to see --
    here's what the government said about their
    advertising that they were doing in the '50s and --
    '40s and '50s that they were doing to kids and they
    were doing to the American public.  They conclude, now
    due in part to the cumulative effect of cigarette
    advertising over the years, advertising that shows
    cigarette smoking to be enjoyable, pleasurable
    activity and ignores the suffering -- they not only
    ignored it, they kept it away from everybody --
    ignores the suffering and early death that it causes,
    many youngsters consider smoking to be an acceptable
    and socially desirable activity.  They tend to view
    cigarette smoking as a visible mark of maturity, a
    passport to adulthood.
         You member what Jimmie said why he started, I
    wanted to look big.  Exactly what they're concluding
    in here.  And then let's look about what they say
    about the -- about the advertising, and this is
    cigarette advertising, and this is where they say,
    well, our advertising -- he couldn't name a specific
    ad -- our advertising, we don't know that it reached
    Mr. Willis.
         Let's see what the FCC concluded.  "Cigarette
    advertising reaches virtually all Americans who can
    either read or understand the spoken word.  Cigarettes
    are advertised on both network and spot television, on
    radio and magazines and newspapers."
         You know, it's hard for us to imagine this
    because we don't see it.  We haven't been there.  We
    can't feel that, we don't relate to it, most of us
    don't.  Some of us unfortunately at my age.
         And many types of point of sale, advertising
    aids, we still have that, they haven't gotten rid of
    that point of sale at the 7-Eleven.  "So pervasive is
    cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible
    for Americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette
    advertising."
         As Dr. Cummings explained, as he said -- he said,
    we've been talking about -- some time about the
    marketing, the wallpapering effect of this
    advertising, the marketing the culture that it
    created; it was a culture, it was wallpapering, it was
    everywhere.  And he said -- we've shown and discussed
    to the jury about advertising.
         "Do you have an opinion as to whether Jimmie was exposed and affected by that advertising?"
         "He was exposed and he was affected."
         Do you remember:  Number 1 brand everybody
    smoked, Luckys, Camel, number 1, Pall Mall, number 1,
    Kools, number 1 menthol, and then Marlboro number 1.
         He obviously was affected by the advertising.
    The Defendants knew it.  They knew their advertising
    worked, and they knew -- and it worked unfortunately
    on Jimmie.  He told you about the ads that he saw.
    Did they put on a single witness, one company
    employee, one expert to explain or justify their
    marketing?  To explain their marketing to kids who --
    they made the product easier to inhale and get people
    addicted like Jimmie Willis.
         The thing I would like to (inaudible) what Dr.
    Cummings said -- anyone to mention or apologize for
    marketing to youth, getting them addicted without
    telling them what their product would do to them.
    Once they got the youth of our country hooked on the
    nicotine in their cigarettes, they enticed them with
    their ads and continue to do so.
         And you have a book of those ads back there, look
    at them.  We only showed you a few, but when you look
    at them, you'll see the themes are so obvious who
    they're directed to.
         And they continued -- after doing it, they
    continued the manipulation, they continued to refine
    their engineering, as you saw on the exhibits about --
    from RJR.  Remember, we are talking about the
    percentage of fault of the Defendants in discussing
    this.
         Now, we talked about their physical manipulation,
    we talked about how that affected Jimmie and caused
    him to become addicted and cause his diseases.  We
    have now talked about marketing and advertising.
         Now, let's go into the conspiracy and coverup and
    talk about that for a moment.  Coverup not only of the
    harm that it caused you but of the addictiveness of
    their product and how that affected Jimmie.
         Your Honor, it may be a good segue to stop.
         THE COURT:  In one minute it will be one hour, so
    that probably is a good time to break.
         Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to take our
    morning break at this time.  Even though you've heard
    all the testimony and evidence, even though we're in
    the closing argument portion of the stage of trial, I
    urge you to, again, not talk about the case amongst
    yourselves.  You'll have plenty of opportunity to do
    that when you begin your deliberations.  And continue
    to resist the temptation to form a definitive or fixed 17
    opinion about the case.  You've heard the instructions
    on the law, you've heard the evidence, but you haven't
    heard the closing arguments.
         We'll be back in 15 minutes, so that makes it
    about 10:25.  Enjoy your morning break.  We'll see you
    in about 15.
         (Jury out at 10:09 a.m.)
         THE COURT:  All right.  We'll be in recess.
         (A recess was taken from 10:10 a.m. to 10:26
    a.m., after which the following proceedings were had:)
         THE COURT:  Frank, you can bring the jurors in.
         (Jury in at 10:26 a.m.)
         THE COURT:  All right.  Mr. Uiterwyk, you may
    proceed.
         MR. UITERWYK:  May it please the Court.
         Before the break, we had talked about physical
    manipulation.  We had talked about the marketing to
    youth.  What we're going to be talking about now is
    what has been referred to as a conspiracy and coverup,
    not only of the harmful effects of their products, but
    also the addictive qualities and nature of their
    products and what they did to them as well.
         Remember, this is a time we're talking about in
    the '50s and '60s of so forth.  We didn't have
    Internet, we didn't have cable TV, we had three TV
    stations, this is the time when we didn't have
    investigative reporting, things didn't come out,
    people weren't exposed to what they are exposed to
    today with Internet, cable TV and investigative
    reports and TV shows and so forth.
         It was also a time that we trusted the
    corporations, that they were telling us the truth,
    they were disclosing to us what was going on.  Now,
    remember also on this issue of conspiracy and coverup,
    you've already gotten -- if you've gotten to this
    point, you have gotten past the findings.  The
    findings were already there, that they committed a
    conspiracy that they did cover up, that they committed
    a fraud.
         Now, but this issue is not only important as it
    relates to comparative fault, but it's also related to
    other issues as well that we're going to be talking
    about.
         You remember this all started when the rat
    studies came out, painting the back of the rats with
    the cancer, and that was when they had the meeting at
    the Plaza Hotel.
         Now, they had a choice at that time.  They could
    have chosen at that time to come clean and tell the
    Americans what they knew themselves, and they could have -- they had a choice to say, you know what, we
    know this as well.
         They had a choice to tell them what they were
    doing to their cigarettes to make them addictive.
    They had a choice to tell them that their cigarettes
    were addictive.  They had a choice to tell them about
    what harms they knew about their products themselves.
         But instead of telling everybody, instead of
    embracing it, instead of telling them that as a result
    of their design and manipulation that cigarettes were
    addictive and because of the addiction that they'll
    probably smoke for a long period of time in
    significant quantities that could harm and kill you --
    instead, they made another choice that had devastating
    consequences on millions of people.  They chose to
    cover up and lie.
         And as you have seen from Dr. Cummings, they went
    on a media blitz, and they went on a campaign like
    this country has never seen since then.  It's hard to
    relate about this coverup and what they did to their
    cigarettes because we all know now, decades later, as
    a result of what was disclosed in the '90s what they
    did, so it's hard for us to think about how do we put
    that in our mind.
         Let's assume that society -- what would society
    do today if someone was manufacturing a high-energy
    drink and they marketed it as high-energy drink to our
    kids in a package that was cool, sophisticated, adult,
    grown up.  And what society didn't know is that this
    energy drink had a drug in it that the manufacturers
    manipulated to cause and sustain addiction.  And they
    had the right amount of the drug in there so it would
    be optimum level to sustain addiction.
         What society didn't know either is that this
    drink also had carcinogens in them that cause cancer.
    The company knew it, both about the addictiveness and
    the carcinogens, but they hid it.  Then when there was
    some publicity about it, this high-energy drink, the
    manufacturer came out, just like the heads of the
    tobacco companies, and made public announcements:
    Don't worry, there's nothing wrong with our product.
    It is not hazardous.  And if we find anything -- and
    these are quotes from them -- if we find anything,
    we'll remove it or go out of business.
         But at the same time, they know otherwise based
    on their internal documents.  These are the same
    identical statements that the cigarette companies
    made.  If society found out today about that drink and
    what they did to that high-energy drink, how they
    marketed it to the kids and how the harm that it would 18
    cause, and the manufacturer of that drink didn't do
    anything about it, didn't disclose it, didn't come out
    on it, the Americans would be outraged.
         The American public does not like to be fooled or
    lied to, and they didn't like to be fooled and lied to
    in the '50s and '60s and '70s, and thereafter.  The
    reason I use that example because of the passage is
    time is difficult to grasp what the cigarette
    companies did during that time frame.
         It's not well known when Jimmie started smoking
    and became addicted.  It was not well known.  Now,
    they're going to -- there is a thing here.  You'll see
    that they'll bring out some articles from the Readers
    Digest from 1926 or they'll talk about some Florida
    notes, or they'll talk about these things in this
    paper or that paper about cigarettes and the harm or
    addictiveness and so forth.
         They never put that together, though.  They
    always talk about that separately from when they talk
    about:  Well, we really didn't know what the
    definition of addiction was yet.  We denied addiction
    because it really wasn't a formal definition of
    addiction.
         You know, they don't put it also with their
    quotes from their interviews that:  Oh, we don't know
    if our product is harmful.  We're looking into it.
    They don't ever put those two together and keep them
    apart separately.
         When the Defendants chose to cover up, they knew
    and they chose to do what they did.  The campaign that
    they went on lasted for half a century.  Not only --
    so they manipulated their product, they manipulated
    their advertising, and then they hid from the American
    public about the addictiveness of the product.
         They knew if they would deny it -- they knew if
    they would deny it, they would create a psychological
    crutch for their addictive customers, who would say:
    Oh, I don't have to quit now.  They tell me they're
    going to take it out if it's bad for me.  It's not bad
    for me.  They don't know yet.
         So they were creating this campaign on purpose to
    create the doubt and rationalization for their
    customers.  All this came out in the 1950s when Jimmie
    Willis was becoming a regular smoker.
         They had a choice and a decision at that time to
    put a warning label on their cigarettes, or to advise
    the American public.  They could have put a warning
    label like this in the 1950s:  Warning:  These
    cigarettes are addictive.  They can and do kill our
    customers.      Did they choose to put any warning label like
    that in the '50s?  Did they choose to do anything like
    that to inform the customers or the youth of this
    country?
         You also saw at the same time many examples of
    the interviews that they were coming out at that time,
    contrary to what this warning label is saying.
         Let's look at a composite of these videos of
    these Defendants.  These are interviews that occurred
    in the '50s and thereafter.  These are interviews
    during the time they know their product is addictive,
    they know their product contained carcinogens, they
    know their product causes cancer.
         And these are things that they're saying to the
    American public on national TV shows for decades.
    This is why the Engle jury -- these are examples of
    what was seen and what you have seen in this
    particular trial as to how this campaign really
    worked.  Go ahead.
         (At this time, a video was played in open court
    and taken down to the best of the court reporter's
    ability.)
         SPEAKER:  Well, if it was found by somebody
    looking under the Tobacco Industry Research Grant, it
    would be made public immediately.
         SPEAKER:  I don't think the industry admits there
    are any bad elements.  If there are bad elements
    through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General,
    through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope
    that we may find them.  And if they are found, they
    will be removed.  But at this point, we do not know.
         SPEAKER:  We do talk to the person of whether or
    not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not believe that
    cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't accept that.
         SPEAKER:  Okay, the jury has not come in.
         SPEAKER:  It may not be harmful?  You are not
    convinced?
         SPEAKER:  It may be or it may not be.  We don't
    know.
         SPEAKER:  We don't know what causes cancer in
    general right now, so I think that we may find out
    what causes cancer and we may find out some
    relationship which has yet to be proven.
         (End of video.)
         MR. UITERWYK:  In the meantime, they had
    documents which you'll see.  One of them is Exhibit
    No. 1817, which is a document that they, from their
    own internal records, from Philip Morris' records
    talking about the Surgeon General report, and this is
    written right after the Surgeon General report in 19
    Exhibit 1817:  The restraint and unity of the industry
    has been very effective.  The opponents have had their
    inning.  However, at some point, reflecting the same
    seriousness with which we met the report, we must in
    the near future provide some answers which will give
    smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to
    continue to smoke.
         Here they are saying:  We need to come up with
    more psychological crutches to continue to smoke,
    knowing that it's going to kill them.
         And then in Exhibit No. 2050, they talk about
    this whole campaign and look back at it for the last
    20 years.  Exhibit No. 2050, another document I urge
    you to look at when you go back.
         Here.  For nearly 20 years -- sorry, for nearly
    20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy
    to defend itself on three major fronts:  Litigation,
    politics and public opinion.  It has been, in fact, a
    holding strategy, creating doubt about the health
    charge without actually denying it.  And that's what
    they have been doing.  They have been creating doubt
    since the '50s when it started all happening.
         It gave people like Jimmie the psychological
    crutch to -- you know, to quit, psychological crutch
    not to quit, to continue to smoke.  You know, they
    talked about, and they will talk about, the issue of
    risk reduction.  Had he quit earlier, maybe he
    wouldn't have gotten the diseases.  You have heard
    testimony about this, you'll hear argument about it.
         The problem with that is, the strategy of that
    all is, is that they've only been saying that in
    recent litigation.  Unfortunately it wasn't until
    1985 -- 1985, after Jimmie Willis had been smoking for
    almost 30 years that they came out with their warning
    that -- to their customers that quitting now greatly
    reducing the serious risk to your health.
         They never told the public, never said anything
    to the public on any of their cigarettes when it
    really mattered in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s
    and the early '80s.  Time really did matter.
         Unfortunately, the decision to wait until it was
    too late is what really mattered.  Each of the
    episodes when somebody talked about cancer, when the
    Surgeon General report came out, when the rat painting
    came out, when the warning labels came out, was an
    opportunity.
         It was the best opportunity for them to tell
    their customers:  We need -- you need to get rid of
    it, you need to quit, you need to stop.  The best hope
    for most people who were addicted to have the maximum motivation created by that clear and present danger.
    But even then, people would relapse because of their
    addiction to the product.
         It's crystal clear that life and death events
    will motivate -- create the best circumstances to have
    the best chance.  But nobody knew that better than the
    cigarette companies.  That's the criminal part of it.
    That's the tragedy of it all.  They considered every
    one of these opportunities, where they talked about
    the health effects to be actually an enemy of their
    business, one that may interfere in the flow of cash
    to their bank vaults.
         Like Hill & Knowlton memo said, you know, if they
    just smoked one less cigarette a day, it would cost
    them billions.  So what they did was, they
    intentionally watered down the message, made it
    wishy-washy, made it far off on purpose.
         They knew by doing that -- unfortunately, by
    doing it, by delaying, by not admitting what the
    problems were, they were dooming oil customers and
    millions were crossing the line between the normal
    life and a life with an altering disease --
    life-altering disease.
         What a difference it would have made had they
    owned up instead of covered up, had they at least
    hushed up and let the health authorities and the
    health threat take its natural course.
         So going back to the verdict form, which we have
    up there, we've talked about their -- what they did,
    the decision and choices they made, and you will also
    have an opportunity to assign percentage of fault to
    Mr. Willis.
         They want you to accept that they don't have any
    responsibility for what happened to Jimmie, that he
    bears all that responsibility.  They want you to
    ignore the fact that they designed and manipulated
    their cigarettes and made sure Jimmie Willis could
    easily inhale them at the optimum level of nicotine.
         They want you to ignore the fact that they
    marketed them to kids.  They want you to ignore the
    fact that they knew how addictive their product was,
    but they didn't warn about it, or even disclose it,
    until years ago, and even lied to Congress about it.
    They even lied to Congress about it.
         They want to ignore the fact -- let's go to the
    mental manipulation -- with their mental -- we talked
    about physical -- they also did a mental manipulation,
    made smoking appear cool, healthy, fun and sexy.
    Denied any suggestion of health risk, called for more
    research. 20
         Claimed that if research revealed a risky
    substance in their smoke, they would remove it or go
    out of business.  Well, they sure as heck ain't out of
    business.
         Claimed cigarettes were not addictive.  And
    created a controversy, you remember we talked about
    and I showed you a number of documents of how they
    created a controversy, intentionally, to do it, to
    provide a psychological crutch through their
    conspiracy.
         What evidence did they bring to explain their
    actions of the coverup and the mental manipulation and
    the conspiracy, the damage they did?  Not a person,
    not a witness, not a thing.
         Jimmie Willis relapsed.  He bears partial fault
    because they didn't try harder, but they bear the
    biggest brunt of that fault because of the parts that
    they played in this strategy and what happened to
    Jimmie, because of what they did to their product,
    what they did to their unreasonably defective,
    dangerous products.
         We talked at length about laryngeal cancer and
    how addiction was the legal cause.  Now, they will
    probably say in closing:  Had he gone to the doctor
    earlier, had he gone to the doctor earlier, that maybe
    it would not have been as bad or he wouldn't have
    gotten cancer, other than -- and they're relying on a
    single note from the discharge note, the four years of
    hoarseness note.
         Jimmie emphatically denies it.  The doctors tell
    you there's no way he had cancer four years before,
    even three years before.  Cotton Smith, you remember
    we read his deposition?  The guy who Jimmie was help
    remodeling his house.  He said he doesn't remember him
    having any problems up and through '92 and '93.
         Paul, his own nephew, said the hoarseness didn't
    start until the spring of '93 and testified to that.
    And they are trying to use the fine art of hindsight
    and speculation in order to avoid responsibility for
    what they intentionally did to their product, making
    it addictive -- and their unreasonably dangerous
    product.
         You can't decide this case on speculation.  You
    can't decide it on speculation.  Even Dr. Goodman, who
    met with the lawyers for 24 hours in meetings, with
    regard to this matter, said the minute it gets less
    than a year, I can't tell you if earlier treatment
    would have made a difference.  He's the one who
    testified to that.
         As Dr. Civantos said, when asked if it was a year between Dr. Ellis and Dr. Howell, whether earlier
    treatment would have made a difference, he said it
    would be speculating.  We don't have enough
    information.  And they don't.  We don't.
         We don't know the stage, we don't know when it
    was, we don't know what Jimmie was told.  We do not
    even know if it would have made a difference.  So that
    brings us to the second question.
         Your Honor -- what time did we start, Debbie?
         CLERK:  10:30.
         MR. UITERWYK:  The second question is:  Was
    smoking cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause
    of Jimmie Willis's lung cancer, bladder cancer, COPD.
         Now, remember you've already got the findings at
    this point.  The findings say that cigarette smoking
    does cause these things.  Smoking causes laryngeal
    cancer, et cetera.  Cigarettes that contain nicotine
    are addictive.  And so then we go to the question
    about -- the second question, if we could, please,
    again, Jeff.
         But let's look at the evidence on causation of
    those diseases.  There's no dispute that 60 percent of
    bladder cancers are caused by smoking.  You know what?
    He did not have small cell bladder cancer.  He had
    mixed cell bladder cancer, which was predominantly
    transitional, with some glandular or adenocarcinoma
    and some small cell component.
         Since the time of the initial occurrence in
    February of '04, some of the recurrences were
    transitional, some were small cell, which indicates
    clearly that he had a mixed cell.
         Again, let's look at what the doctors say who
    have no dog in this hunt.  And you know, I apologize
    by having to show you by video -- we had no choice.
    These are employees of the VA, and we had to take
    their depositions at the VA.
         Dr. Mowlazadeh.  Doctor:  Based on your
    experience, review of Mr. Willis' records and your
    care and treatment, do you have an opinion as to
    whether his bladder cancers were caused by his smoking
    cigarettes, more likely than not?
         Yes.
         And what is that opinion?
         I think it is -- it's more likely than not
    related to smoking.
         He goes on.  Doctor, let me ask you this way:
    Did his addiction to cigarettes and smoking contribute
    substantially to producing -- and you remember the
    "substantially producing" -- contributes substantially
    to producing, as we have in that definition, to 21
    producing his bladder cancer more likely than not?
         Yes.
         Doctor, did -- more likely than not, did his
    addiction to cigarettes and his smoking, in your
    opinion, contribute substantially to each of his
    recurrences of his bladder cancers in 2007, 2008, '9
    and 10, more likely than not?
         Yes.
         Now, we go on to Dr. Weinstein.
         Now, in your opinion, Doctor, more likely than
    not, did his addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine and his smoking contribute substantially to
    producing the bladder cancer that was found in
    February of 2004?
         It would be my opinion, yes.  Doctor, based on
    your experience, your care and treatment as to whether
    his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine -- do
    you have an opinion containing nicotine and smoking
    contributed substantially to producing all the
    reoccurrences of the bladder cancer since 2003 up to
    the tumors that were removed last week, more likely
    than not?
         It would have -- I would have to say more likely.
         Than not?
         Answer:  Than not.
         Did they contribute substantially to producing
    those cancers?  Correct?
         Yes.  I agree.  Yes.
         All right.  Doctor, I want you to assume further
    that he stopped smoking in -- this is an important
    answer he gives here -- I want you to assume further
    that he stopped smoking in 1993 -- they're all
    actually important -- after he had been smoking for
    approximately 37 years.  Can you explain to the jury
    how there can be a five-centimeter tumor in 2003 when
    he quit in 1993?
         Answer:  Don't think that's unusual at all.  We
    see a lot of people who have stopped smoking for 10,
    15 years who come in with tumors, bladder cancers.
         We heard so much testimony about whether this
    bladder cancer metastasized to the lung, and we heard
    about it, I don't know, for hours and hours and which
    they refused, the lung, to call it small cell lung
    cancer.
         Instead they call it cancer of the chest or
    cancer of the hilum.  Even though every doctor and
    every record that you have back there and every
    medical record, every doctor at the VA called it small
    cell lung cancer.  These are not experts that we
    hired; these are doctors, independent doctors.      You know, did you notice that there were a few
    words in this trial that they just refused to use?
    One was "addiction."  One was "small cell lung
    cancer," and one was "mixed-cell bladder cancer."
         Very artfully, they changed the word.  They
    changed "addiction" to "choice."  They changed "small
    cell lung cancer" to "cancer of the hilum," and they
    changed "mixed-cell bladder cancer" to "small cell
    bladder cancer."
         They are doing this to create a red herring.  I
    don't know how many of you know what a red herring is.
    Basically to deviate the attention off to the goal
    that you are to solve.  Actually -- the explanation
    was actually used in a fox hunt, they used to drag it
    along the trails.  The dogs would get off the scent.
         And that's what they've been trying to do.
    They've been trying to create a red herring.  Why do
    you think it's so important for them for them to try
    to say that the bladder cancer metastasized to the
    lung?  The reason being is 98 percent of small cell
    bladder cancers are caused by smoking.
         Let me address this whole thing of metastasis
    from the bladder to the lung for a moment and put out
    a few facts for you.  Almost all primary small cell
    lung cancers start in the hilum.
         You heard this testimony from Dr. Anderson, his
    treating physician, you heard this testimony from
    Dr. Mowlazadeh, you heard this testimony from
    Dr. Villa.  Almost all primary small cell lung cancers
    start in the hilum.  You also heard them explain to
    you that the parenchyma, which means the lower part,
    you don't see it in there.
         95 percent of small cell carcinomas are primary
    small cell lung cancers.  And then if bladder cancer
    metastasized out of the bladder, Mr. Willis would be
    dead.
         The fourth one.  Cancers, bladder cancers, don't
    jump from the bladder to the hilum.  Now, they had an
    interesting take here.  He said: Well, he had an
    enlarged inguinal lymph node.  I'm sure you remember
    the enlarged inguinal lymph node.  How could you
    possibly forget.
         I'm not going to go over it except to say one
    thing.  And that is, first of all, the bladder doesn't
    drain into the inguinal lymph nodes; it drains into
    the pelvic lymph nodes.  That's a red herring.
         Secondly, the most important part -- you remember
    Dr. Rosenbach, he was up here.  And he said, the
    December of 2003 CAT scan showed the enlarged inguinal
    lymph node, and then they showed him the March 2004 22
    CAT scan and he said -- it said no enlargement of
    inguinal lymph node, but he said -- then he said:
    Well, here it is.  It's still enlarged.  And he said
    that.
         What you also have, though, what I urge you to
    look at, is the October 2004 CAT scan.  And let me
    tell you why.  Between March and October, actually up
    to September, he was under chemotherapy, and that
    chemotherapy, if you look at the October 2004 CT scan,
    that chemotherapy -- the mass in the lung was gone,
    the chemotherapy worked on the cancer that he had in
    the lung.  It's gone.  The CAT scan shows it as gone.
         But guess what's not gone?  The enlarged inguinal
    lymph node, which means it never was cancer.  It never
    was cancer.  It's all a red herring.  All a red
    herring for you to go off on a tangent totally
    unrelated to what really happened.  And then remember
    also the PET scan had no uptake, nothing.
         Secondly, you know, if it was that type in the
    bladder, why didn't this chemotherapy cure the small
    cells in the bladder?  They reappeared.
         Now, again, I want to bring you back to the
    treating doctors.  Dr. Anderson, his primary treating
    pulmonologist since 2004 -- a pulmonologist, not a
    radiologist, but a pulmonologist who diagnoses lungs.
         And on the issue of primary lung cancer, this is
    what he said:  In your opinion, based on your
    experience, review of the CAT scans, pathology, was
    Mr. Willis' small cell lung cancer a primary cancer?
    Did it start in the lung rather than some other organ?
         In my opinion, his small cell lung cancer was a
    primary cancer that did start in the lung.
         Then based on causation -- Dr. Anderson, based on
    your review of the records, et cetera, more likely
    than not, was his small cell lung cancer of Mr. Willis
    caused by smoking?
         More likely than not, I think his lung cancer was
    caused by cigarette smoking.
         More likely than not, did his addiction and
    smoking contribute substantially to producing his
    small cell lung cancer?
         In my opinion, the fact that he was addicted to
    nicotine-containing cigarettes was very related to his
    later development of small cell lung cancer.
         And did his smoking contribute essentially to
    producing his small cell lung cancer?
         Answer:  Yes, it did.
         All the doctors have agreed that his small cell
    lung cancer was caused by smoking and that it was
    primary.  Every record in the hospital reflects that.      Now, they're arguing:  Well, the doctors didn't
    know because they didn't stain the same.  I'm not
    going to get into this tumor board.  The doctors knew
    there was small cell there.  They already knew about
    it with the March, 2004 tumor board.
         The staining is a red herring.  The staining
    makes no difference.  Even when they were told about
    the staining during the deposition, they said it
    doesn't make a difference.  Dr. Villa explained:  It
    doesn't make a difference.
         Dr. Villa, Dr. Anderson, Dr. Mowlazadeh, said the
    lung was primary.  Two of those doctors are treating
    doctors.  And both Dr. Villa and Dr. Mowlazadeh told
    you it really makes no difference whether it
    metastasized because, as Dr. Mowlazadeh testified:
         All right, but does it make a difference as to
    whether or not it metastasized?  It's your opinion
    contributed substantially to causing both cancers?
         As a cause of cancer, no, it doesn't make a
    difference.
         And in this case, does it make any difference?
         Answer:  No.
         And what did their doctors say about causation?
    Remember what Dr. Epstein said about causation when I
    asked him what caused his bladder cancer, he goes --
    he actually said, I don't think it's smoking, but I
    don't know.
         And then he said -- Dr. Stonesifer:  What causes
    bladder cancer?  I don't know.
         When I asked Dr. Stonesifer what causes lung
    cancer, I don't know.
         And then you have Dr. Rosenbach, I don't know.
         Is that a familiar phrase?  "I don't know."
    Sound familiar?
         (At this time, a video was played in open court
    and taken down to the best of the court reporter's
    ability.)
         SPEAKER:  At this point, we do not know.
         SPEAKER:  I believe they have not been proved to
    be unsafe.
         SPEAKER:  The fact that we don't know and nobody
    knows.
         SPEAKER:  I don't know what harms a cigarette
    smoker or what doesn't harm him.
         SPEAKER:  It may be or it may not be.  We don't
    know.
         SPEAKER:  We don't know what causes cancer in
    general.
         (End of video.)
         MR. UITERWYK:  On message, on message.  2004 -- 23
    strike that.  1954, here is what they said:
    Cigarettes are not addictive.  Here's what they said
    in this trial:  Cigarettes are not addictive to Jimmie
    Willis.
         Here's what they said in '54:  No definitive
    proof cigarette smoking causes cancer.  Here's what
    they said in 2010:  No definitive proof smoking caused
    Jimmie Willis' bladder and lung cancer.
         On message, creating the doubt, creating the
    doubt, creating the doubt.
         What's the expression?  You can't take the
    stripes away from the tiger or lines or something like
    that?  I think you know what I'm talking about.  I
    don't know exactly what the expression is.
         Don't let them -- their talk about this and their
    play of these words fool you.
         And then we have COPD.  Everybody admits COPD is
    caused by smoking; that's not an issue.  However, they
    have a radiologist to come in here and said in court:
    Radiologically, it's mild COPD.
         Well, if I have COPD, I sure as heck don't want
    to go to a radiologist to be treated for it.  We look
    at what the pulmonologist, his treating pulmonologist
    said.  He said it was moderate to significant COPD.
    That's the one we rely on.  Not on some radiologist
    who has an opinion about everything and anything.
         Now, so then we go to the third question and it's
    very difficult to read because it's upside down.
         CLERK:  Mr. Uiterwyk, an hour and a half total.
         MR. UITERWYK:  That means I'm going to have to
    hurry.  We have two and a half-hours, and I have
    rebuttal as well and I have to save some time for that
    so that's why I'm doing this.  Okay.
         Basically, the question here in number three was
    concealment of information regarding the health
    effects and/or the addictive nature of smoking
    cigarettes a legal cause of Jimmie Willis' loss,
    injury, or damage.
         You need to look at the jury instruction on
    reliance because the jury instruction on reliance
    says, basically -- all right.  And we go here to
    Jimmie Willis, start there to the end of the
    paragraph:
         Jimmie Willis must show that he relied on the
    concealment or omissions or that he would not have
    acted as he did but for the concealment or omissions.
    A material fact is one that is of such importance that
    Jimmie Willis would have acted as he did, but for the
    concealment or omissions.
         That is the definition.  That's what we have to show, to show answer yes to question three.  Let's
    look at Mr. Willis' testimony of whether he would have
    acted differently, but for the concealment:
         If they had told you that it would get you
    addicted, that it would get you cancer, would you have
    started regularly at the age of 16?
         I don't believe so.
         Then, about whether he would have done
    differently in quitting if they had told him in '66
    what they said in 1985 with the new warning labels:
    If the cigarette companies at the time, meaning in
    '66, had told you that smoking caused cancer, like
    they did in '85, and that quitting smoking at that
    time greatly reduces serious risk of your health,
    would you have probably tried harder to quit?
         Yes, I believe I would have.
         And then he said -- this was the deposition that
    was read, portions of it, during the course of the
    trial, he said -- is it here, the video.
         (At this time, a video was played in open court
    and taken down to the best of the court reporter's
    ability.)
    Q.   Do you believe that any tobacco company withheld
information from you that would have affected your smoking
decisions?
    A.   I do.
    Q.   What?
    A.   They lied.
    Q.   What did they lie about?
    A.   About tobacco.
    Q.   What did they --
    A.   And what it did to you.
    Q.   What did they say that was a lie?
    A.   They didn't tell the truth.
    Q.   When didn't they tell the truth?
    A.   I don't know.
    Q.   Who didn't tell the truth?
    A.   The tobacco companies.
    Q.   Which one?
    A.   All of them.
    Q.   What was it they said that wasn't truthful?
    A.   They didn't tell the truth on what it would do to
you.
    Q.   What is it that it would do to you that they
didn't tell you about?
    A.   I would say, take a look at me.
         (End of video.)
         MR. UITERWYK:  All right.  Let's go on.
         Also testimony during trial -- and I'm going to
    skip over a little of this and go only to the part, at 24
    the time -- are you with me down here:
         At the time that you were smoking regularly and
    you were trying to quit, did you know at that time
    that they had lied to you?
         No.
         And had the tobacco companies not lied to you,
    would we be here today?
         I don't believe we would.
         We wouldn't -- we wouldn't be here today had they
    not concealed.  Ultimately, they got caught.  And we
    all know they got caught in the '90s.  And I urge you
    to look at the internal documents which show what they
    knew versus what they said, which revealed for the
    first time their acknowledging the dangers of their
    products and the addictiveness that it caused,
    revealed for the first time that they actually were
    manipulating their product and, in fact, manipulating
    it in such a way that it would cause and sustain
    addiction.
         The Engle jury -- let's go back.  Strike that.
         The Engle jury found that out and issued its
    findings.  So what we have here is, quickly, we have
    the first question, which is:
         Was cigarette addiction to nicotine a legal
    cause?
         Yes.
         Was smoking cigarettes a cause to the lung
    cancer, bladder cancer, COPD?
         Yes.
         All the doctors -- everyone who has testified on
    these issues have said yes, that it contributed
    substantially to producing, which is under the
    definition of legal cause.  Was it concealment of
    information, which we just discussed?  Yes.  We
    discussed at length the percentages.
         And let me suggest something briefly there to
    you.  You know, how do you separate -- well, first of
    all, let me suggest that it's your decision to make a
    decision as to what percentage should be allocated.
    I'm going to suggest 20 percent for Jimmie Willis.
    Why do I do that?  Why do I say not 50/50 between
    Mr. Willis and the Defendants?
         If we look fairly at the evidence, Jimmie didn't
    know he was going to get addicted, Jimmie didn't know
    that they manipulated their product, Jimmie didn't
    know that their product was defective.  They didn't
    disclose it.  In fact, they outright denied it.
         Yes, Jimmie should bear some fault for trying
    harder.  But he was driven in a significant way by his
    addiction to nicotine.  So the significant fault for the development of his diseases, in fact, should be
    lying on the Defendants, because they were the one who
    designed the product that got him addicted, and kept
    the dangers of the product hidden.  That's their
    fault, that's their responsibility.  His choice was
    driven by addiction -- strike that.
         Their choice wasn't driven by addiction.
    Jimmie's was driven by addiction.  Their choice was
    also driven by greed.  When they could no longer
    defend their product, they devised a new strategy,
    blame the smoker.  It was his choice.  He should have
    known.
         All the more reprehensible, all the more
    reprehensible since they -- since they had the
    knowledge and publicly denied it.  After you decide
    the percentage of the fault in question to number 3 --
    question 3 and 4, you then come to the issues of
    damages.  And let me go over those issues of damages.
    Those are obviously important questions.
         The first question is the issue of his past
    medical expenses.  You have an exhibit there which
    showed the total of his past medical expenses as being
    $412,104.  It's in an exhibit outlining exactly those
    past medical expenses of 412,000.
         You also have a copy of the report from Dr. Raffa
    and its tables showing the future medical expenses of
    255,000 to 435,000, depending on his life expectancy.
         Now, we know he is not well right now.  You know
    what, he hasn't been well for the last 17 years.
    Mr. Willis is a survivor.  He has proven he is a
    survivor.  One thing I ask you to do is not cut him
    short.  Not cut him short on the life expectancy, not
    cut him short on his future medical expenses.
         If it's not enough, he can't come back here.  He
    can't come back in here and have another jury decide
    if he should have more.  This is the only chance that
    he has of recovering the damages that he sustained as
    a result of what they did to their product and as a
    result of what they did.
         And remember, once you award just medical
    expenses and damages for medical expenses, both past
    and future, you've only awarded a part of his damages
    because in addition to the medical expenses are pain
    and suffering, disability, physical impairment,
    disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss
    of the capacity of life, enjoyment of life.  We all
    think it's just pain and suffering; it's not.  It's
    all those other factors that are in that pie.
         Now, how do you determine what those damages are?
    It's an enormous task, very enormous task.  You need 25
    to kind of put yourself kind of in a time machine and
    go back and look what Jimmie's life was before he got
    his laryngeal cancer, before he got his lung cancer,
    his bladder cancers, and his COPD.  When there was a
    time when he was going fishing and four-wheeling and
    enjoying life with his kids, when he would go out to
    dinner, movies, and have a good time.
         Now, then we need to go in that time machine,
    that same time machine, and we need to look at what
    his life has been like for the last 17 years.  And
    he's not able to do things that we all take for
    granted every day.  Not able to talk normally, eat
    normally, drink normally, smell normally, taste
    normally.  Every sense that we all take for granted.
         We also need to look that during the last
    17 years he's had chemotherapy, six bladder surgeries,
    many, many more cystoscopies.  The pain he's gone
    through, the hospitalizations, the pneumonia, the
    shortness of breath, the medications, the inhalers,
    the fatigue.
         Unfortunately, it's not going to change.  He
    either has to have his bladder removed or he needs to
    go through chemo and radiation.  Either one is
    exceedingly traumatic.  He is a survivor.  Jimmie
    wants to live.
         So how do you determine the amount of these
    damages?  Well, you award what you all collectively
    feel is reasonable, fair, and just.  There's no exact
    standard like there is for medical expenses.
         One way of doing this is we can use a want ad.
    And let me suggest -- this is a want ad, and this is a
    want ad for the person who has the job that Jimmie
    Willis has.  This is a want ad that says:  No
    education or previous experience necessary.  Job
    requires applicant to undergo removal of his laryngeal
    cancer nix with radiation to follow.  Job requires
    applicant to be unable to eat normal food, choke
    frequently while drinking liquids, no longer have
    normal speech, making him difficult to understand.
    Applicant will lose all his teeth, sense of smell and
    taste.  Solitude a must, because applicant will not
    want to be stared at when in public.  Job further
    requires six bladder surgeries, multiple scopings,
    must endure constant pain, burning while urinating,
    multiple hospitalizations.  Must undergo a radical
    total removal of the bladder and/or chemo and
    radiation therapies.  If surgery is the only
    alternative, must be willing to wear a bag to hold
    urine that must constantly be emptied and cleaned.
    Applicant will be constantly short of breath, take multitude of medications and inhalers.  Applicant,
    because of the pain that must be endured and the
    repercussions of the surgeries, will not be able to
    enjoy the activities he once enjoyed.
         The problem with this job is, is that it's
    18 hours a day, 365 days a year, for 17 years in the
    past and 13 years in the future.  This job is a
    lifetime job, no vacations, no time off, no coffee
    breaks, no fringe benefits, and once accepted, you
    can't quit.
         He's had this job for 17 years.  He will have
    this job, according to the life care tables, for 13
    more years.  How do you determine the hourly rate for
    that job?  I'm suggesting a rate of $65 an hour, ten
    percent of what one of the experts are paid.  You can
    go less than that, you can go more than that; that is
    your decision.
         And then what you need to do, though, is you need
    to take the 18 hours a day for 365 days a year times
    17 years.  It works out in the last 17 years as
    111,000 hours, 111,000 hours.  For the next 13 years,
    it works out to 85,000 hours.  You all determine that
    hourly rate for that job.
         After you decide on an amount that represents
    justice -- justice is what we're here for -- we're
    left with one more job in this particular case, and
    that is the issue of punitive damages.
         Now, the question of punitive damages is:  Under
    the circumstances of this case, state whether you find
    by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages
    are warranted.  You don't establish the amount at this
    phase; just whether they're warranted.  And you note
    it's not by the greater weight.  Let me put that board
    up here.
         It's not by greater weight; it's, in fact, by
    clear and convincing.  That is a higher standard.
    It's a higher standard than greater weight, but lower
    than beyond a reasonable doubt.  You can, again, still
    have doubts as long as it's clear and convincing.
    Now, the instruction -- again, it's more than
    51 percent, more than tipping the scales; it's clear
    and convincing.
         Punitive damages, as you will see from the
    instruction, is punishment to one or both of the
    Defendants for their actions.  It acts as a deterrent
    to others so that others will not lie and mislead the
    American public like these Defendants did.
         Punitive damages are warranted -- go up above
    that, please.
         If you find for Jimmie Willis and against either 26
    of the Defendants, you must decide whether, in
    addition to compensatory damages -- in addition --
    punitive damages are warranted as a punishment to one
    or more of the Defendants and as a deterrent to
    others.
         We submit to you that you've got to deter these
    Defendants.  You, as members of this state and as
    members of this county and this community must be
    willing to send a message to others that actions like
    those by these Defendants will not and cannot be
    tolerated.
         And in order to do that, if you find by the clear
    and convincing evidence -- let's go to the next one --
    that the conduct causing loss injury, meaning the
    conduct they did, the conduct of manipulating their
    products, the conduct of marketing to youth, the
    conduct of lying and deceiving and conspiring to
    conceive (sic), was so gross and flagrant as to show a
    reckless disregard of human life, or of the safety and
    persons exposed to the effects of such conduct.
         What can be more reckless conduct and disregard
    of human life or the safety of persons exposed to the
    effects -- what can be more flagrant than manipulating
    a cigarette so you can get addicted to it when they
    know it could kill you?  What can be more flagrant to
    make it easier to inhale so -- a product so they would
    have you as a customer?
         What can be more flagrant to a market to our
    kids, to our teenagers?  What can be more reckless
    disregard than to lie and deceive the American public?
    What can be worse than that, particularly when you
    figure they're doing it to our kids?
         And they did it to the kids of Jimmie Willis'
    generation, the ones who are dying today.  They showed
    an entire -- and these are "or," by the way.  You
    don't show each one of them, or the conduct showed an
    entire lack of care, that the Defendants must have
    been consciously indifferent to the consequences.
         They could care less that their product -- that
    they manipulated and designed their product so people
    would get addicted.  They could care less that they
    encouraged people to smoke a product that was killing
    you.  They could care less what they did and how it
    harmed.  All they cared about was their profits, their
    bank accounts, and that's all they cared about.
         Showed entire lack of care that the Defendant
    must have wantonly and -- or recklessly disregarded
    the safety and welfare of the public.  How could what
    they did not be a wanton and reckless disregard for
    the safety and welfare of this public, of our public, of our country, of our community?  Showed reckless
    indifference to the rights of others -- these are
    "or," as to be equivalent to intentional violation of
    these rights.
         You know, what is even worse -- what could be
    more reprehensible and outrageous, than to design a
    product, get your kids to use it -- get the kids to
    use it -- mislead their customers about what it has,
    what it does, in order to make a profit?
         Not refuting it by having anybody come in here
    and explain what they did and why they did it, but by
    blaming the person that their conduct harmed?  Their
    product is deadly.  Their product is addictive, and
    they lied about it to Jimmie Willis and millions of
    others.
         They not only lied about it, they made it that
    way.  They designed it that way.  They marketed it
    that way.  Where was any witness to tell you that
    their design, that their marketing, that their design
    to make it easier to inhale, where was their witness
    to say about their design to maintain an optimum level
    of nicotine?  Where was the witness to explain, tell
    you why they were telling Jimmie Willis that their
    product was safe when they knew it caused cancer and
    was addictive?
         They are unrepentant, unrepentant.  They have not
    repented to this day.  They have offered no
    explanation to this day.  You have heard them accept
    no part in playing -- causing Jimmie Willis and
    developing his devastating health problems.
         But that was their strategy and their shield,
    then and now.  You, by your verdict in this courtroom
    can tell them what they did for the last 60 years is
    outrageous.  Outrageous, and a reckless disregard for
    the care and safety of our country, of the people of
    our country, and our community.  They never cared and
    they still don't care.
         It's your role, it will be your job, to show that
    there are people who do care, there are people who are
    willing to say:  Enough, enough.  You must be
    punished.  We need to deter this type of activity.
    Thank you.
         CLERK:  Mr. Uiterwyk, you have about 39 minutes
    left.
         MR. UITERWYK:  Thanks.



         MR. UITERWYK:  May it please the Court.  Good
    afternoon.
         The good news is I've got 39 minutes left.  The
    bad new is I've got 39 minutes left.  And I've got a
    lot of territory to try to cover because there was
    some new things -- or things that I even didn't see
    during the trial that kind of, you know, that I felt
    like we should cover.
         But let me start with something that is a -- kind
    of a demonstrative, kind of shows the history of what
    the cigarette companies have been doing and why
    they've been doing it.  And it's kind of a -- it gives
    a quick summary.
         You know, if you've noticed, they particularly
    promoted the deception, opposite of the truth they
    knew, they said it was not harmful, that's what
    happened.  They denied deception:  We didn't know.
    That continued in the '50s and '60s.  Then they
    qualified the deception, they said we still don't know
    for sure, not proven not safe; depends on what you
    mean by addiction.
         They not only did that in the '60s and the '70s
    and the '80s and the '90s, they did it in this
    courtroom.  Deflect responsibility for the deception:
    We didn't have anything to do with it; it's all your
    choice.  Then they repeat the new message:  Choice,
    choice, choice, and their defensive definitions.
         That has been the deception that they've been
    carrying on since -- for over half a century.  You
    know, when we listen to Mr. Cofer's closing, all we
    heard -- the only thing he talked about was Jimmie.
    He never once talked about Philip Morris.  He never
    once talked about what Philip Morris really did, never
    explained what Philip Morris really did.
         It was just like the trial.  They didn't say what
    they did and why they did what they did, and then,
    interestingly, Mr. Johnson showed the chart of the 56
    reduction of the nicotine, and interesting, if you
    note that chart, it actually was done by the FTC
    smoking record.
         If y'all remember the FTC smoking record, that's
    actually when they actually manipulated and changed
    the way they did the filters, so, in fact, the machine
    would not really draw the right amount of smoke; the
    way they did the overwrap, the filters, they put the
    vent holes -- did the overwrap so it would deceive the
    machine as far as the numbers that would come out.
         The numbers that they're looking at are, in fact,
    deceiving numbers, they're wrong numbers, as
    Dr. Henningfield testified during this trial, number
    1.  Number 2, I never said that they increased the
    nicotine, no, and I never meant to say they increased
    the nicotine.  As a matter of fact, the documents show
    what they did was they met the level of nicotine -- if
    it's too high, you can't inhale it because nicotine is
    sharp, it burns.  That's why natural tobacco wrapped
    in paper, you can't smoke it, it's too harsh.
         So what you got to do, you got to do what
    Dr. Henningfield called was find the sweet spot,
    number 1, and you find the sweet spot; and, number 1,
    at a level that reduces the harshness and number 2 at
    a level that still sustains an addiction.  And they
    did that, number 1, by manipulating, making sure they
    kept it at that level because they knew the level --
    what the level of addiction was, and their documents,
    which you will have in the back, show that, number 1.
         Number 2, they added the compounds to adjust the
    pH in order to allow for the easier inhalation, number
    1.  Number 2, in order to make it smoother so you
    could go down into the lungs.  They also added
    flavoring compounds to allow it to go deeper in the
    lungs.
         You never heard them say one single word in
    defense of the position that they manipulated their
    cigarettes and manipulated their product and
    manipulated the design to make it easier to inhale.
    Not one word did you hear from them either in closing
    or during the trial.
         And then they say with regards to the physical
    manipulation they say, well, we reduced the nicotine,
    but they reduced it exactly at the level where people
    could inhale it and it still caused and sustained
    addiction.
         That's what the whole trick is, that's what
    Dr. Henningfield was talking about when he testified
    how they manipulated to a perfectly engineered and
    designed -- and their own articles talk about how they manipulated the level, kept it at a certain level --
    it wasn't too high, wasn't too low, and that it can
    inhale without any difficulties and bring it deeper in
    the lungs.
         So then he also comes in here and he's talked
    about, well, we didn't market to teenagers.  Well,
    that -- one of the exhibits you have back there is a
    1926 letter written to their marketing people to go
    visit the prep schools and market their product.  And
    what you will also have back there, you will have all
    the ads where you show -- and we showed, for instance,
    one of the comic-type ads where you get the free magic
    book after a certain number of coupons; you can see
    from those ads that they, in fact, targeted the youth.
         You also have other publications and you also
    have other documents back there which shows that they
    actually investigated marketing and the -- and what --
    children did -- as young as 12 years old.  So for them
    to say they didn't target or market the youth, it's
    just not true and the documents speak differently.
         And then he points out, Mr. Johnson, about the
    issue of the documents, that we only had one document
    from this company, 13 documents from this company.
    You know, the deception, that's what we got here, we
    have deception, so, you know, that's deception.  That
    is actually true deception, and I will show you some
    more deception before I finish in my next 20 --
    31 minutes, whatever it is.
         And the deception was is that they -- and I lost
    my train of thought.  Oh, yeah, the number of
    documents.  They -- what they didn't point out, what
    he didn't point out, what they didn't tell you is all
    the Tobacco Institute documents and the TIRC documents
    and the CTR documents.  Those are part of the stack of
    documents you got, number 1.
         Number 2, as we explained to you, we didn't bring
    all the documents that the first Engle jury saw.  We
    didn't want -- you would have been killing us by now
    had you seen all these documents.  You would have been
    -- the Judge would be killing us as well had we
    brought all these documents.
         And the jury looked at all those and made their
    findings about a defective and unreasonable dangerous
    product, made their findings about conspiracy and
    committing fraud, made their findings about negligence
    and so forth.  They did it with all those documents.
    We brought you a sample, as Dr. Cummings explained to
    you, of the documents, not all of them.
         So basically all you heard was choice, choice,
    choice, and we know why they say that and why they try 57
    to say it.  And, you know -- we know that Exhibit 2184
    -- and we've seen it three or four times, and it's up
    there -- I don't know if it's up there -- there it is
    -- and the lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the
    entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a
    prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/
    cigarette case.
         We can't defend continued smoking as free choice
    if the person was addicted.  The reason being is if
    someone is addicted the addiction will always be a
    legal cause for long-term smoking.  It will always
    contribute substantially.  Addiction will never be --
    for anybody who's addicted will never be insignificant
    and meaningless; it obviously won't be.
         They still -- I don't know why but there's still
    a message, even though this -- the secret is out --
    the reason they have -- the argument is choice, that's
    all they've got.  They know they can't defend the
    addiction.  They must hope that there's some emotional
    reaction to their argument about the choice and that
    it overrides all evidence and common sense as to the
    role that addiction plays in it.
         And they were hoping that you wouldn't notice or
    something that it's addiction that really is the part
    that plays in it.  And as we know from the experts who
    only testify to this, the nicotine drives the choice.
    The nicotine constrains the choice, the nicotine
    undermines the motivation, the nicotine diminishes the
    free choice and the addiction to that nicotine that
    they created does that.
         The tragedy of this, they knew it in the '40s and
    they know it now but they still do not acknowledge it.
    So they knew the physical addiction that they were
    causing with the manipulation of their product, they
    knew it actually constrained choice, and that's what
    they wanted it to do.
         They didn't want people to have a free choice,
    they didn't want people -- and the reason being is, as
    you've seen from some of the articles -- and I don't
    have time to bring them all up -- if -- people
    wouldn't smoke if it wasn't for the nicotine; that's
    Exhibit No. 3065, the Dunn speech.  That's
    Exhibit 1920, the Teague article and research article.
         You know, it's one thing to continue to
    manufacture a product which basically kills you and
    can kill you and make you very sick.  It's almost
    criminal to add to the killing effect of that product
    by -- in such a way that it diminishes the person's
    free choice when they find that that product can kill
    you -- and undermines their motivation and causes the smoker to continue smoking the deadly product, even
    when they know it.  And that is because they maintain
    it at a perfect level.
         They design it in such a way that you can inhale
    it, they design it so it's easy to inhale and keep the
    nicotine going.  They never had anybody even in
    argument talk about that.  You know, it's criminal
    also that they marketed the product, particularly in
    the '50s and '60s --
         MR. COFER:  Your Honor, excuse me, this is the
    third time he's used the word "criminal."  That's
    improper argument.
         THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, this is
    argument.  I give fair latitude in argument; obviously
    this is not a criminal trial.  The context that Mr.
    Uiterwyk is using that term, you can determine.
         MR. UITERWYK:  I'm not using it in that term, I'm
    not.  And what's the term I'm using it -- and actually
    the term I said was almost criminal was the term I
    used -- that they marketed at that time as being
    healthy, as doctors recommending it, as doesn't take
    your wind, as athletes using it.
         And they marketed it that way so that people
    would take of their product and think their product
    was fine to smoke even when they knew differently.
    Without revealing in those ads during that time frame
    -- and we've got to bring ourselves back to that time
    frame, we can't look at what's going on today because
    that's not what we're talking about -- we're talking
    about the time frame that Jimmie became a regular
    smoker.
         You know, it's wrong for them to try to put this
    all on Jimmie because of his choice.  When they caused
    the addiction with their product and sustained it,
    they never warned about it until he was well into the
    addiction cycle.  And when they did -- and you heard
    this testimony -- when they did warn about it, they
    did -- in fact, the warning, it may be hazardous to
    your health.
         You remember the testimony?  In fact, they had
    people testifying before Congress to actually water
    down that label, to actually get it less than what it
    actually -- to get it low down:  It may be hazardous
    to your health, instead of saying what it said in '85
    and it should have said in '55 is that it kills you,
    it causes cancer, and that it's addictive.
         They never put anything anywhere about addictive.
    And the tragedy of all it is, too, that when this
    warning did come out, it may be hazardous to your
    health, people said, you know what, maybe I should try 58
    quitting like Jimmie did, and he tried to quit.
         But at the same time they were pumping millions
    of dollars into advertising, millions of dollars, and
    there were pumping millions and millions and
    multimillions in the whole coverup and the media
    blitz, and then having people come on TV and saying if
    anything is bad we'll take it out.
         You know what -- And the funny thing about it is
    you will see -- and why don't we pull it up now.  Why
    don't we go ahead and pull up the federal state
    (phonetic) speech.  You have that?
         This is a speech given by the vice president of
    Philip Morris, and at the time -- this is 1954.
    Remember, Mr. Johnson talked about 1954 that they
    disclosed, in fact, at that time, that there were
    carcinogens -- that Dr. Rodgman was finding
    carcinogens in their cigarettes and knew that the
    cigarettes had carcinogens, 1954.
         This is 1954, the same time when the rat studies
    came out.  This is 1954 when they say from their own
    documents -- that they disclosed carcinogens in the
    product and they knew about carcinogens -- not
    disclosed them, knew about them in '54.
         And then he tells the people that he's making the
    speech for, if any one of us believed that a product
    we were making and selling was in any way harmful to
    our customers' health and our own as well, we would
    voluntarily go out of business.
         Their product was then and is still today harmful
    to your health, and they've done nothing to make it
    less harmful, they've done nothing to stop it from
    causing cancer, they've done nothing to prevent people
    from getting addicted to it, they've done nothing to
    prevent people from being able to inhale it deep into
    their lungs.
         At the same time, ten years after that, the
    general counsel of Brown & Williamson, the
    manufacturer -- one of the manufacturers now owned by
    R.J. Reynolds -- on Exhibit 3615 --
         How much time do I have?  Don't count this time
    for me asking about the time.
         CLERK:  You started at 3:33, which is --
         MS. HUMPHRIES:  19 minutes.
         MR. UITERWYK:  3615.  We're going to do this
    quick.  He says here, moreover nicotine is addictive
    -- this is the general counsel for Philip Morris.  We
    are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive
    drug effective in the release of stress mechanism.
    They said they didn't know it was addictive at the
    time, they didn't use that term.      This is their own document saying that.  And then
    in the meantime, at the bottom, we say, here is our
    triple, quadruple, or quintuple filter capable of
    removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently
    suspect while delivering full flavor, and incidentally
    a nice jolt of nicotine.
         These are documents, 3615 -- the document you're
    going to see -- and this is just examples of them, a
    nice jolt.  And then he says if we are the first to be
    able to sustain the claim, what price Kent?
         You know, I need to spend a little time going
    over the issue of legal cause.  Oh, yeah, and before I
    do that, one of the things that they were talking
    about is that he didn't try hard enough to quit.
    Well, he actually tried and he didn't try hard enough.
    We agree he could have tried harder, but he did try to
    quit many times and he -- but what does it tell you
    when he wasn't able to quit, even though he wanted to
    quit?
         It tells you that he was addicted.  It shows you
    that he was addicted.  Did he do all the right things?
    No.  Did he even know about the right things?  No.
    Did the Philip Morris publish the right things, R.J.
    Reynolds publish the right things?  No.  They have the
    thing from 1997 -- well, Jimmie was -- this case was
    over as far as Jimmie was concerned in 1997.  To the
    contrary, they lied about the health effects and they
    covered up what they knew and continued to engineer
    the product.
         Now, why would they do this?  Greed.  Why would
    they make a product even more addictive when they knew
    it harmed and killed you?  Greed.  Why would they
    market to kids and everybody else to tell you that
    it's helping?  Greed.  Why would it start to come out
    that the product could cause harm, that they conspired
    together and attacked the Surgeon General and deny
    what they knew?  Greed.
         Why didn't they make a cigarette less easier to
    inhale?  Greed.  Why didn't they reduce the level of
    nicotine below the threshold for addiction?  Greed.
    Why didn't they warn their customers with a warning
    that had some meaning to it?  Greed.
         Now, Mr. Cofer talked about tremendous freedom,
    and I agree, this great country has -- you have
    tremendous freedoms.  But along with those freedoms
    you said you have responsibility.  They have
    responsibility, too, for the decisions and actions
    they made.
         I'm rushing because I've got -- I want to get to
    a few things, and I don't have much time.  I need to 59
    talk about legal cause.  Mr. Cofer, in fact, left out
    in discussing legal cause something very, very, very
    important.
         The question is a legal cause, and what the
    second paragraph says is that in order to be --
    regarding the legal cause of loss, injury, et cetera,
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not
    be the only cause.
         Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may
    be a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage, even
    though it operates in combination with acts of
    another, some natural cause or some other cause, if
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
    contributes substantially to producing.
         It doesn't have to be "but-for"; it simply has to
    be contributes substantially to producing.  Now, let's
    talk about that because I don't have much time, and
    that is with regard to addiction.  Life is not simple,
    that there's only one cause for diseases, that there's
    only one thing that causes something.  Do you remember
    my example during voir dire?  I told you about the guy
    that got in a wreck and it clearly wasn't his fault
    and he had a severe brain injury.
         And we all know that wreck was the cause of his
    brain injury, but then I added to that, he wasn't
    wearing his seat belt.  And that's what also caused
    him to have the brain injury, make his brain injury
    worse.  And I explained to you, there you had two
    legal causes.
         Number one, the legal cause of the accident;
    number two, the legal cause of not wearing your seat
    belt.  Frequently life -- and that's why the whole
    thing about cause and choice, it's not an either/or
    situation; they all play some part.  They all play
    some role.  You know, all it does is contribute
    substantially.  This is why I explained to you that
    nothing in life is so simple that there is only one
    cause.
         Now, has anybody denied that addiction was a
    legal cause -- or not a legal cause -- substantial
    contributing cause?  No.  Could he have gotten
    treatment quicker?  Yes.  But let's talk about that
    for a moment, the treatment of the laryngeal cancer,
    and it's important that we look at 420 and 421 of his
    deposition, talking about Dr. Ellis.
         (At this time, a video was played in open court
    and taken down to the best of the court reporter's
    ability.)
    Q.   To Boone, North Carolina?
    A.   Yes. Q.   And you took him because he was hoarse; correct?
    A.   Yes, me and him both.
    Q.   And so the doctor he scoped your throat at that
time, Dr. Ellis; is that right?
    A.   Yes.
    Q.   And then as a result of that, did you go see
Dr. Howell because the hoarseness didn't go away?
    A.   Yes, that's what he told me to do.
    Q.   And do you recall when it was that you saw
Dr. Ellis in Boone, North Carolina?
    A.   I don't remember.
    Q.   Do you remember would you say it was fairly
quickly that you saw Dr. Ellis and then you saw Dr. Howell
or was there some sort of extended period of time between
those two visits?
    A.   I don't know how long it was, but it was a short
time.
    Q.   Generally a short time?  Like a month or so?
    A.   Yes.
    Q.   Okay.
         (End of video.)
BY MR. UITERWYK:
    Q.   1993, a month or so.  And then we have Paul
24 Willis who testified:
         Do you remember the summer or spring when he went
up to Tennessee before in '93, before he had surgery in
2 October of '93.
         Yes, sir.
         And do you remember talking to him before he went
up there --
         Yes, sir.
         -- with regard to what you noticed about his
voice?
         He appeared to have a sore throat, and kind of
raspy voice.
         And what did you tell him?
         I asked him if he thought he ought to get checked
it before he went.  I didn't want him sick on his trip.
         What did he say?
         He said it was a cough, that he would be all
right.  If it got worse, he would have it checked out.
         Do you remember how long that raspy voice?
         I don't remember exactly.
         Did he have it when he came back in '92?
         No, sir.
         Did he ever have it prior to 1993?
         It was before he left on his trip.
         I'm talking about before 1993, did he ever have
it?
         Not that I recall, no.
17 month.
         Did you ever recall him having a hoarseness or
raspy voice before the time he was leaving for North
Carolina in 1993?
         No, sir.
         Tennessee in '93.  Sorry, I beg your pardon.
         I said:  No, sir.  Are you certain that when you
heard the raspy voice for the first time, it was in '93?
         Yes, sir.
         So we have that testimony, and we have Carolyn's
testimony which was in May of '92 and it was actually in
'93.  We have testimony that says -- we have testimony all
over the place.  We have issues all over.
         Exhibit 19, for instance, which is from the
Johnson City from the radiological consultant, what did he
say?  Quote:  The person has a history of sore throat
associated with hoarseness which worsened in the last
         What they want you to do is they want you to
speculate on the gap between when he had his hoarseness
and when he was finally diagnosed by Dr. Howell.  They
want you to speculate and make a decision about legal
cause based on pure speculation on snippets here, snippets
there, and totally -- I will admit, it's 17 years ago,
there's testimony all over the place in that regard.
         But they're the one who are saying that it didn't
cause.  They're the ones who are saying, well, if he had
gotten -- if he had gotten treatment, if he had seen a
doctor, if it was in '90, '92, or maybe if it was -- but
then you remember Dr. Goodman testified, anything less
than a year between when he saw Dr. Ellis and when he was
diagnosed by Dr. Howell, I can't tell you with any degree
of certainty as to whether it would have made a
difference; that was Dr. Goodman's own testimony from
their experts.
         CLERK:  Mr. Uiterwyk, you have 15 minutes
    remaining.
         MR. UITERWYK:  How many.
         CLERK:  15 minutes remaining.
         MR. UITERWYK:  Are you sure?
         CLERK:  4:12.
         MR. UITERWYK:  I was going a mile a minute.  I
    was killing Lori with that one.  Sorry, Lori.  I may
    go back.  No, I'm kidding.
         And then they say -- first, they say the
    addiction has nothing to do with it, but, in fact, the
    in fact they're saying the addiction is meaningless,
    it had no substantial effect, it didn't participate at
    all in contributing to his laryngeal cancer.
         And you know the interesting thing about it is,
    they admitted that smoking causes laryngeal cancer.
25 There's an admission, a stipulation that's part of the
    record that they admitted that smoking caused his
    laryngeal cancer.  They can't escape that now with
    speculation, which is what they were asking you to do.
         He did a good job, but if you looked at the
    different snippets and different pieces, they were all
    over the place.  They were everywhere from four
    years -- which, by the way, Dr. Goodman says there's
    no way he has cancer four years before -- and
    Dr. Civantos -- no way he had cancer three years
    before, and probably didn't have cancer two years
    before because the life of this tumor, from growth
    until diagnosis, is anywhere between seven to
    eight months to 18 months.  And that's what the
    testimony was.
         So this hoarseness of four years ago or two years
    ago really doesn't play a part in this case.  It is
    pure speculation on their part to suggest otherwise
    and for you -- and asking you to do otherwise.  Now --
    and that's what they're asking you to do on that
    issue.
         Let's talk briefly about the lung.  I think we
    have covered it enough.  They want you to ignore the
    treating doctors on the issue of the lung being a
    primary cancer; they want you to ignore the treating
    doctors who said that it was caused by his smoking.
         And they want you to basically -- saying that the
    treating doctors, even though they found out about the
    stain, they're sticking to their guns because they may
    be sued -- first of all, they work for the U.S.
    government and the VA hospital, number one.
         And number two, for them to even suggest that,
    it's called deception and it's called basically
    speculation.  That's what I heard so much in their
    closing was them coming up with stuff that it's just
    pure speculation.  Well, maybe the doctors did it for
    this reason, and maybe the doctors did it for this
    reason.  There is no evidence, and the judge will tell
    you -- has told you in the instructions.
         You don't speculate.  You base your decision on
    the evidence, not on their speculation, which is what
    they're asking you to do on the issue of the laryngeal
    cancer and actually asking -- and trying to tell you
    to ignore what the treating doctors said about the
    lung cancer.
         And then they -- again, deception.  I tell you,
    they've been experts at it for over half a century,
    and unfortunately, they're still using it here in this
    courtroom.  I ask you not to be fooled by their
    deception. 61
         For instance, 46 percent people who die were
    caused by smoking.  We're not talking about death in
    this case.  What we're talking about is what the
    information is, 60 to 66 percent of people who develop
    bladder cancer are caused by smoking.  They, again,
    kind of twist a word here, twist a word there.  And
    then they talk about the COPD.  They even twisted
    that.  They said it stopped progressing.
         What they didn't tell you, as we get older, our
    lung capacity gets lower, and as Dr. Anderson
    explained to you in his deposition three weeks ago or
    so, two and a half weeks ago, he said because of age,
    your lung capacity gets lower; and unfortunately,
    because of the COPD, that exacerbates the loss of lung
    capacity that you have as you get older.  And, again,
    it's a deception on their part.
         Now, I don't have much time left.  You know, you
    saw that speech by Wiseman, the vice president of
    Philip Morris in 1954, where he said:  If anyone we
    believed that the product we made was harmful, we
    would go out of business.  We would voluntarily go out
    of business.
         We now know their product is harmful, and they
    have done very little to change that or make it less
    addictive.  We can't put them out of business.  We
    can't do that.  But we can punish them for what
    they've done and send a message to other people and
    deter future actions like this.  And that if you do
    things like they have done -- and you know, I need to
    stop here for a minute.
         They say:  Well, what did we do that affected
    Jimmie?  That's just totally not fair.  They made
    their product so that people like Jimmie would get
    addicted.  They made their product in such a way so
    people like Jimmie could inhale it.  They made the
    product so that he would lose his choice -- not lose
    it completely -- diminish his choice, undermine his
    motivation, and they made it that way.
         And so what we need to do is you need, on the
    verdict form, there's question three on the reliance
    issue.  Question three, if you recall:  Was the
    conspiracy, the concealment, a legal cause of Jimmie
    Willis' injuries.
         And that was, if you remember, was the
    concealment regarding health effects, the addictive
    nature of smoking, a legal cause of Jimmie Willis' --
    and they said, and do you remember the instruction,
    which you have, it will tell you that in order to be a
    legal cause, you have to show that he would have acted
    differently had he known about the addictiveness or the health effects.
         And let's look at Jimmie 1 and Jimmie 2 and see
    what Mr. Willis said, and I'm rushing.  That's in
    quotes for him.  I saw you say:  What's Jimmie 1 and
    Jimmie 2?
         Let me tell you what that is.  That's actually --
    I call it Jimmie 1.  It happens to be in the computer
    as Jimmie 1 and I have it in my notes as Jimmie 1.  It
    has nothing to do with anything other than Jimmie 1.
         If they had told you that it could get you
    addicted and that it could get you cancer, would you
    have started regularly at the age of 16?
         No.
         And we know they didn't tell him.  We know they
    didn't warn him.  Let's go.
         Do you also blame the cigarette companies?
         I do.
         Why?
         Because they lied to me.  What do you mean, you
    say they say they lied to you?  What have they lied to
    you about?
         They didn't tell us what it would do to us, and
    what was in the cigarettes.  The chemicals they put in
    there to make it easier to inhale.  The flavors they
    put in there to make it less hash.
         At the time you were smoking regularly and you
    tried to stop, did you know at the time that they lied
    to you?  And you -- you know, they interestingly
    say -- and he says, no.
         They interestingly said:  You know, he never
    could tell you what they didn't tell you.  He never
    could tell you what they concealed.  He was not able
    to tell you what they concealed.  How can you tell
    somebody -- how would he know what they concealed if
    they concealed it?
         And that's what they asked him.  They said:  Do
    you know what we concealed that would have made a
    difference?
         He didn't know what they concealed, and he didn't
    know until 1998 what they concealed.
         And had the tobacco companies not lied to you,
    would we be here today?  I don't believe we would.
         Debbie?
         CLERK:  You have five minutes.
         MR. UITERWYK:  I'm not going to take the five
    minutes.  I'm not going to do that.  I just want you
    to remember that the other jury had millions of
    documents -- not millions -- thousands of documents
    and looked at thousands of hours of testimony.
         We gave you a sample of what the documents are. 62
    I urge you to look at those documents.  You know,
    Henningfield is the only person who testified about
    the manipulation of the product.  Henningfield is the
    only one who explained to you how they manipulated the
    product and what effect that manipulation did.
         As a matter of fact, they also talked about
    filters for one second, and they did say one thing,
    and I don't know if you remember this from
    Dr. Henningfield.  He, in fact, testified that, yeah,
    they used the filter, but they always made sure that
    they got enough nicotine to sustain addiction.  And
    that was his testimony.  They always made sure.
         And the Blatnik report -- this is the Blatnik
    report to Congress.  Here's what Congress concluded
    about their cigarettes:  The cigarette manufacturers
    have deceived the American public through their
    advertising of filter-tip cigarettes.  Congress's
    conclusion about what they did, and they said, oh, we
    were so great, we put these super-duper filters on.
         They deceived the American public because -- I
    would urge you to look at this document because
    there's a number of -- a lot of information about what
    they did and how they did it and how they manipulated
    and how they deceived the American public.
         You know, Mr. Cofer ended up with a quote from
    Jimmie:  That is your decision.  What drives that
    decision, though, that it's your decision about
    smoking, that what drives that decision from an
    addictive smoker is the nicotine.
         It's still your decision.  It's still your
    decision to light it up.  But if you don't want it, if
    you don't like it, if you don't think it's healthy for
    you, why do you light it up?  Because you're addicted.
         And that's what Jimmie Willis was.  He was
    addicted, he was harmed by the addiction, he developed
    laryngeal cancer from the addiction, he developed his
    other cancers from the addiction.
         They have been deceiving the public, they've been
    trying to do it with creating doubt, what they mention
    in their documents.  Don't let them do it in this
    courtroom.
         Thank you.
