          MR. FINGER:  Thank you.
          May it please the Court?
          Counsel and ladies and gentlemen of the
      jury, good afternoon.
          When I spoke to you a little over two weeks
      ago when we first met, we talked about your
      function and what you could expect in this
      trial, what was expected of you and your
      willingness to follow the instructions of the
      law and base your verdict only on the evidence
      that comes before you.
          All of you when you walked into the
      courtroom once you knew that it was a case that
      involved smoking, the overwhelming majority of
      you had a notion that whoever smokes has made
      their choice, and you all knew that, that was
      your thinking coming in.
          This trial and the evidence you heard is
      indeed about the choices that Milton Williams
2785 made.  And you knew when you walked in that he
      made a choice to smoke.  You knew when you
      walked in that it was up to him to quit, to be
      responsible.  But I suggest to you that what you
      didn't know was the reason why he made this
      choice and why Milton Williams and a generation
      of Americans made the bad choice they did.  And
      I suspect that what you didn't know is the role
      that the tobacco company in this case in
      particular and the tobacco companies in general
      had to do with the bad choice that Milton
      Williams made.  That I suspect you did not know.
          This trial, while it is very much about the
      choices that Milton Williams made is as much
      about the reasons they made it and the choices
      exercised by the defendant tobacco company that
      resulted in the bad choice that cost Milton
      Williams his life.
          Before I get into the details of the case I
      want to take this opportunity on behalf of
      Mr. Kaiser and Virginia Williams to let you know
      we appreciate your attentiveness.  Your lives
      were interrupted for a couple of weeks, your
      routine was interrupted, you missed work,
      probably cost you some money, to listen to this
2786 case, to resolve this case, to bring your sense
      of fairness in what's right and your intellect,
      not just your intellect, not just your ability
      to judge the facts and the evidence, but to
      bring to the courtroom your inherent sense of
      what is right and wrong.  For that we thank you.
          Because just as you have the opportunity to
      see us act up -- act up, Mr. Kaiser doesn't act
      up, I act up, but we had the opportunity to
      watch you.  Nobody fell asleep.  Everybody was
      attentive.  And there's a lot of material to
      synthesize.  We heard about koilocytes and HPV
      and if you think that Mr. Kaiser and I are on
      top of all that that you heard this morning and
      understood the halo effect and the koilocytes,
      I'd like to think we are on top of it, but the
      fact of the matter is it's highly technical.  I
      will discuss with you the import of that
      testimony, which I think you got, but we
      appreciate your attentiveness.
          The judge told you in the first issue, the
      threshold issue, which we talked early on, is
      this matter of class membership.  Because the
      first issue you must decide --
          Can you turn on the Elmo, please?
2787 Well, it appears we're having some technical
      difficulty.  So rather than use up my precious
      time, which is limited, I'll talk to you without
      the benefit of the Elmo.
          The first question you're going to be called
      upon to answer, and I would put the verdict form
      up if we could get it up, is:  Was Milton
      Williams addicted to cigarettes containing
      nicotine?
          The first part of this case, this trial,
      involves three questions, three questions in
      order for Milton Williams to become a member of
      the Engle class.  Before you get into any issues
      about how much fault was on Milton Williams and
      how much fault on the tobacco company and before
      you even consider awarding him a nickel, you
      must first determine if he's a member of this
      class of people.  And you determine that by
      answering certain questions, three questions.
          And that's pretty small and pretty blurry.
          This is the verdict form you're going to
      get.
          First question:  Was Milton Williams
      addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
          That's an easy one.  That's a very easy one.
2788 And the reason that's an easy one is because the
      defense in this case don't contest it.  They
      told you in opening statement, and I have the
      transcript of what was told to you, "We don't
      contest that he was addicted as that term was
      used today."
          No issue on that one.  They're conceding he
      was addicted.  A pack or two a day for 40 years.
      We appreciate their generosity in acknowledging
      he was probably addicted after 40 years.  So
      they give you that one.  That one's a yes.
      There's no dispute on that one.
          Now, I'm going to skip the second one and
      I'm going to go to the third question.  The
      third question was:  Was pharyngeal cancer a
      legal cause of Milton Williams' death?  See
      that.  Was pharyngeal cancer a legal cause of
      Milton Williams' death?
          And I submit to you there's no dispute on
      that.  He died from pharyngeal cancer.  Nobody
      suggested otherwise, not their medical examiner
      from Montana, nobody that you heard.  He died
      from throat cancer.  The answer to that is yes.
          The question that's in dispute in this case
      and that I'll talk to you about is number 2.
2789 Was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
      a legal cause of Milton Williams' pharyngeal
      cancer?  That's the question.  That's the
      question that bears on whether or not cigarettes
      and smoking killed him or HPV or bad teeth.
      Because the burden is on us to prove to you that
      the addiction to cigarettes, they admit
      addiction, but we have to then take and prove to
      you by the greater weight of the evidence, not
      beyond a reasonable doubt, this is not a
      criminal case, just the more persuasive effect
      of the evidence, just tip the scale by evidence
      that's more persuasive than theirs, we must then
      demonstrate to you that the addiction to
      cigarettes containing nicotine, they all contain
      nicotine, was a legal cause of Milton Williams'
      pharyngeal cancer.
          In other words, if he didn't die from
      smoking, if he died because his teeth were bad,
      he died from HPV, he died from alcohol abuse, if
      he died from something totally unrelated to
      smoking, then that answer is no and we're not a
      class member, it's over, because we haven't
      proven causation, we haven't proven that the
      cigarettes killed him, something else killed
2790 him.  That's why you heard all this testimony
      about HPV and risk factors and alcohol, because
      the idea is and the defense is he's addicted but
      they haven't proved that the smoking killed him.
      How do we know it wasn't alcohol that killed
      him?  How do we know it wasn't HPV that killed
      him?  How do we know it wasn't poor dent --
      these are risk factors, these are things that
      can cause cancer of the throat.
          So how has the plaintiff satisfied their
      burden of proof?  What have they put forward to
      tell us that it was the smoking rather than
      these other risk factors?  That's the
      significance of it.  All of that is designed to
      raise doubt.  The defense is raising doubt about
      whether or not the nicotine in the cigarettes
      killed him.  It was something else, not the
      nicotine.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Goodwin.  And this
      is where we come in, so I'm going to spend time
      talking about our medical testimony and their
      medical testimony.  Because you're going to have
      to decide which doctors to believe.  This is
      where you come in.  And you're going to have to
      stack up the testimony of Dr. Goodwin and Carmen
2791 Gomez, who you heard this morning, versus
      Dr. Bennett.  Dr. Bennett's role is to come in
      and say we can't say what it is was.  I can't
      say it's HPV.  I can't say it's smoking.  I
      can't say it's poor dentition.  I can't say it's
      alcohol.  We don't know.  We can't say.  And if
      we can't say then the plaintiff hasn't proven
      their case.  The burden of proof is on us.  And
      if we can't say then they haven't proven what
      they need to prove and defendant wins.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Goodwin.  And he
      said, I can tell you what it is.  It's a
      combination of smoking and alcohol.  I can say,
      maybe Dr. Bennett can't, but I can.  To justify
      his conclusion that we can't say -- I'm getting
      to Dr. Bennett -- he talks about HPV and he
      talks about the koilocytes, all this thing about
      the koilocytes.  The purpose of that raised by
      the defense is so that you'll think, maybe it's
      not the smoking.  You know, it's HPV, there are
      koilocytes there, you know, that's a sign that
      suggests HPV.  Maybe the cigarettes didn't kill
      him, it's HPV.  And if that's the case they
      haven't proven their case.  We haven't made the
      link between the cigarettes and the cancer.  And
2792 that's why you heard Carmen Gomez.  You're going
      to have to decide, were they koilocytes or not?
          Now, they can't be -- one of those doctors
      is wrong, okay.  Dr. Bennett says it's a
      koilocyte suggestive of HPV.  Carmen Gomez this
      morning said it isn't.  So you've got two
      different opinions.
          What's interesting is, even if you believe
      every single thing that Dr. Bennett says you
      still can't conclude it's HPV.  And he doesn't
      say it's HPV, even if it's a koilocyte.  I tried
      to get him to say it, because like I said, it's
      suggestive of HPV.
          And he said, the only objective proof I
      have, the only objective proof is this
      micrograph.  And he drew the lines that showed
      what he thinks is HPV.  We know it's not.  The
      better of the two doctors, the more qualified of
      the two doctors you heard this morning.
          But you get to judge the credibility of the
      witnesses.  You get to judge.  When you go back
      in the jury room, you decide.  Who do you think
      knows more about pathology, their medical
      examiner from Montana or the girl that works
      down the street at the Sylvester Cancer Clinic
2793 working with a team of doctors right here every
      day?  You heard her testify.
          Did you get the idea that maybe she knows a
      little bit more about it than he does?  Did you
      get that idea?  Did you get the sense that maybe
      she spends a little more time on pathology than
      Dr. Bennett?  We know that's all she does is
      pathology.
          Dr. Bennett does 300 autopsies a year.  When
      does he have time to look at slides?  I assume
      he takes a weekend off here and there.  There
      are 52 weekends in a year, that's 104 days.
      That only leaves 260 days, working days, he does
      300 autopsies.  That man is doing more than an
      autopsy a day.  How much time do you think he
      spends looking at slides and staying on top of
      the material?  Do you really think he knows
      better than Carmen Gomez?  Do you really think
      he's more qualified?  It's a joke.  It's not
      close.  But you'll have the chance to judge
      their credibility.
          You would think that they would be able to
      find a well-qualified pathologist somewhere east
      of the Rocky Mountains.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection, Your Honor,
2794 personal attack.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          You may proceed.
          MR. FINGER:  He's from Billings, Montana.
      There was testimony that we have excellent
      pathologists in Boston, Philadelphia, New York,
      Chicago and, you know what, with all due respect
      to Dr. Bennett, when you folks think of topnotch
      doctors, it doesn't matter what the field is,
      what comes to mind?  You don't think New York,
      Boston, Philly?  Does anybody, when they're
      thinking about a topnotch doctor, does anybody
      go, you know what, I gotta check out Billings,
      Montana?  You know what, that's where you're
      going to find your topnotch doctor, that will be
      the first place that comes to mind, right?
      Wrong.
          But what you have in Billings, Montana is
      the expert witness whose job it is to come in
      and testify something else killed him.  He
      testifies for automotive companies, and what
      does he say?  He gave you an example.  The
      wrongful death case, automotive company is sued,
      the seatbelt didn't work, his testimony in favor
      of the automotive company is it wasn't the
2795 defective seatbelt, he had a heart attack.
          Patch, the patch.  It was so powerful.
      Pharmaceutical company gets sued, the patch is
      too powerful, it resulted in a death.  His
      testimony:  Oh, no, no, no, the patch didn't
      kill him, it was a heart attack.
          Then lo and behold, what does he do here?
      No, no, no, it's not smoking.  I can't say that.
      It was HPV maybe.  But the one thing I can say
      is, we can't say it's smoking.  He's the
      something-else-killed-him expert.  That's who
      you hire to come in and say it wasn't what
      you're getting sued for, something else killed
      him.
          Well, we brought you the head, Dr. Goodwin,
      we brought you the head of the Sylvester Cancer
      Clinic, who happens to specialize in head and
      neck surgery.  Now, he's the head of this and he
      said, without any doubt at all, it's a
      combination of tobacco and alcohol, it is not
      HPV.  HPV, he said, is more common in whites
      than blacks; Dr. Bennett disagrees.  It's more
      common in nonsmokers than smokers; Dr. Bennett
      disagrees.  It's more common in younger people
      than older people; Dr. Bennett disagrees.
2796 You gotta decide, one of these doctors is
      wrong.  Somebody is making a mistake, I suggest
      to you the better doctors are the ones we
      brought in from the Sylvester Cancer Clinic as
      opposed to their medical examiner from Montana
      that they've used 12 times.  I think this is
      trial number 13 that he comes in and says it's
      something else.
          In the other cases, we know what he does for
      them in other cases because we know in these
      cases many of them involve lung cancer.  And
      what he does in those cases, we touched on them
      in cross, he'll come in and say, oh, that cancer
      in his lung, it didn't start in his lung from
      smoking, it metastasized.  It came from some
      other place and it wasn't caused from smoking.
      In other words, if somebody has liver cancer
      that doesn't come from smoking.  So if the
      cancer in the lung has spread from the liver,
      they haven't proved causation.  There's
      addiction, it caused harm, but it didn't kill
      him because we know that this cancer is in the
      liver, it spread to the lung.  They use him to
      say, oh, it didn't go to the lung, it spread.
      And then you haven't proven causation and
2797 everything is wonderful, the defense wins
      because the smoking didn't cause the harm.
      That's how they use him.
          Well, you decide.  You decide which doctor
      you liked.
          The one thing that Dr. Bennett can't talk
      about is treating people.  He hasn't treated
      anybody.  Dr. Goodwin did.  Dr. Goodwin has
      treated 10 cases of head and neck last year.
      The last time Dr. Bennett saw a head and neck
      case Richard Nixon was President of the United
      States the last time he ever treated somebody
      like that.  That's why he always talks about
      what the literature says.  The reason he has to
      rely on the literature is he doesn't treat
      people.  He doesn't know how they present.  He
      just relies on the literature.  That's the
      expert they're counting on to suggest to you we
      haven't proven our case.  It may be HPV.
          And on that subject, the issue, you know, we
      brought out the fact that during the course of
      Virginia Williams' 14 hours of deposition they
      never asked, they never asked if she was ever
      tested for HPV.
          And on redirect examination Dr. Bennett was
2798 asked, well, Mr. Finger had the opportunity to
      ask you that, Mr. Finger didn't ask.  Well,
      there's a very good reason I didn't ask.  I
      don't need the answer.  I've got the head of the
      Sylvester Cancer Clinic saying I exclude HPV.  I
      don't need to ask --
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection, Your Honor.
      That's not in evidence.
          MR. FINGER:  That was the testimony.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  There was no testimony
      to that effect.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, as I
      mentioned to you earlier, what the attorneys say
      is not evidence.  They're giving you their view
      of the evidence.  But you must rely on your own
      recollection of the witnesses and exhibits
      together and discussion during deliberations
      with your colleagues to determine your view of
      what the evidence is.
          MR. FINGER:  We didn't ask because we're
      satisfied with Dr. Goodwin's testimony that he
      excludes HPV and it's alcohol and tobacco.  And
      if they want to suggest to you that maybe it's
      HPV, they should have asked and you wouldn't
      have to wonder.  We are happy with the evidence
2799 that we have.  I don't need to ask.
          Now, you may be wondering, well, how about
      the alcohol?  You know, I mean, I understand
      tobacco is involved, but if there's alcohol
      involved too, how can we say that the cigarettes
      was the cause?  Because even Dr. Goodwin said
      it's a combination of the cigarettes and the
      alcohol.  Doesn't the fact that there's alcohol
      involved, doesn't that suggest that that answer
      to question number 2 should be no?  Because that
      doesn't talk about alcohol and we know alcohol
      is involved in this cancer.  And the answer to
      that question is found in the instructions that
      Judge Eig read you.
          What is the cause?  See, we're in the word
      business, us attorneys.  And the question is:
      Was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
      a legal cause?  And the operative word there is
      is it a legal cause.  And we define what is a
      legal cause.  And that definition resolves that
      issue about the combination of alcohol and
      tobacco.
          And what we're told is, and I'll read you
      the instruction, let me put it under here.
          "In order to be regarded" -- the judge just
2800 read you this.  And it's on page 8.
          "In order to be regarded as a legal cause of
      death," and I highlighted the important
      language, "cigarettes need not be the only
      cause.  Cigarettes may be a legal cause of death
      even though they operate in combination with,"
      and then they say, "the act of another," we're
      not talking about another person, "some natural
      cause," we're not talking about that, "or some
      other cause," that's the alcohol, some other
      cause, "if the cigarettes contribute
      substantially to producing such death."
          Dr. Goodwin said it is primarily tobacco in
      combination with the alcohol, primarily.  That
      means that the cigarettes contribute
      substantially.  It doesn't have to be only the
      cigarettes.  It doesn't have to be solely the
      cigarettes.  If the cigarettes operate in
      combination with something else, in this case
      alcohol, but the cigarettes contribute
      substantially, and we know from Dr. Goodwin it
      does because he said more likely, it's more the
      tobacco and the smoking, then we have proven it.
      That's a legitimate cause.
          In case anybody is thinking, well, how about
2801 the booze?  If you think it's the tobacco and
      the booze, the combination is enough.  That's
      all we need to prove.  Because I wanted to
      address that.
          Dr. Goodwin's testimony -- and we have the
      benefit each day of the transcript so I can read
      you verbatim of Dr. Goodwin, chief medical
      officer, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center,
      leadership and administrative responsibilities
      on the medical side, and most of the teaching is
      done while they care for patients.
          And what he said is that the HPV is much
      less common -- was much less common five to ten
      years ago, even more [sic] common before that.
          And when asked:  "If we went back to 1996,
      of HPV, tobacco and alcohol, which would be the
      more serious risk factor?
          "Tobacco.
          "The second, in '96 or '95?
          "Would be alcohol."
          And the two of them acting together have a
      synergistic effect.  In other words, when you
      put the two of them together, it's not just 1
      and 1 equals 2.  The two of them together make
      it even more than an additive effect, 1 and 1
2802 equals 4.  It's called a synergistic effect, the
      two of them together are even more than just
      adding them together.
          Dr. Bennett, by the way, disagrees with
      that.  I guess Dr. Goodwin is wrong.  You know
      what, if you believe Dr. Bennett then Carmen
      Gomez doesn't know what a koilocyte is.  She's
      totally incompetent.  Everything she told you
      I'm positive, totally incompetent.  She's wrong.
      And Dr. Goodwin, who testifies as to the people
      he treats, HPV, they're white not black, they
      present late, the tumors respond better to
      treatment.  His tumor didn't respond well to
      treatment.  HPV tumors do.  Unless Dr. Goodwin
      is wrong.  But if you think that guy knows what
      he's talking about, if you think he knows more
      than Dr. Bennett then we've proven our case.
      You decide which doctors have more credibility.
          By the way, Carmen Gomez, you didn't hear
      her say that she's testified for anybody
      anytime.  This is the first time she ever sat in
      a courtroom and rendered expert testimony.  And,
      yes, she was asked, oh, you hate cigarettes.
      And I guess the conclusion is she's a liar.
      See, she hates cigarettes that means she's lying
2803 to get the tobacco company.  I assume that was
      the point.  Do you think she lied?  Do you think
      that?  Do you think that?  It's a joke.  This
      issue is a joke.
          They fly some guy in from Montana who's
      mostly a medical examiner --
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection.  The personal
      attacks need to stop.
          THE COURT:  I respectfully overrule the
      objection.
          MR. FINGER:  They fly someone in from
      Montana and they ask you to believe him over
      doctors that have spent their life treating
      patients and looking at cells and slides.  I
      suggest to you the doctors we presented are more
      credible and we have satisfied proving that the
      nicotine was a cause of the pharyngeal cancer.
      It was nicotine and tobacco and we have proven
      it.
          Interestingly, Dr. Goodwin says most of the
      patients who present present at Stage III or IV.
      They make a big issue out of, oh, he waited late
      and he had a tumor the size of a sweet potato in
      his throat.  You know, it's interesting, they
      sent him home.  It wasn't emergency surgery.
2804 That tracheostomy wasn't an emergency.  Do you
      really think that he went there, had a tumor the
      size of a sweet potato in his throat and they
      said, you know what, you can go home.  Call us
      when it turns into a watermelon.  It's only a
      sweet potato now.  Get back to us when it grows.
      Do you think maybe they're exaggerating how big
      it was?
          And the interesting part of this,
      Dr. Goodwin says most people don't even develop
      symptoms until late.  They want you to believe
      Milton Williams is at fault because he waited
      too long for treatment.  He has nobody to blame
      but himself.  He waited too long to get
      treatment.  He should have gotten in sooner.
      Except we know from Dr. Goodwin that most people
      when they present with this type of cancer don't
      present until it's a Stage III or Stage IV, if
      you believe Dr. Goodwin.  He may be wrong, but
      if you believe him then we know that the
      symptoms don't develop until it reaches this
      stage.  So, no, Milton Williams didn't wait too
      long.  He didn't wait until it was the size of a
      sweet potato and he couldn't breathe.  I suggest
      to you that that's absurd.  And I suggest to you
2805 that what Milton Williams did and how he
      presented is entirely consistent with
      Dr. Goodwin's experience, unless Dr. Goodwin is
      wrong.  But I submit he's not wrong.
          Dr. Goodwin's opinion:  "Did you arrive at
      an opinion in this particular case as to the
      cause of Mr. Williams' oropharyngeal cancer?
          "Yes.  I believe the cause was tobacco and
      alcohol as a secondary factor.  I don't see
      anything in this case to suggest HPV as a
      cause."
          And that koilocyte, we know from Carmen
      Gomez, isn't a koilocyte.
          Now, they cross-examined her this morning,
      well, you testified in depo somebody could take
      a look at this and think it's a koilocyte.
          And she goes, yeah, but not people with my
      experience.  Maybe a resident might take a look
      and think it's a koilocyte, but people with my
      experience who -- she's modest, she doesn't want
      to toot her own horn -- who lectures all over
      the world on this, they know right away, it's
      like a familiar face, she knows right away it's
      not a koilocyte, she spends every day of her
      life looking at these slides, not trotting
2806 around testifying as an expert for various
      industries and not doing autopsies.  She knows a
      koilocyte when she sees one.
          Now, Dr. Bennett may think it is, and she
      said, a resident may get it wrong, he doesn't
      know, at best.  If you want to give him the
      benefit of the doubt, he doesn't have enough
      experience and he's making a mistake.  If you
      don't want to give him the benefit of the doubt,
      he's saying what they want him to say.  But I
      suggest to you in either case he's wrong.
          And Carmen Gomez, did you get the sense that
      she knows what she's talking about?  Did you
      sort of get an idea?  She sounds pretty smart.
      I think she knows what she's talking about.  I
      suspect and I suggest that you did, because she
      does.
          What we brought you were two doctors.
      Carmen Gomez never testified before in a case,
      and Dr. Goodwin, I think this is the third time
      he's testified in a tobacco case.  They've used
      Dr. Bennett 12 times in tobacco cases alone.  We
      brought you professional doctors who happen to
      be witnesses.  They brought you a professional
      witness who happens to be a doctor.  And that's
2807 the difference.
          Dr. Goodwin, everything fits, nonHPV.  I see
      nothing here to suggest HPV, no koilocyte.
          Oh, poor dentition, the teeth.  The teeth.
      Maybe what killed him is an infection or throat
      cancer came from the teeth, okay.  Now,
      Dr. Goodwin talks about that.  See, he treats
      people, he sees them, he knows what causes these
      things because he treats them, he sees them.  He
      just doesn't rely on the literature, what he
      reads.  The teeth.  Dr. Goodwin.  He makes a
      distinction.  There's a difference between
      cancer of the oral cavity -- the mouth, the lip,
      the tongue -- and the oropharynx, the base of
      the throat.  And he associates no risk factor
      with this type of cancer.  He says, yes, there's
      some literature suggesting that it is.  I don't
      see it.  I don't see it.  And he dismisses the
      teeth.
          Lymph nodes, they make big of, oh, he had
      lymph nodes, he should have run into the doctor
      sooner, he had these big lymph nodes.  Well, we
      know from the doctor, you can have enlarged
      lymph nodes, it doesn't put you on notice that,
      I may have cancer.  You can have enlarged
2808 lymph nodes from a cold, from a fever, from an
      infection.  And it doesn't suggest to anybody, I
      may have throat cancer.
          My conclusion, Dr. Goodwin and Dr. Gomez are
      credible, more qualified than Dr. Bennett and
      that testimony allows you to answer question
      number 2 yes.
          Now he's a class member.  Once you answer
      questions 1, 2 and 3 yes, he is now a class
      member.
          And now we get into the history.  Now this
      form.  Now we get into number 4, "Were the
      defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes
      placed on the market by RJ Reynolds Tobacco
      Company a legal cause of Milton Williams'
      death?"
          Now, what's interesting about that question
      is that it presupposes that the cigarettes were
      unreasonably dangerous.  The question isn't,
      "Are the cigarettes unreasonably dangerous?  It
      says, "Were the defective and unreasonably
      dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by RJ
      Reynolds a legal cause?"
          And why are they telling you that it's
      defective and reasonable [sic]?  Why are they
2809 telling you the only issue for you to decide is
      if the defective cigarette caused the harm?  Why
      are they telling you that?  Because you have
      these findings, these Engle findings that now
      come into play.  Once you make him a member,
      once you go yes, yes, yes, now these findings
      that the judge told you about, they now come
      into play.
          And what the judge told you and what comes
      into play is that smoking cigarettes causes
      pharyngeal cancer.  That should come as no
      surprise.  You heard that from Dr. Goodwin
      already.  And you heard that from Dr. Bennett.
      So that doesn't tell you anything you don't
      already know.
          This is what the judge read you, that
      nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.  That's a
      fact.  All of these six things are facts.  When
      I spoke to you two weeks ago, I said, would you
      be able to accept these things as facts without
      any evidence because the judge tells you it's a
      fact, you don't get to question it?  You all
      said you would.
          So when you go back in the jury room, once
      you find he's a member of the class, every one
2810 of these is a fact, we don't have to prove
      anything.  It's a fact.
          Going into that jury room, number 3,
      "RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company placed cigarettes
      on the market that were defective and
      unreasonably dangerous," that is a fact.  We
      don't have to prove it.  It is not in dispute.
      That's a fact.  That's their starting point,
      it's defective.
          "RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company concealed or
      omitted material information not otherwise known
      or available knowing that the material was false
      and misleading or failed to disclose a material
      fact concerning the health effects or addictive
      nature of smoking cigarettes or both."
          There it is.  They hid the truth.  Fact,
      that is a fact.  That is a fact that is not open
      to dispute.  They can't dispute it.  They can't
      tell you they didn't do that because you've been
      told you must accept it.  So all they can do is
      attack Milton Williams.
          The best defense is a good offense.  They
      can't deny these facts so they defend the case
      by saying Milton Williams chose, it's 100
      percent his fault, none of these things matter.
2811 They're going to have to look you in the eye and
      say, you see these things, none of them matter
      because Milton Williams made a choice so it's
      100 percent Milton Williams.  So even though he
      did these terrible things, we still win because
      it caused no harm.  None of this affected Milton
      Williams so we still win.  That's the defense.
      That's what they have to sell you on.
          That's what Dr. Proctor was here testifying
      about.  What was the purpose of Proctor's
      testimony?
          Number 5, let's go to number 5.
      "RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company and other tobacco
      companies agreed to conceal or omit information
      regarding the health effects of cigarettes or
      their addictive nature with the intention that
      smokers and the public," not just Milton
      Williams, "smokers and the public would rely on
      this information to their detriment," to their
      harm.
          So they concealed the truth and then they
      got together with their friends to conspire to
      make sure that the truth doesn't come out and
      that smokers don't find out.  That's a
      conspiracy, number 5.  An agreement to conceal
2812 or omit information regarding the health effects
      of cigarettes, health effects, causes cancer, or
      their addictive nature, with the intention, what
      was their intention?  That smokers and the
      public rely on this, this misinformation, the
      false information to their detriment.  They
      didn't care that people were going to die.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. FINGER:  Well, what is the effect of
      conceal --
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Hold on.  There's an objection
      pending.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Can Your Honor see the
      screen?
          MR. FINGER:  I can see the screen.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  No, I'm talking about
      the screen of what Mr. Finger just said.
          THE COURT:  Well, let's come --
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  The defendants not
      caring, that's a personal attack.
          MR. FINGER:  I think that's --
          THE COURT:  Let's come to sidebar.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
2813 THE COURT:  What's your objection,
      Mr. Williams?
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  That's an unfair
      personal attack on a party.  He can't say
      Reynolds Tobacco Company doesn't care and what
      it cares about.  That's not -- that's going
      beyond the finding.  The finding doesn't say
      anything about what Reynolds cares about,
      meaning people.
          THE COURT:  Isn't that the entire heart of
      the case?
          MR. FINGER:  It's a reasonable inference
      based upon what they did.  And what they did, my
      argument is if they really cared about the
      product they wouldn't give a product that kills
      them.  It's a reasonable inference that people
      that cared don't do that.
          THE COURT:  Why would plaintiff not argue
      that?
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  How can plaintiff say
      what Reynolds cares about, Your Honor?  He's
      talking about today.
          THE COURT:  No, they didn't care.  He's not
      talking -- if it was today then I would sustain
      their objection.  But I believe he's talking
2814 about during the time period of the conspiracy.
          MR. FINGER:  I said they didn't care.
          THE COURT:  I overrule the objection.
          (The sidebar discussion was concluded and
the following was held in open court:)
          THE COURT:  The Court overrules the
      objection.  Mr. Finger, you may proceed.
          MR. FINGER:  I submit to you, ladies and
      gentlemen, that a reasonable -- you know, the
      judge -- let me talk about inferences for a
      minute.  I want to touch on this.
          The judge told you, Judge Eig told you --
      and remember, everything that this circuit court
      judge tells you you must accept as true.  He
      went over this, I went over it, because I am
      counting on you folks to follow the law to the
      letter.  You don't have the option of not
      following the law, what this circuit court judge
      tells you.  You decide what the facts are, but
      you must follow the law.  And what the judge
      told you is that you may draw reasonable
      inferences from the evidence.  That's very
      important, because you don't always have direct
      evidence, but you can draw a reasonable
      inference.  You can infer something from the
2815 evidence.
          If I have my little boy and I leave him at
      home and I say, look, I don't want you to have
      anything to eat.  I don't want you to spoil your
      appetite.  And I come home a half an hour later
      and I see there's a jar of peanut butter that's
      on the -- and a jar of jelly on the -- and I see
      a little bit of jelly on the corner of his
      mouth.  Now, I didn't see him eat a peanut
      butter and jelly sandwich.  I can't say I saw
      him eat that sandwich, but I can draw a
      reasonable inference that he had a peanut butter
      and jelly sandwich.  But I didn't see it.  I
      saw -- I never saw him eat the sandwich.  But a
      reasonable inference is he had a peanut butter
      and jelly sandwich.
          And when they spend millions and millions of
      dollars in advertising to get people to smoke, a
      reasonable inference is it has an impact.  Now,
      we can't prove that Milton Williams ever smoked
      on account of any ad, can't.  I can't say that
      any one thing they did caused him to smoke, but
      what I can tell you is a reasonable inference
      you can draw from the evidence, and you'll see
      the evidence, I'll discuss it, is when they
2816 spend hundreds of millions of dollars on
      advertising it has an impact on people and
      public opinion and it affects effects their
      judgment and it affects their actions.  Because
      this case, this case is not just about what
      Milton Williams did, but about what they did to
      induce him to do something.
          Milton Williams chose to smoke.  We told you
      that at the outset.  We've been up front with
      you from the beginning.  He bears some
      responsibility.  This trial is about how much
      responsibility they bear.  They tell you zero,
      it's 100 percent Milton Williams.
          Well, you gotta ask yourself:  Why did
      Milton Williams in Jacksonville in 1956, why did
      he smoke?  We know now why people don't smoke,
      but let's go back in time to those wonderful
      years of yesteryear.
          It's 1956.  Milton Williams is 14 years old
      and he's in Jacksonville.  And the airwaves are
      bombarded with ads for cigarettes.  Pall Mall
      ads are one of them.  And jingles, Don't miss
      the fun of smoking.  What they left out from the
      jingle, and they know full well, is that it's
      not all fun.  They knew when they were
2817 advertising and marketing this product that it
      was going to work.  They had smart guys.  These
      are advertising executives.  They know what
      they're doing.  They weren't throwing money
      away.  And I'll go over the evidence.  You'll
      see how much money they spent on advertising.
      Advertising works.  The reason it costs 3
      million dollars for a 30-second spot during the
      Superbowl is because people watch it and they're
      impacted.  Advertising works.  They're not
      throwing their money away.  And it worked then.
          Milton Williams made a very bad choice, a
      fatal choice, cost him his life.  The question
      you must answer is:  Did they have anything to
      do with it?  Did they impact this choice?  And
      we know they did.  We know for a fact because
      the judge told you that they hid the truth.  I
      read you the Engle finding.  They concealed the
      truth.  When he made that bad choice, they were
      hiding the truth.
          If I go in to buy a car -- let me give you
      an example.  I go to buy a car and I see this
      nice car.  And I say to the salesman, You know,
      that's a beautiful car.  I'd like to buy that
      car, I said, but I like an eight-cylinder car.
2818 I like a little more pickup.
          And he goes, This is the finest
      eight-cylinder that you're ever going to see.
          And I love this car.  It's nice and shiny,
      the leather smells good.
          My voice is dropping?  That doesn't happen
      too often.
          And I decide to buy it.  I haggle with them
      over it.  They throw in the floor mats.  They
      always throw in the floor mats, you know, when
      you're haggling to close the deal, they always
      say, I'll throw in the floor mats to try and
      close the deal.
          So I get the free floor mats and I drive in
      the car.  And it's like, I'm driving the car on
      I-95 and it's like the pickup is not there.  It
      just doesn't seem to accelerate the way it
      should.  And I go to my neighbor, I have a
      neighbor who's a mechanic and I say, There's
      something wrong with this car.  It doesn't drive
      like an eight-cylinder.
          And he looks under the hood and he goes,
      There's a very good reason.  It's six-cylinder
      car.
          I've been defrauded.  Now, I made a choice.
2819 I didn't have to buy that car.  I chose to buy
      that car.  I made a choice.  I made a bad
      choice.  Why?  Because I was given false
      information.  I wasn't given the truth.  Now, am
      I at fault for that choice?  The answer, yes, I
      am.  I bear some responsibility.  I didn't test
      drive it.  I could have test driven it, but I
      didn't.  I trusted them.  I made a bad choice.
      Now, am I at fault?  Yes.  But are they at
      fault?  Yes, yes, I would say that salesman is
      at fault too.
          And when they concealed the truth and kept a
      generation of Americans from knowing the truth,
      they bear some measure of fault.  Those Engle
      findings are fraud.  They concealed the truth.
      Do you think that that generation that Milton
      Williams was a part of was dumb?  I mean, was
      that a stupid generation?  Because we all know
      now, we know how bad smoking is.  Everybody in
      the courtroom when I spoke to them knew how bad
      it is.  And for the most part, people don't
      smoke.  Why?  Because everybody knows how bad it
      is.
          We in 2012 have the benefit of knowledge.
      The truth is out.  The cat's out of the bag.
2820 They can't lie anymore.  They can't cover things
      up.  People know the truth.  And when people are
      armed with the truth, they make an intelligent
      choice.  The reason people don't smoke now is
      they know how bad it is.
          In 1956 people didn't know how bad it was
      because they were hiding the truth.  They didn't
      allow the American people to be informed so that
      they could make the same choice they do now.
      They want to blame Milton Williams for his bad
      choice.  How about this for a novel idea?  Why
      don't you tell the truth and let's see if Milton
      Williams starts smoking to begin with.  Because
      if they had told the truth, and we heard
      evidence he's an intelligent man, they brought
      out the fact he's an intelligent man, well, I
      submit to you that if that intelligent man knew
      then what we all know now we wouldn't be here
      debating how often he should have quit, how hard
      he tried.  We wouldn't be debating that because
      he wouldn't have started in the first place.
      But he did because they lied to him.  And they
      concealed the truth and this intelligent man
      fell into it.
          Basically the defense is, if you're stupid
2821 enough to believe the stuff we're telling you
      about these cigarettes, don't blame me.  And
      they're blameless.  They look you in the eye and
      they say they don't bear one ounce of
      responsibility, it's 100 percent Milton
      Williams.
          Let's take a look at some of the evidence
      and see if they did anything wrong.  Defense
      counsel in opening statement acknowledged --
      what he said is, "The next item that's not in
      dispute is that of the thousands of tobacco
      company executives, some of them said some
      inappropriate things.  I'm not going to stand up
      here and defend them.  Some of them said some
      stupid things.  They were wrong and they held on
      to technicalities for too long.
          Technicality like what?  Like it causes lung
      cancer?  It's addictive?  Are those the
      inappropriate things?
          Play the Waxman hearing tape.
          Let's take a look at another inappropriate
      moment.
          (Video clip was played.)
          VOICE:  Let me begin my questioning on the
      matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
2822 Let me ask you first, I'd like to just go down
      the row, whether each of you believes that
      nicotine is not addictive.  I heard virtually
      all of you touch on it.  And just yes or no, do
      you believe nicotine is not addictive?
          VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not addictive.
      Yes.
          VOICE:  Mr. Johnson.
          VOICE:  Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine
      clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
      addiction.  There is no intoxications --
          VOICE:  We'll take that as a no.  And,
      again, time is short, if you --
          (No audio sound).
          VOICE:  -- have this for the record.
          VOICE:  I don't believe nicotine or our
      products are addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
      addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
      addictive.
          VOICE:  And I too believe that nicotine is
      not addictive.
          (Video clip concluded.)
2823 MR. FINGER:  Seven tobacco company
      executives, it's not addictive in 1994.
          Plaintiff's Exhibit 103, you're going to get
      a lot of exhibits, but I'm going to call out
      some numbers, some I think are more significant
      than others.
          Plaintiff's Exhibit 103, it's a July 17th,
      1963 memo from the tobacco companies, one of
      their memos, an internal memo.
          "Moreover, nicotine is addictive.  We here
      then are in the business of selling nicotine, an
      addictive drug."
          Thirty-one years before they appeared before
      Congress they knew it was addictive.
          That was very inappropriate.  Lying to
      Congress, that's very inappropriate.  Is that
      what they meant?
          When I sit down, they're going to have a
      chance to talk to you about what they did.
      Let's see what they have to say about what they
      did.  See how much of their closing argument
      they spend talking about their conduct.  They
      won't.  They're just going to talk about Milton
      Williams.  They can't talk about their conduct,
      because have you the Engle findings that said
2824 they hid the truth and the fact that they
      conspired to keep people ignorant so that they
      would smoke.  And they knew it was addictive and
      they knew it was harmful.  They knew it was
      harmful since Claude Teague wrote his
      report that you heard Proctor -- by the way, a
      digression, Robert Proctor, the historian, is
      here to talk about what they did.  They make a
      big deal, do you know anything about Milton
      Williams?  He goes no.  Robert Proctor is not
      here to talk about Milton Williams.  Robert
      Proctor is here to talk about them.  And nobody
      knows more about them than Professor Proctor.
      That's why he's made a million dollars.  He gets
      paid a lot.  Because I suggest to you, nobody,
      but nobody knows more about what they did for 50
      years.  And it's all the truth.
          And you know what, if every single thing
      that Proctor said wasn't true why wouldn't they
      call a historian.  Proctor isn't the only
      professor of the history of science out there.
      We've got a lot of fine colleges and
      universities.  If what he said wasn't true why
      didn't they call a professor to say, what do you
      have to say?  Call your witness.  Show the jury
2825 Proctor is wrong.  They can't, because he's
      right.
          They've known since 1953, Claude Teague, the
      Teague memo.  This is number 22.
          "The increased incidence of cancer of the
      lung in man which has occurred during the last
      half century is probably due to new or increased
      conduct with carcinogenic stimuli.  The closely
      parallel increase in cigarette smoking has led
      to the suspicion that tobacco smoking is an
      important ideological factor in the induction of
      primary cancer of the lung."
          1953.  They knew.
          And did they come forward and share that
      with people so they could make an intelligent
      choice and not buy their product?  No, they kept
      it hidden.  They kept it hidden until the year
      2000.  They didn't come clean, grudgingly,
      according to Proctor, until the year 2000.  In
      '94 they're still saying it's not addictive.
      Their own scientist, Claude Teague.
          So what do they do?  What do they do?  We
      heard about the studies.  In the '50s there are
      studies.  Scientists are starting to catch on,
      it causes cancer, it's harmful.
2826 What do they do?  They hire a public
      relations outfit called Hill and Knowlton to
      devise a strategy to head off this information.
      We can't let this information out.  People will
      stop buying our product.  What are we going to
      do?
          So they hire a public relations firm and
      they devise a strategy and the strategy is --
      and they talk about -- this is Exhibit 31.  And
      the title they say, this information is
      confidential, requires treatment as such.  They
      don't want this coming out.  And they describe
      some of the tobacco guys and what they had to
      say when they talked about this.
          And they said, it's very interesting, the
      opinions, one of the men said, It's fortunate
      for us that cigarettes are a habit they can't
      break.  Isn't that great?  That's in 1953.  It's
      a habit they can't break.
          1994, not addictive.  There they were, not
      addictive.  41 years before, it's a habit they
      can't break and they're swearing in front of
      Congress not addictive.  I think that was
      very -- that was probably one of those
      inappropriate things, lying for 40 years and
2827 keeping the truth hidden.  I would agree, I
      think that is extremely inappropriate,
      especially when you know the consequences.
      Because the consequences of this inappropriate
      conduct, hiding the truth so that people can't
      make an informed choice and decide not to smoke,
      the consequences are that people get cancer and
      die.
          And you heard Proctor testify about
      millions -- let me get you the statistics.
          What are the consequences about that, that
      inappropriate comment, that stupid comment?
      What were the consequences?  Let me see what
      Dr. Proctor said.
          Dr. Proctor said, "From the '50s until 1997
      the approximate number of people that have died
      from smoking is 100 million people in the world.
      In the 20th century 6 million people die yearly,
      and in the United States 440,000 people die
      every year of smoking."
          How many of those people would not die if
      they knew the truth?  We don't know.  That was
      inappropriate.  That was really stupid.  But
      it's good business because they sold lots and
      lots of cigarettes.  And if a few hundred
2828 thousand or several million people have to die,
      that's business.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. FINGER:  That's the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Overrule the objection.
          MR. FINGER:  That's business.  Why do you
      think they did it?  Why do you think they kept
      it hidden?  Business, money.  And they're
      blameless.  They're blameless.  It's all Milton
      Williams.  They didn't do anything wrong.
          Why did Milton Williams take that first
      cigarette?  You think maybe their marketing
      campaign had something to do with -- in that
      memorandum they write, "In the past, industry
      has given little twists to the facts of science
      to convert them into sales propaganda without
      much risk.  The cigarette industry has indeed
      been doing this for years, we can therefore
      readily understand its assumptions that the same
      technique will work now in devising propaganda."
          Propaganda.  This is in 1953.  They're
      devising propaganda.  Well, you know what, we
      all hear the word propaganda, but I want to look
      it up.  What is the definition of propaganda?
          Propaganda are ideas, facts or allegations
2829 spread deliberately to further one's cause or to
      damage an opposing cause.
          And they did.  They did.  And the propaganda
      is that the jury's out on the smoking, there's a
      dispute as to whether or not smoking causes
      cancer.  They knew it did.  They knew from
      Claude Teague it did.  But they're smart.  They
      have good public relations guys.  And the best
      way to gain the confidence of smokers and the
      public is to convince them, we're really
      concerned with your well-being.  We want to get
      to the bottom of it because we don't want to
      hurt anybody.
          In opening statement defense counsel told
      you to focus on three things when you're
      focusing on Milton Williams conduct; choice,
      control and responsibility.  Remember that?  And
      I couldn't agree more.  Let's talk about choice,
      control and responsibility.
          What choices did the tobacco have?  What
      control did they exercise?  And what
      responsibility to the public did they have?
      Let's talk about those three things as it
      applies to RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company and their
      co-conspirators.
2830 Well, they come out with the Frank
      Statement.  This is the Frank Statement.  A
      Frank Statement, not like Frank as a name, frank
      as in honest, let me be frank, a Frank
      Statement, an honest statement because there's
      this controversy that it's causing cancer and we
      want to be up front with you.  We want to let
      you know we're really concerned with your
      health.  We don't want to hurt you.
          "We are pledging aid and assistance to the
      research effort into all phases of tobacco use
      and health.  We believe the products we make are
      not injurious to health," well, we know they
      know it is.  This is what they're saying, We
      don't think it's injurious but we want to get
      into research efforts into all phases of tobacco
      use and health.  And then they form this Tobacco
      Industry Research Committee.
          And they go on to say, "In charge of the
      research activities of the committee will be a
      scientist of unimpeachable integrity of national
      repute.  In addition there will be an advisory
      board of scientists disinterested in the
      cigarette industry."  Disinterested, neutral
      people.
2831 And the head of it is this Clarence Cook --
      Clarence Little.  And he has great credentials.
      He has great credentials, looks good on paper.
      But they know one thing.  They know -- he's a
      geneticist.  He's already convinced that cancer
      is genetic.  It's not caused by anything.  His
      research is if you got cancer it's in your
      genes.  So they pick somebody who goes into his
      job predisposed to find that cigarettes aren't
      causing the harm because it's genetic.
          And this Tobacco Institute Research
      Committee, an idea created by Hill and Knowlton.
      Hill and Knowlton is their public relations arm.
      It's very interesting.
          This is Exhibit 37, a 1954 memo, "Since the
      committee had no headquarters and no staff, Hill
      and Knowlton was asked to provide a working
      staff and temporary office space.  As a first
      organizational step, public relations counsel
      assigned one of its experienced executives to
      serve as executive secretary for the Tobacco
      Industry Research Committee."
          So this neutral committee designed to get to
      the bottom of this allegation that cigarette
      smoking is bad, this neutral committee is
2832 staffed and run by their public relations
      committee.  That's very neutral.
          And, oh, by the way, coincidentally the
      committee, this neutral committee, is in the
      Empire State Building and one floor below is
      Hill and Knowlton, another coincidence.  And
      then they start to put out the propaganda.  Now
      we see the propaganda.  And they publish a
      newsletter.
          Now I'm jumping forward to 1960.  Tobacco
      and Health.  Scientists Report Air Pollution
      Plays Lung Cancer Role.  It's air pollution.
          Inhalation Tests Failed to Cause Lung
      Cancer.  Virus suggested.  It's a virus.
          October 1960, Cancer Linked to Air
      Pollution.
          April/May '61.  Scientists Say Socioeconomic
      Stresses May Set the Stage.  It's not -- smoking
      doesn't give you cancer.  It's stress,
      socioeconomic, money, not smoking.
          This is their neutral committee.  Notice the
      trend in these articles.  These newsletters are
      going to doctors all over the country, doctors
      and hospitals all over the country.
          Studies Link Viruses in Cancer.  It's a
2833 virus.
          Review of Lung Cancer Literature Concludes
      Causes Are Not Known.  We don't know what does
      it.
          Lung Cancer Rise Reflects Aging, Better
      Diagnosis.  You're just getting old.  It's not
      the cigarettes.
          Lung Cancer Rate Low, Half Are Nonsmokers.
          Judge, can I approach the bench?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          (A discussion was held off the record.)
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, we're
      going to take a five-minute recess.  We're still
      in the middle of the argument.
          Please don't discuss the case among
      yourselves or anyone else, don't do any
      independent research.  And don't form a fixed
      conclusion until you've heard all the evidence;
      okay, you've heard that, my instructions on the
      law, okay, you've heard that, and the arguments
      of the attorneys.  You're at half of one.  So
      you're almost there.  But please don't discuss
      the case among yourselves or with anybody else.
          (Jury exits courtroom at 3:10 p.m.)
          THE COURT:  Okay.  We're in five-minute
2834 recess.
          (A recess was taken from 3:10 p.m. to 3:18
p.m.)
          THE COURT:  All right.  I'm not sure if the
      jury is ready or not.
          THE CLERK:  I'll check.
          Coffee break.
          THE COURT:  We'll take another three minutes
      then.
          (A recess was taken from 3:18 p.m. to 3:24
p.m.)
          THE COURT:  We're back on the record in the
      matter of Williams versus Reynolds.
          Anything else before we bring back in the
      jury?
          Mr. Gaitor, if you bring back in the jury.
          (Jury enters courtroom at 3:26 p.m.)
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, we are in
      the middle of the first part of the plaintiff's
      closing statement.
          MR. FINGER:  May I proceed?
          THE COURT:  You may, sir.
          MR. FINGER:  Everybody awake?
          All right, folks.  We're getting through the
      material.  There's been a lot of material in
2835 seven days, a lot of material to cover.  But
      I'll try to get through it and synthesize it.
          In 1964 the Surgeon General was about to
      come out with a report suggesting that cigarette
      smoking was hazardous to your health.  That was
      the watershed year.
          You know what's interesting is that the
      Surgeon General's Report in 1964 came about at
      the urging of President Kennedy in 1962.  And
      there was a move afoot to look into the hazards
      of smoking.  And at a press conference President
      Kennedy was asked, What is your position?  What
      is the administration's position on this new
      information that cigarette smoking is causing
      cancer?
          Now, we know it wasn't new information.  We
      know they'd known for more than a decade.  But
      the truth was starting to leak out
      notwithstanding their best efforts to hide the
      fact so that people would continue to smoke,
      notwithstanding the fact that they knew that
      people were going to die.
          President Kennedy -- and Dr. Proctor talked
      about this.  President Kennedy said, I don't
      know about that.  I don't really know enough
2836 about that.  I'm going to commission a
      committee.  And he had the Surgeon General, I
      think his name was Terry Luther, put together a
      committee and they looked into the health
      hazards.  And in 1964 we have the Surgeon
      General's Report that links cigarette smoking to
      cancer.
          What strikes me as peculiar is that the
      defense has made much of the fact that Milton
      Williams should have known that cigarette
      smoking is bad.  In fact, everybody has known
      since King James that cigarette smoking is bad.
      I'm sure all of you when you walked into the
      courtroom knew that King James said it was bad.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  I sustain the objection in terms
      of please don't personalize it --
          MR. FINGER:  I'm sure that the public, I'm
      sure that the public knew that John Quincy Adams
      was down on smoking.  I suspect that the public
      didn't know.
          King James in 1604, when King James said
      whatever King James was going to say, people
      were illiterate.  They couldn't read and write.
      I'm not sure if the printing press had even been
2837 invented.  Maybe some scribe spread the word
      writing it out in a quill, I don't know.  But I
      suspect that not many people knew about what
      King James knew.
          But what's more interesting is they make
      much of everybody knew it was bad, Milton
      Williams knew it was bad.  And to be sure, there
      came a time when Milton Williams knew it was
      bad.  I'm not going to look you in the eye and
      say he went to his grave not knowing it's bad.
      We have never shirked our responsibility once.
      I'm going to talk about Milton Williams and I'm
      going to lay that to rest right away what our
      position is on him and what he would do.  And
      I'll look you right in the eye and tell you he
      was responsible, what he did right, what he did
      wrong and what we're willing to admit
      responsibility for.  They won't.  They won't
      look you in the eye.  They're not going to
      accept responsibility for anything.  That's the
      difference between them and us.
          Our case, I submit to you, is up front with
      you.  You'll decide from the evidence and from
      the argument of defense counsel who's levelling
      with you, because you're going to bring your
2838 sense of what's right and what's wrong and who's
      been honest and who hasn't.  You get to judge
      the credibility of witnesses, the credibility of
      witnesses we call and the arguments we make and
      the arguments they make.  And I will stack our
      credibility up against them in this trial,
      because I'm not going to tell you Milton
      Williams deserves no fault.  He does.
          But you know what's interesting, if the
      President of the United States in 1962 didn't
      know about the hazards of smoking, do you think
      Milton Williams did?  The President of the
      United States is the most informed person in the
      world.  He has people giving him information,
      daily bulletins to keep him abreast of
      information.  John F. Kennedy, the President of
      the United States, didn't know about the hazards
      of smoking in 1962, but they would lead you to
      believe Milton Williams should have.  Come on.
          You know what Milton Williams is guilty of?
      Milton Williams is guilty of human frailty, it's
      not going to happen to me.  You heard the
      testimony read to you, the sister-in-law, the
      mother would tell him he shouldn't smoke and he
      would blow her off.  Not me.  Yeah, yeah, yeah,
2839 I'll quit.  Not me.
          You know what, Milton Williams should have
      tried harder, concede that.  Milton Williams
      deserves some fault, concede that.
          Milton Williams -- and we'll talk about the
      damages.  We have not tried to make more of
      Milton Williams in death than he was in life.
      You heard the testimony; there were times he was
      bad to Virginia.  You heard the machete
      incidences.  They like to trot that out.  We
      know that Milton had a tendency to drink too
      much and we know that there were some violent
      episodes.  They want you to believe that that's
      representative of 33 years of marriage.  That's
      not fair.  But I'll talk to you about that
      later.
          This is about how much fault they deserve.
      Because we admit it.  No question about it.  How
      can I look you people in the eye and say, Milton
      Williams, he tried as hard as he could?  I'm not
      going to suggest to you he never knew it was
      bad.  He died in 1997, of course he knew it was
      bad.  But human frailty, ah, I'll be okay, it's
      not going to happen to me.  And you know what,
      seven out of eight times it's true.  You heard
2840 Dr. Bennett say that.  Seven out of eight
      smokers, they don't get sick.  He was the
      eighth.  And he died.
          And so I ask you to understand human
      frailty, not to forgive it, but to understand
      it.  But against his mistake, against Milton
      Williams' poor judgment that arose in an
      environment, a false environment created by a
      tobacco company more interested in corporate
      profit than the health of the public, in that
      environment I ask you to stack what Milton
      Williams is guilty of versus what they're guilty
      of.
          What they're guilty of is fraud and
      concealment.  They kept the truth hidden.  And
      they conspired with the other tobacco companies
      to make sure people stayed in the dark.  And I
      submit to you that that's far worse than Milton
      Williams saying I'll be okay and smoking when he
      had the patch, far worse.  What they did was on
      purpose.  Milton Williams, he didn't do
      anything -- he didn't do anything fraudulent.
          So when you go back there and you're going
      to decide percentages, consider that, stack them
      up against each other, what they did and what
2841 Milton Williams did.  And then you ask yourself,
      is it 100 percent Milton Williams?  I think you
      won't.  Now that you've seen the facts -- when
      the trial started, it was all about he chose, he
      made his choice.  Well, now you know why.
          In 1964 the Attorney General's report [sic]
      was coming out.  It's just come out as January
      29th, 1964, and we have a letter here from the
      CEO of Philip Morris reacting to the Surgeon
      General's Report.  And he says, "We must in the
      near future provide some answers which will give
      smokers a psychological crutch and a
      self-rationale to continue smoking."
          These answers must point out the weaknesses
      in the report.  We've got to attack this report.
      We've got to give them a crutch.  We've got to
      keep them smoking.
          How do we do it?  "Humor and satire, while
      it should not be done in the industry's name,
      someone ought to be contacting all the
      cartoonists."  We want to make fun of the
      Surgeon General.  That's a way.  That's a way to
      undermine what he says.  That's a good idea.
          Labeling action.  "We need to take the
      initiative in securing a mild federal Labeling
2842 Act to thwart the efforts of the various
      states."  This is very important.  A mild
      federal Labeling Act.  They knew that there was
      a move afoot to require the warning label,
      caution -- it's not a warning, it's a caution,
      cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
      health.  That was mandated by federal law in
      1966.
          Choice, control, responsibility.  Remember
      those three words?  They made a choice to use
      their public relations firm and their contacts
      to influence the labeling law because Congress
      was going to pass a labeling law and they wanted
      to influence them into being mild.  We want it
      to be mild so that people won't take note.  And
      it was.  Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to
      your health.  That had no effect.
          And you'll see in the documents people
      didn't pay attention to that.  Someone addicted
      to smoking would go, you know, this could hurt
      you.  It's not going to get anybody to quit.
      They're going to say, could hurt you, maybe it
      will, maybe it won't, I'll have another
      cigarette.  May be hazardous.  What addicted
      person is going to say, I'm going to assume it
2843 is?  Person's natural reaction is to say maybe,
      ah, maybe not.
          And that's because they had the money and
      the influence and the power to influence
      Congress.  They chose to exercise their power
      and they had control over Congress.  Choice,
      control, responsibility.
          And the responsibility that they had to the
      American public went by the wayside when they
      chose to exercise the control that money and
      influence brings to influence Congress into a
      mild or -- or an innocuous labeling law.
      Choice, control, responsibility.  They exercised
      them all to the detriment of millions of people
      who died.
          The Gallup organization ran a poll.  This is
      '68.  Kaiser talked about it briefly I think in
      his opening.  Right after -- this was from
      February of '64 to March of '64.  This is within
      six to eight weeks of the Surgeon General's
      Report.  There's big news that everybody knew,
      and the question was:  When you think of
      cigarettes, what comes to mind?  33 percent said
      cancer.  I mean, this on the heels of breaking
      news.  When a fair question is asked, what comes
2844 to mind, 2 out of 3 people don't mention cancer.
      And Proctor talked about the form of the
      question.
          Now, if you ask somebody, do you think
      cigarettes cause cancer, you're more likely to
      get a yes answer than if you say, what do you
      think about when you think of cigarettes?
      Because once you inject the word "cancer,"
      you're suggesting that can happen.  But when a
      fair question is asked, What comes to mind when
      you think of cigarettes, 2 out of 3 people
      didn't mention cancer.  And this is six weeks
      after that earth-shattering news by the Surgeon
      General.  So it wasn't so earth-shattering, at
      least in public opinion.
          So what did they do?  The Surgeon General
      has now come out and it's hazardous and they
      launch a media blitz and they spend millions and
      millions of dollars.  And we see ads.  We see
      lots of ads.
          Guard against throat scratch.  Enjoy the
      smooth smoking of fine tobacco.  Smoke
      Pall Mall, the cigarette whose mildness you can
      measure.
          Mildness, mildness is a euphemism.  It's a
2845 way of suggesting it won't hurt you, it's mild.
      Guard against throat scratch.  Mildness is a
      pleasure with Pall Mall.
          It's mild.  It's mild, it's mild, it's not
      going to hurt you.
          And we heard the jingle:  Don't miss the fun
      of smoking.  And it became a jingle.
          "We know that smoking is a lot of fun.
      Don't miss the fun of smoking."
          You think Milton Williams had a lot of fun?
      Was this part of the fun?  They didn't mention
      when they were advertising don't miss the fun of
      smoking, they didn't mention that part of the
      fun --
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Objection.  The ad on
      the screen is not in evidence.
          MR. FINGER:  Well, it's going to be.  That's
      one of the ones we agreed to, Judge.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Well --
          MR. FINGER:  I'll take it off, but, I mean,
      that's one of the things we agreed to come in is
      the ads.
          They didn't mention this was part of the fun
      of smoking.  Think this was a lot of fun?  Not
      only is this fun, not only do you get the
2846 pleasure of a hole in the tracheostomy, but it
      affords the family a chance to get together.
      This is part of the fun, a family get-together.
      Don't miss the fun of smoking.  Is this a lot of
      fun?  They didn't tell the American public that.
      Is that part of the fun?
          That was inappropriate to suggest it's fun
      when you know it's addictive and it's going to
      cause people cancer.  That's very inappropriate.
      Maybe that's one of the inappropriate things.
          They'll have a chance.  When you're
      listening to their closing argument and they
      spend it all attacking Milton Williams, you sit
      there and say, when are you going to talk about
      what you did?  You ask them, when do we get to
      hear your position on what you did?  What are
      the inappropriate things?  And I want to hear
      your explanation for why these inappropriate
      things had no effect.  Let them explain why none
      of these things matter.  Maybe it's because
      nobody pays attention to ads.  Nobody buys
      anything based on ads.  The ads don't mean
      anything.  Milton Williams didn't rely on an ad.
      They created an environment where smoking was
      the thing to do.  People didn't give it a
2847 thought because they didn't know the truth.
          Exhibit 69 is a Federal Trade Commission
      report in 1967.  Want to touch on a few things.
      They address labeling, the labeling, "Caution:
      Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
      health."  And the report by the Federal Trade
      Commission to Congress in '67 says "There is
      virtually no evidence that the warning statement
      on cigarette packages has had any significant
      effect."
          Choice, control, responsibility.  The
      control they had over Congress to implement a
      mild label was effective.  It had no control.
      It had no effect.  It had no effect.  Choice,
      control and respons -- did they show any
      responsibility to the American people?  What
      they should have said is, Let's warn them.
      Let's be up front.  Let's tell them the truth.
      But they shirked their responsibility because
      had they told the truth sales would have
      plummeted.  We can't have that happen.  It's the
      American way.  Making profit is the American
      way.  There's nothing wrong with making a
      profit.  Capitalism is what makes this country
      great.  Any other form of government, socialism
2848 communism, doesn't work.  Capitalism works.
      Corporations work, but they have an obligation.
      They have a responsibility to the people to tell
      them the truth.
          If anybody that wants to start smoking now
      has no right to sue any company, because the
      truth is out and it would be a frivolous,
      ridiculous lawsuit to sue them now because
      you've got no excuse.  Everybody knows the
      truth.  But in 1956 and in the '50s and '60s
      when they were hiding the truth, who could blame
      anybody for smoking?
          So what did they do?  Let's talk about some
      of the ads.  "During a single month of January
      1967 87 network television programs were
      sponsored in whole or in part by cigarette
      products of the six major manufacturers.  An
      estimated 1.1685 billion viewers watched 60
      programs during the week commencing January 11,
      '67."  This is worldwide.  "This means that on
      the average each of the 197 million inhabitants
      of the United States viewed 5.9
      cigarette-sponsored programs during the week."
          And here's what they had to say, "Cigarette
      advertising" -- this is Federal Trade Commission
2849 report to Congress:  "Cigarette advertising
      reaches virtually all Americans who can either
      read or understand the spoken word.  Cigarettes
      are advertised on both network and spot
      television, on radio and magazines and
      newspapers, restaurants, drugstores, advertising
      decals, entrance doors, wall clocks."
          "Teenage boys surveyed averaged 4.3 hours of
      radio listening daily."
          "Whatever effect this exposure of youth to
      cigarette advertising may have, it is a fact
      that in this country the general trend is
      towards starting smoking at an ever earlier
      age."  He started smoking when he was 14.
      That's not an accident.
          And then they talk about effective marketing
      tools.  "The associative theme:  Associating
      cigarette smoking with persons, activities,
      places and things likely to be admired,
      respected or emulated."
          Sports figures.
          Appeals directed to vanity.  Be
      discriminating.  An array of positive images.
      All elements of escape from reality.
          They know what works with people.  These are
2850 smart people.  These are marketing people.  They
      know what works.  They know what appeals to
      people.  They're not wasting their money when
      they spend millions and millions of dollars.
      You'll have a chance to look at Exhibit 69.  See
      how much money they spent.
          In 1966, two years after the Surgeon
      General's Report, a confidential memo, Blalock
      to Yeaman.  Addison Yeaman was in-house counsel
      for Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company.  And he
      talks about, "The key word is confusion.
      Anything we can do to confirm such a situation
      could work to our advantage, provided the
      current methods of testing are shown to be
      fraught with numerous variables and therefore
      give rise to misleading results."
          Confusion, the key word is confusion.
      That's very inappropriate to try to confuse the
      public.  I think that's -- maybe that's what he
      means.  That's very inappropriate.  I don't
      know, when I sit down, they'll tell you what
      they did was inappropriate.  I'm interested to
      hear.
          But whatever they did it had no effect on
      Milton Williams.  They're going to tell you,
2851 whatever we did was inappropriate, it had no
      effect on Milton Williams and we don't deserve
      one ounce of responsibility.  Well, I think
      otherwise.  And I think you think otherwise.
      Otherwise they wasted billions of dollars in
      advertising.
          The Teague report, 19 -- we're up to 1972.
      This says, the same Teague, Claude Teague from
      20 years earlier, the chemist that made the link
      that it was cancer forming.  Now Claude is
      talking about addiction.  "Nicotine is known to
      be a habit-forming alkaloid, thus a tobacco
      product is in essence a vehicle for delivery of
      nicotine designed to deliver the nicotine in a
      generally acceptable and attractable form.
      Happily for the tobacco industry nicotine is
      both habituating and unique in its variety of
      physiological actions."
          Isn't that wonderful?  It's addictive.
      Isn't that great?  We're going to get them
      addicted.  Now, they may get cancer, but once we
      get them addicted, we're going to sell a lot of
      cigarettes.  Happily, happily it's addictive.
          Claude's come a long way, in 20 years, in 20
      years from first -- Claude's on board.  Claude's
2852 on the team by 1972.  In 1953 he's saying, this
      is bad, it causes cancer.  In 1972 he's saying,
      happily it's addictive.  I guess Claude has come
      around.  Claude's on board now.
          In 1972, a letter, this is Exhibit 67, this
      is a memorandum from the president of the
      Tobacco Institute, that's that phony front --
      the Tobacco Institute was created out of the
      Tobacco Research Committee that they -- in the
      Frank Statement.  The committee they set up that
      was staffed by the public relations people, that
      bogus committee, out of that they had this
      Tobacco Institute.
          The Tobacco Institute was the propaganda arm
      of the tobacco industry designed to influence
      public opinion and designed to get the public
      thinking that cancer is not caused by cigarettes
      and to get a positive slant on the tobacco
      industry.  They used the term "propaganda,"
      these are the ministers of propaganda.
          The president of the Tobacco Institute gets
      a memo from the vice-president, fellow by the
      name of Fred Panzer, who says that "For nearly
      20 years this industry has employed a single
      strategy to defend itself from politics and
2853 public opinion.  While the strategy was
      brilliantly conceived over the years, helping us
      win important battles, it's only fair to say
      that it was not, nor was it ever intended to be
      a vehicle for victory.  On the contrary, it has
      always been a holding strategy consisting of
      creating doubt about the health charge without
      actually denying it."
          The strategy, this is in 1972.  He's
      referring to a brilliantly conceived and
      executed strategy, 20 years.  Twenty years we go
      back to the '50s and they're talking about the
      initial strategy, the Hill and Knowlton
      strategy.  "A brilliant strategy designed to
      create doubt about the health charge without
      actually denying it."  We don't want to come out
      and deny it.  That would be inappropriate.
      We'll just plant doubt.  And it's brilliant.
      And it worked.  Because people did die and they
      continued to smoke.
          The Tobacco Institute Research, are they
      really trying to help people?  Are they really
      trying to help people?  Or are they trying to
      create doubt so they'll continue to sell their
      products?
2854 In 1973 we got another document from Claude
      Teague.  This is "effects of ammonia and its
      salts on smoke quality."  Claude Teague in that
      writes that "The nicotine impact is enhanced by
      using ammonia."  So not only -- it's not as if
      the nicotine is bad enough, now we can give them
      an extra jolt.  Now, I don't know if Pall Mall
      ever used ammonia.  I don't think Proctor
      said -- doesn't know, but the point is, they're
      taking the position they're trying to get to the
      bottom of it.  We are concerned with the health
      effects.  We have a committee we're going to set
      up because we don't want you to get sick.  And
      their research guy, their scientist is saying,
      you know, if you add some ammonia the nicotine
      gives it a little extra jolt.  Come on.  That
      was very inappropriate.  I think that was
      inappropriate, when you're telling people you're
      concerned with their health.
          Let's jump forward, 1978.  Brown &
      Williamson internal memo.  This is a letter from
      H.D. Steele, who was in the Brown & Williamson
      marketing department, to M.J. McCue, Brown &
      Williamson marketing department.  "I need to
      explain present attitudes toward nicotine.  Very
2855 few consumers are aware of the effects of
      nicotine, i.e., its addictive nature and that
      nicotine is a poison."
          It's addictive nature, remember, I don't
      have to play that congressional hearing,
      cigarettes are not addictive, cigarettes are not
      addictive, cigarettes are not addictive, seven
      of them stood up there and said cigarettes are
      not addictive.  Very few consumers are aware of
      the effects of nicotine, it's addictive nature.
      Do you think they knew it was addictive?
          Now, you can believe two things.  Those CEOs
      that testified before Congress are really dumb
      and they really don't know it's addictive and
      they were telling the truth because they don't
      know or they were lying.  Those are the only two
      choices.  Well, we know they were lying, and we
      know why, because we want people to continue to
      buy cigarettes and they're willing to lie to
      Congress to accomplish it.
          But of course that has no impact, because
      Milton Williams chose to smoke.  None of this
      matters.  None of this influenced public
      opinion.  Milton Williams didn't grow up in a
      cocoon.  He didn't grow up in a cave.  He grew
2856 up in a society molded by an industry, with
      enormous funds and enormous research and
      resources and the ability to wield tremendous
      control and influence in the media.
          And they picked Hill and Knowlton way back
      in the '50s because it was the most powerful
      influential public relations firm in the
      country.  They had connections in newspapers.
      They had connections in magazines.  They had
      connections on Capitol Hill and Congress.  They
      had connections with every branch of media,
      that's why they used them.  And they used it
      well.  They did good by the tobacco companies.
      The problem is that the strategy involved them
      covering up the truth.  They were good at it,
      they were successful, and a generation of people
      died on account of it.
          And they are not stupid people.  They're
      sophisticated businessmen who knew how to
      manipulate public opinion and make a disgusting,
      reprehensible habit that they knew was going to
      cost people lives, they knew how to cast it in a
      positive light, make it acceptable, without
      actually coming out and flat out lying.  Doubt,
      confusion, that's their mantra.  Confusion, you
2857 need to create confusion, and they did.  And it
      worked.
          This is a letter in 1980, senior
      vice-president for Tobacco Institute for public
      relations, a letter from the editor of the
      Tobacco Institute newsletter.  I showed you some
      of the newsletters.  And they're talking about a
      meeting of some anti-smoking people, commenting
      on an anti-smoking meeting that they didn't
      attend.  They weren't there.
          And at that meeting a fellow by the name of
      Pollin, P-O-L-L-I-N, was quoted as talking to
      these anti-smoking people and saying that
      "Cigarette smoking is the nation's leading drug
      problem in youth despite the rise in marijuana."
      This is now 1980.
          Pollin's predecessor was quoted as saying
      "Cigarette smoking is more addictive than using
      heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who
      have ever smoked."
          And then the question that the writer puts
      to the senior vice-president, "Did TI -- did
      Tobacco Institute miss a chance to attend and
      present information at NIDA" -- National
      Institute Of Drug Abuse, NIDA, it was a meeting
2858 of individuals on the topic of drug abuse.
          "Did TI miss a chance to attend and present
      information at NIDA's 1979 meeting which
      developed the addictive language."
          In other words, he's saying, did we blow it?
      Should we have been there to counter this?  The
      point is they knew not only was it addictive,
      they were afraid that not only was it addictive,
      but it was addictive such -- analogous to heroin
      and hooking two-thirds of the people.  They
      didn't like that out there.  We should have been
      there to head that off.
          They targeted young adults, Exhibit 76.
          You look at Exhibit 76 they talk about
      successful younger adult brand strategies in the
      past.  And what's interesting is they say,
      "Younger adult smokers have been the critical
      factor in the growth and decline of every major
      brand and company over the last 50 years."
      Young smokers.  They need to get young people to
      smoke, because once you get young people to
      smoke they become addicted and they have them
      forever, so they focus on the young.
          "RJR," RJ Reynolds, "should seek to better
      understand to capitalize on the factors and
2859 strategies which have succeeded for younger
      adult brands in the past."  We need to focus on
      young people.  We need to get them hooked early.
      That's 1984.  The same year -- 10 years before
      they appeared in front of Congress.
          So now you've got to ask yourself, are they
      really blameless?  Did they have nothing to do
      with Milton Williams' choice?
          Let's go back to the verdict form.  Let me
      go to number 4.  "Were the defective and
      unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the
      market by RJ Reynolds a legal cause of Milton
      Williams' death?"  That's an easy one.  All this
      business about who did what and whether or not
      Milton Williams relied on what they did and
      whether or not their concealment and their fraud
      affected Milton Williams, I submit to you
      doesn't address this question.  Were the
      defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes,
      we know they're defective and unusually
      dangerous because the findings say they are,
      were they a legal cause of Milton Williams'
      death?  The answer is they clearly are.
          That question doesn't call for you to decide
      how much fault you want to put on Milton
2860 Williams.  That's a simple question.  When you
      go back in the jury room, focus on the question,
      just answer the question.  You'll get a chance
      to decide.  You'll see how the verdict form
      unfolds.  You'll get a chance to put percentage
      of fault on Milton Williams.  Go through it and
      just answer it question by question.
          Were the defective and unreasonably
      dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by RJ
      Reynolds a legal cause of Milton Williams'
      death?  That's a simple one.  The answer is yes.
      He didn't die from anything else.  We talked
      about that earlier.  He didn't die from anything
      other than the cigarettes.  We know they're
      defective.  We don't have to spend any time
      telling you why.  That was proven a long time
      ago.  And that's what killed him.
          Is there any dispute that it was the
      cigarette smoking that did it?  We talked about
      Dr. Goodwin.  I'm not going back over that.  The
      answer to that is an easy one.
          The more interesting question is number 5.
      "Did Milton Williams reasonably rely to his
      detriment on information known to RJ Reynolds
      Company that intentionally concealed or omitted
2861 a material fact that was unknown to Mr. Williams
      and not otherwise obvious to him concerning the
      health effects or the addictive nature of
      smoking cigarettes such that but for his
      reliance he would have acted differently and
      avoided his death."
          COURT REPORTER:  I'm sorry?
          MR. FINGER:  I'm going to read number 6,
      because 5 and 6 kind of go together.  5 is the
      fraud and the concealment.  6 is the conspiracy.
      "Did Milton Williams reasonably rely to his
      detriment on RJ Reynolds Company's agreement
      with others," and we've heard Philip Morris and
      all the other tobacco companies, everybody in
      that Frank Statement, the other conspirators,
      "to conceal or omit material information that
      was unknown to Mr. Williams and not otherwise
      obvious to him regarding the health effects or
      addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if
      so, did Mr. Williams reasonably rely to his
      detriment on information," that word is
      information, "information made available in
      furtherance of that agreement that concealed or
      omitted material information such that but for
      the information he would have acted differently
2862 and avoided his injury?"
          Okay.  What do those two mean?  Did he rely
      on it?
          This fraud that we talk about, because as
      the judge told you, the mere fact that they
      concealed things and they perpetrated a fraud
      and the mere fact that they conspired to do it
      doesn't mean it affected Milton Williams.  They
      could do that and it could have no impact on
      Milton Williams.  They'll spend their entire
      time telling you that that doesn't matter,
      that's what happened.  We did these things, but
      it didn't affect Milton Williams so it doesn't
      matter.  You should answer that no.  That's what
      they will argue.
          So how do you decide if he relied on it?
      And we come back to what I talked about at the
      beginning, reasonable inferences.  Judge Eig
      told you you can draw reasonable inferences from
      the evidence.  So I can't tell you that Milton
      Williams ever started smoking on account of any
      ad that was deceptive, I can't tell you that if
      they had told the truth and they hadn't
      concealed the truth that Milton Williams
      wouldn't have started smoking, because we don't
2863 know.  It's very hard to say.  What would
      somebody have done if they knew the truth?  I
      can tell you this, people now know the truth and
      they're not smoking.  And I suggest to you if
      the truth had come out then Milton Williams, an
      intelligent man, wouldn't have started smoking.
      But I can't tell that to you.  Milton Williams
      is dead.  And I can't put him on the stand and
      say, Milton, if you would have known how bad it
      was would you have still started smoking?  I
      can't do that.  I don't know.  I can't tell you
      that.  He's dead.  He died 15 years ago with a
      hole in his throat.  And now what's left of him
      are ashes in Virginia Williams' urn.
          But you can draw reasonable inferences from
      the evidence and you can say, you know what, I
      think the concealment of the truth affected him.
      I think there's a reason why he started smoking.
      I think it's reasonable to believe that if he
      knew the truth he wouldn't have started to smoke
      like millions of people now don't smoke.
          I think these ads had an impact.  I think
      the reason that 14-year-old took the cigarette
      is because of these ads that didn't mention
      these health hazards.
2864 I'm going to draw an inference from what you
      did that it did affect him, because I have no
      direct evidence.  But we know what they did and
      we know why they did it.  And we know it was
      successful.  We know that their marketing
      strategy to get people to smoke a product that
      we know is defective, we've been told it's
      defective, and that we know has killed millions
      of people, those are facts, Proctor testified to
      it, you didn't hear anybody say that it doesn't
      kill that many people, they knew about it.  Does
      it matter?
          THE COURT:  That's an hour and a half.
          MR. FINGER:  Does it matter?  Sure it
      matters.  Sure it does.  And you can infer that
      he relied upon it.
          I submit you're going to answer all of the
      questions yes.  And now we get to the issue of
      how much.
          This is the hard part.  Very difficult.
      You're going to compensate her for loss of
      companionship and for mental pain and suffering.
      This is very difficult, to put a number to this.
      How do you determine what the loss of a wife's
      husband is to her?  How do you measure love?
2865 For all of the technical jargon we heard,
      koilocytosis, risk factors, in the final
      analysis your verdict will be predicated upon an
      emotion.  You can't go into Publix and buy a
      gallon of love.  You can't go into Home Depot
      and say, give me a bucketful of love.  So how do
      you measure it?  Well, you listen to the
      testimony of Virginia and you consider what we
      have.
          And we know that there were times Milton
      Williams was bad.  You can consider that.  You
      can consider it, because ultimately this is
      about whether or not this woman loved him.  You
      may not care for him.  I'm not suggesting you
      should.  This is not about what you think of
      Milton Williams.  This is about whether or not
      her love and affection for him is genuine.  And
      if it is, it doesn't matter that you don't like
      him.  All that matters is how she feels.  And if
      you believe her feeling is genuine then you
      should award her money damages.  You're
      responsible.
          But how do you quantify them?
          But first let's deal with whether or not her
      feelings for him are genuine.  We know there
2866 were bad times.  She filed for divorce at one
      time.  The marriage was rocky.  The incident
      where he threw the candlestick holder and there
      was violence, no question there were bad times.
      But there's no evidence that that represents 33
      years of marriage.  And it's not fair to suggest
      that it does.  She said that there were a lot
      more good times than bad times.  And when she
      slept next to him when he was in the hospital
      not missing -- or missing the fun of smoking, do
      you think she didn't love him?  When she was
      putting food in that feeding tube, do you think
      she didn't love him?  When he died and she slept
      next to him, do you think she didn't love him?
      Maybe she shouldn't have, but do you think she
      didn't?  Do you think that woman is
      exaggerating?  We didn't see a lot of tears when
      she was on the stand.  She didn't breakdown.
      She's had 15 years to heal.
          But when they cremated that man with a hole
      in his throat, I submit to you that for 15 years
      it left a hole in her heart.  That heals because
      time does heal.  So we didn't see emotion on the
      stand, but it leaves a scar.
          And when she says there's these Pa days with
2867 Pam and they talk about it, we have these Pa
      days, I submit to you it's genuine and she loved
      the man.  She didn't stay with him because she
      was trapped.
          The RJ Reynolds Company asks you and they
      say, is there a limit to love is blind?  They're
      going to decide that she exceeded her limit.
      Where do they get the nerve to suggest that this
      woman shouldn't have loved him so much?  I
      submit to you she did and it was genuine.
      You'll decide.
          When she changed his diaper, I submit that
      was genuine.  This is the man she married.  This
      is the man she fell in love with.  And she was
      with him when he died and I submit to you she
      loved him till the end.  And she had to watch
      this man, young, good looking, virile in
      uniform, she had to watch him disintegrate till
      the point where she had to change his diaper
      like a baby.  You think that didn't hurt?  You
      think that was a sham -- do you think in 1997
      she was just going through the motions because
      someday I'm going to have a lawsuit 15 years
      from now and I want them to think I really loved
      him?  Do you think that's what was going on back
2868 then, or do you think she really loved him?
          She had a good job.  She wasn't trapped in
      that marriage.  She had a better job than
      Milton.  She could have taken off and left with
      the kids.  So she wasn't trapped.  It wasn't a
      situation where she had to stay.  She stayed
      because she loved him.
          They paid $400 an hour to bring Dr. Bennett
      down here.  I'm going to suggest to you that you
      award Virginia $40 an hour, a tenth of what
      they're paying Dr. Bennett.  She's been without
      him for 15 years.  That's a lot of hours.  And
      I'm going to suggest to you that you give her
      $40 for every hour that they took Milton
      Williams away from her.  It comes to over 5
      million dollars.  It's a lot of money.  And I'm
      going to ask you to award more than that,
      because she's still alive, she's not done
      living.  How much longer she's going to live, I
      don't know, none of us know.  Use your common
      sense.  You figure out, she's healthy, vibrant.
      If you want to give her $20 an hour -- they're
      paying Dr. Bennett, the medical examiner, 400.
      Do you want to give her $20 an hour?  Do you
      think that's fair?  That's still 2.6 million
2869 dollars.
          And I'm going to ask you to assess 15
      percent fault on Milton Williams.  Where do I
      get that?  If he was successful with the patch,
      Dr. Goldman, remember Dr. Goldman in the
      beginning of the trial, he said aided attempts
      to quit are successful 15 percent of the time.
      If Milton Williams had stuck with that patch, he
      had a 15 percent chance of quitting, of being
      successful.  I suggest to you that when you
      stack what Milton Williams did up versus what
      they did he's no more than 15 percent at fault.
      I'm going to suggest to you that you award
      Virginia Williams 5.2 million dollars and you
      assess 15 percent fault on Milton Williams and
      85 percent fault on the tobacco company.
          The percentages and the numbers are entirely
      up to you.  This is a suggestion.  This is what
      we think it's worth.  This is what we think her
      love for that man is worth.
          So in the final analysis when it comes down
      to how you perceive what's right and what's
      fair, I'm confident that when you analyze the
      evidence and you clear away the clouds and let
      the light shine through on the truth you will
2870 see that this is more than just a choice Milton
      Williams made.  And you will bring your
      collective wisdom to bare and not just your
      intellect and your wisdom, but your inherent
      sense of what's right and wrong.  And your
      inherent sense that what's gone on here to
      Milton Williams and the public is wrong.  And
      when they do that, they must be called to bear,
      they must be called to account and they should
      compensate the victim.  That's fair, that's
      right and that's just.  And we trust your good
      judgment.  We will await your verdict.
 
 
           MR. KAISER:  Ladies and gentlemen of the
      jury, good morning.  I have a whopping 24
      minutes left to talk to you so please indulge me
      during that time.
          THE COURT:  Take a full 25.
          MR. KAISER:  25, the judge has been gracious
      to give me an extra minute.     I don't want to beat a dead horse.  I want
      you to rely on what Mr. Finger said in his
      closing arguments yesterday because he spent a
      great deal of time talking about the different
      issues, but I do want to comment on a couple
      things.
          Number one, class membership, because I
      really want to talk to you how inane the
      argument you just heard was about class
      membership.  And it's simple.
          The issue is:  Was Milton Williams addicted
      to the nicotine in cigarettes and did the
      addiction cause his death?  You've already been
      told by two doctors, Dr. Goodwin, Dr. Goldman,
      absolutely, absolutely.  His addiction caused
      his cancer and his death.
          Now, what the defense wants to do is they
      want to come up with this new and novel argument
      and basically say addiction is just a word, it
      doesn't mean anything, because anybody can quit.
      So now we're in Alice in Wonderland.  Addiction
      is just a word, anybody can be addicted but
      anybody can quit.  Under that argument there's
      no such thing as a class, because in that
      scenario it doesn't matter if anybody's addicted if they can quit.  Well, then there's no class.
      And that's simply inane.
          Because you're not going to see on the
      verdict form, by the way, if Milton Williams
      could have quit then his addiction did not cause
      his death.  You don't see it.  It's addiction.
      They concede it.  He's either addicted or he
      wasn't.  He didn't quit, he couldn't quit,
      that's not the issue on class.  That's an issue
      on fault.  That's an issue on fault.  And we'll
      get to that.
          But for class membership was he addicted,
      did it cause his death?  You've already been
      told absolutely and it's not an issue about
      whether or not he was able to quit because in
      that scenario there's no class.  There's no
      class.  So that argument is disposed of, that
      argument is disposed of.
          Interestingly, Mr. Burton was adamant that
      we just haven't proved our case.  And he told
      you for an hour we haven't proved our case, but
      he jumped to comparative fault.  He wanted to
      jump to comparative fault.  And interestingly,
      on his chart, on his chart it was comparative
      fault, but to whom?  All you saw was Mr. Williams.  Who was he comparing fault with?
      You don't see that.  And that's been the whole
      tenor of their argument.
          Let me give you an example.  When
      Mr. Williams spoke to you yesterday, he told
      you -- and of course this came out with
      Dr. Proctor's testimony first -- this King James
      counterblast in 1604.  Christopher Columbus,
      John Quincy Adams, that was public knowledge
      that everybody knew that smoking was bad.  And
      Reader's Digest before Milton Williams was
      alive, we have that.  And we have all these
      examples of this huge amount of public
      knowledge.  And, you know what, that would ring
      true if tobacco like RJ Reynolds didn't exist.
          See, they want you to believe they don't
      exist in the equation.  That's why neither of
      these defense counsel were able to comment on
      their contacts that Hill and Knowlton had with
      the media.  Why didn't you hear them talk to you
      about their contacts with radio and television
      and media executives and all those people that
      put their message out?  Why didn't you hear
      anything like that?  Why didn't you hear them
      comment about their side of the story and their white papers that they sent to hundreds of
      thousands of people, including Congressmen,
      scientists and doctors to respond to the
      information that was negative to their sales?
      You didn't hear them talk about that.  Why
      didn't you hear them talk about their
      newsletters for their denialist campaign talking
      about baldness causing cancer, virus causing
      cancer that they sent to hundreds of thousands
      of people over a period of years and years and
      years?  Why didn't you hear them comment about
      that?  Because they don't want you to believe
      that they existed.  It was all the other
      information.  Why couldn't you hear them comment
      with their historian in response to Dr. Proctor?
      No, Dr. Proctor is wrong when he says the
      information the tobacco companies put out
      created doubt.  Their denialist campaign was
      working.
          So when you consider the equation, as much
      as they would like you to believe that they
      didn't exist, they did.  Why didn't they hit the
      issues head-on and show you their documents,
      their documents, in 1963 where they said
      nicotine is addictive, we are in the business of selling it?  Why didn't they show it to you and
      explain what they meant by these inappropriate
      comments?
          Why didn't they put up the documents and
      explain what they meant in 1972 when they said,
      Our strategy was brilliantly conceived and
      executed?  Why didn't they talk about that?
      Because they didn't want you to believe they
      existed.  Why didn't they tell you in 1964 their
      memo they put out about we need to find a
      psychological crutch for people to continue to
      smoke and not quit?  Why didn't they do that?
      Because they didn't want you to know they
      existed during that time.  That's the problem.
      So these are nonissues.
          We have proven by a greater weight of the
      evidence in this case class membership and we've
      proven their liabilities so that we get those
      Engle findings, and you have to abide by those
      findings.  And I'm going to tell you what that
      means.  Right off the bat, number one, they're
      negligent.  How are they negligent?  Doesn't
      matter.  That fact has been proven.
          So in answer to the question, did their
      negligence cause Milton Williams' death, he smoked their product, you better believe it did,
      yes.
          Strict liability, we don't have to prove how
      their product was defective.  The product you
      were told was unreasonably dangerous, and they
      knew it.  How so?  Doesn't matter.  That's a
      fact that's been established by the Engle
      findings.  Milton Williams smoked their product
      as intended, got sick and died.  Answer, yes.
          Reliance doesn't apply to those two
      questions.  Reliance applies to concealment and
      the conspiracy to conceal, that's all.
          And remember how Mr. Finger discussed those.
      It was the climate that they created when they
      existed.  It was the climate that they created
      where smoking is glamourous, smoking is neat,
      smoking makes you independent, smoking is for
      kids.  That's the climate they created when
      Milton Williams started.
          And what you have to decide is is there
      evidence that you heard in this record where if
      Milton Williams had known that it was bad in the
      climate like today exists would he have smoked
      with his intelligence?  That's what you have to
      decide.  And that's only on concealment and conspiracy to conceal.  That's it.
          As far as this causation, there's no
      question the evidence that you've heard, it's
      not HPV, it's not poor dentition, it's not late
      to the doctor, it's smoking; it's the 4 million
      or so doses of carcinogens that Mr. Williams had
      in the smoke that was bathing his throat every
      time he was inhaling that dose of nicotine that
      was being sold to him.  That's what was causing
      his problem, not HPV where you heard Dr. Goodwin
      talk about it.
          And you know how they're no longer embracing
      Dr. Bennett.  Dr. Bennett was their expert who
      relied on all sorts of information and he spent
      countless hours pouring into these documents and
      he came up with the conclusion that there are
      risk factors that I found.  What does that show
      you?  Zip.  Nothing.
          All he could tell you is there are risk
      factors.
          HPV risk factor, the man had children with
      different women.  That's a risk factor?  Where
      are there instances of oral sex with multiple
      sex partners in this record that you can draw on
      and say there's the evidence and that's why he had HPV in his throat?  You don't hear that.
      What you do know is he smoked and he drank and
      the combination is not additive, it's not
      additive, it's much worse than being additive,
      it's not 1 plus 1 equals 2, it's synergistic, 1
      plus 1 equals 35.
          And remember the concurring cause
      instruction, doesn't matter one or the other,
      they both combined so that they were substantial
      causes with smoking.
          So let's move on to the germane issue here,
      damages.  That's the issue for you to decide in
      this case.  And in this case how do you assign
      the value of Ms. Williams' loss?  And the way
      that Mr. Finger told you how to do that was,
      basically this is how it is:  He gave you a
      figure, $40.  Mrs. Williams, and she certainly
      didn't want this, but she was given a job by RJ
      Reynolds, yes, RJ Reynolds that existed at all
      times.  And she was given a job to watch her
      husband die.  She didn't want that job.  She
      didn't apply for that job.  And this happened
      right during the time when they were middle age,
      55 years old, had a lot of life ahead of him.
      This job didn't take schooling.  This job didn't need a college degree, this job was full-time.
      There were no days off, and it was a 24-hour
      job.  And who in their right mind would have
      ever applied for such a job?  Certainly not
      Virginia Williams, but she got it.  That was the
      job she was dealt with.  And she had another job
      at the same time.  She was still a social
      worker.  So now she's got two full-time jobs.
      And her job when she got that job when her
      husband got sick was to watch him die and watch
      him wither away and watch him lose his dignity.
      And that's what she saw for seven months and she
      still suffers to this day and she will continue
      to suffer because she's lost his companionship
      and she suffered mental anguish.  And she loved
      that man.  And she told you she loved that man.
          We haven't walked away from the fact, you
      know, there were some bad times.  I can count on
      my one hand how many bad times there were and
      still have fingers left if there were bad times.
      But for 33 years there were a lot of good times,
      and don't let anyone fool you into believing
      that there were not.  And she loved that man.
      And she watched that man wither away.  And she
      took care of that man and within a week after he was diagnosed he had that operation with that
      hole in his throat and couldn't talk and they
      communicated by notes.  And a week after his
      diagnosis he had a PEG tube put in his stomach
      so he could be fed because he couldn't eat
      again, and she did that.  She made sure he had
      his nutrition until he died.  And on his
      deathbed she was helping change his diapers
      because he no longer could control his body
      functions.  And this woman didn't leave his
      side.  And this woman to this day has his ashes
      in an urn in her room in the house because she
      feels that she is with him even now.  So that's
      love and she loved the man.
          This case isn't about Milton Williams.  This
      case is about them.  It's about her.  It's about
      everybody together.  And it's about compensating
      this woman for her loss.  And that's why when
      you look at it, they paid Dr. Bennett $400 so
      they could deny responsibility in this case,
      $400 an hour for him to come in here and say,
      yeah, I found some risk factors.  Well, we're
      asking pay her 10 times less than that, $40 an
      hour for their responsibility for her loss.  And
      you know what, you might say, no, she deserves more than that.  But figure it out, $40 an hour
      for the time she suffered for her mental
      anguish, for her pain, for her loss of
      companionship, and that adds up to about 5.4
      million.  You know what, there's more, because
      this woman still has life to live.  And you
      might want to figure out how much more life she
      has to live and it's going to be even more than
      that.
          Now let's talk about fault, because we've
      got damages.  And the first thing about fault,
      and you've heard in this case is, number one, RJ
      Reynolds wanted Milton Williams to smoke their
      product.  They wanted Milton Williams to smoke
      their cigarettes.  We already heard the evidence
      about how they advertised their product on every
      media you can imagine.  The blast of cigarette
      ads was there.  On television, on radio,
      anywhere you could think of.  They basically
      pioneered mass marketing in the industry and got
      their message out.  They wanted Milton Williams
      to smoke their product and they wanted Milton
      Williams to smoke their product for a long, long
      time.  You know why?  The proof is in the
      pudding, they were advertising to kids.     Who else would want to see their favorite
      athlete on a TV commercial or on an ad?  Who
      else would want to see their favorite athlete or
      actor or actresses these famous people that kids
      could relate to in advertising?  Who was
      watching television during this time period?
      Mostly young kids.
          And you saw from the FTC report, you can see
      it again, "The advertising was so pervasive
      billions of people were exposed to ads.  You
      could not help but see ads."  They wanted
      Mr. Williams to smoke for a long time and they
      didn't want him to stop.
          When you go back in that jury room, look at
      the 1963 Battelle Hippo memo.  1963 they knew
      their product was addictive.  They knew nicotine
      was a poison.  Did they tell him?  No.
          Did they take the nicotine out of the
      cigarette so it couldn't sustain addiction?  No.
      They said nothing.
          They knew in the '50s cigarettes were bad.
      Did they tell him?  No.  They wanted him to
      smoke, they wanted him to be addicted.  And they
      were even messing around with ammonia to make
      the jolt even a little more.  Instead of maybe these people shouldn't smoke, maybe these people
      should smoke in moderation, maybe we shouldn't
      addict them.  And you know what happened?
      Milton Williams started smoking their brand,
      Pall Mall nonfilter, one of the most popular
      brands at the time.  Maybe he got the message
      from their advertising because that's what he
      started smoking.  Milton Williams started
      smoking when he was 14 years old.  Milton
      Williams when he was 14 did not go and read the
      scientific publications from which Claude Teague
      referred.  He did not go to his local library
      and take out those Roffo studies that were in
      Spanish and read them.  No, he didn't.  He did
      not take the German studies that were available
      to the public and read them in German.  No, he
      didn't.  When he was 14, he didn't do that.
      There might have been a scientific consensus,
      but not Milton Williams' consensus.  14-year-old
      kid, can't drive, can't vote, can't get the
      death penalty if they kill someone, you know
      why?  Because kids at 14 aren't expected to make
      wise choices, that's why.  And so Milton
      Williams at 14 didn't make a wise choice.  He
      made an ill-informed choice because the tobacco industry that existed wasn't telling him
      anything.
          And so Milton Williams did everything they
      asked of him.  He smoked at a young age.  He was
      addicted.  He continued to smoke their same
      brand for years and years until he died.  He was
      a loyal smoker.  And what they're saying now is,
      Milton, you screwed up.  You trusted us.  Why
      did you believe our despicable lies?  That's
      what they're asking now.  Put it all on Milton
      because he relied on us.  For being a loyal
      consumer, that's what he gets.
          When you consider the evidence, ladies and
      gentlemen, there's no question we proved this
      case by our burden.  And all we ask now is that
      you compensate Virginia Williams for the loss of
      her husband.
          Thank you.
