         MR. COFER:  May it please the Court, counsel,
    Mr. Willis, members of the jury, good morning.
         Almost three weeks ago, I stood in front of you
    and I gave you my opening statement.  And you may
    remember that I asked you that as you listened to the
    evidence of the case the last few weeks, could you
    please ask yourself:  What does any of this have to do
    with Jimmie Willis?  It is Mr. Willis' lawsuit, and
    he's the person who's asking you for money in this
    case.
         So as we walk through the evidence, ask yourself
    what did it have to do with Mr. Willis?  Did it affect
    him in any way?  Now, Mr. Uiterwyk predicted, because
    he saw it, that I told you I think this case really
    comes down to three questions, and I do, and I ask you
    to think about those questions.
         Why did Jimmie Willis smoke?  Why did he wait so
    long to quit?  And what, if anything, did Philip
    Morris or R.J. Reynolds have to do with Mr. Willis
    getting sick?
         I want to walk through that evidence and I want
    to talk about it.  And let's start with the first
    question:  Why did Jimmie Willis smoke?  Why did he
    smoke?  Did he like cigarettes?  Did they give him
    pleasure?  Did he?  Or did he really truly detest
    cigarettes and only smoke because he was just so
    helplessly addicted that he couldn't control himself.
    Was that the evidence?
         Did Mr. Willis understand that his smoking could
    cause him to get sick?  Did he understand that?  Or
    was he in the dark about the risks of smoking?  Did
    Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds fool him in some way?
    Did we keep him in the dark about the risks of
    smoking?  Was he waiting for a wake-up call from one
    of these two companies that never came?  Was that the
    evidence?
         Why did he wait so long to quit?  It is
    undisputed in 1993 after his surgery for laryngeal
    cancer, he never smoked another cigarette.  Well,
    that's not a surprise.  He had a stoma.  It would have
    been very difficult to smoke, and I'm sure every day
    when he looked in the mirror and he saw what his
    smoking caused, I'm sure he didn't want a cigarette.
    Of course he didn't.
         But you know what is important is Mr. Willis
    testified that after that surgery, he never desired a
    cigarette, he never craved nicotine, or had any
    withdrawal symptoms ever again.  And I don't mean he
    didn't just crave them those nine days he was in the
    hospital.  He testified that he never craved nicotine unhappy to come back tomorrow morning and be told at
    8:35 he's the alternate, go home.
         MR. COFER:  I think he's going to be kicking his
    heels, doing cartsprings down the hall, sliding down
    the banister, running out screaming, I'm free.
         MR. UITERWYK:  That's three times I agree with
    him.
         MR. COFER:  I'm stopping because obviously I'm
    not thinking clearly.
