MR. ISASI: May it please the Court.
Counsel, Ms. Zamboni.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Before I discuss the claims that Mrs. Zamboni has brought in this suit, I first need to thank you all. And I'm sure that I speak for everyone here when I do.
You were plucked, literally plucked, out of your lives and brought in here, knowing nothing about anyone, knowing nothing about the case, having no idea you'd be sitting in judgment as recently as a week ago over this case.
It's a sacrifice that you made. It's jury service. It's an important part of our country, and we really do
appreciate that you have embraced that.
Everyone else in this courtroom, even the judge, we're all volunteers. You were drafted.
So we thank you for your time and your attention to
the case.
In a moment, I'm going to take you through the Verdict Form. That's the paper that you're going to have in the jury room, that you're going to use to render your decision in this case.
But before I do, I want to start with three undisputed facts that tell you what you really need to know to decide the issues in this case. And I've put them up on the screen. Can everyone see on our screen there?
(Affirmative responses from jurors.)
MR. ISASI: Great. The first is that Mr. Hoover knew the risks of smoking by at least the 1960s. That's not me saying that. That's Dr. Burns. Dr. Burns came in, and he told you that Robert Hoover was likely aware of the risks of smoking by the late 1960s.
Number two, Dr. Burns admitted that if Robert Hoover had quit smoking at any time prior to 1976, it is medically more probable than not that he would not have developed his lung cancer. That's undisputed, and it came from their own expert, Dr. Burns.
If he had stopped at any time prior to 1976, he
would more -- medically, more likely than not have developed his lung cancer.
And the third thing is that the Court is going to instruct you -- and this will be binding on you in your deliberations, ladies and gentlemen -- that Mr. Hoover's own actions, his own decisions, his own choices were a contributing cause to his death.
I'm going to discuss what that means for the purposes of this case in a moment. But those three things, those three facts are incredibly important in your deliberations in this case.
So I promise you we're going to walk through the Verdict Form, because that's what you all will have to do, too, when you get back there. You'll sit down. You'll go question one, question two, question three.
So question one. This is the first question you're going to be asked.
We, the jury, find that the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that Mr. Hoover was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
The first question, and right off the bat I think it needs to be said, some people simply enjoy smoking.
That's been true. It's been true in the '30s and the '40s and the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and so on.
There are people who smoke, not because they're
addicted, but because they enjoy smoking.
Not because it's safe. As we've said, we're not going to debate whether or not smoking is safe in this case or not, but they make a choice.
And you heard Harry Reasoner at the very end of Dr. Kyriakoudes' testimony that broadcast from the '60s when the Surgeon General's Report came out. He said -- he said that ”in a country like ours, no one is going to tell an adult they cannot smoke.”
The choice is yours.
Now, how do you get to the question of addiction and whether or not Mr. Hoover was addicted?
Well, they only brought one witness in to do this for you, and that was Dr. Burns. He told you that he's got -- there's no standard set of criteria that he uses to diagnose addiction.
He goes through these -- these considerations of his and these lawsuits, and he does a lot of work in lawsuits. We'll talk about that in a second. But the point is there's no criteria. There's no standard set of diagnostic criteria that he uses to diagnose addiction.
Now, the plaintiff's lawyers may try to use part or all of this other definition that you've heard sort of floating around out there, that you may recall people talking about the NIDA definition. NIDA, the National Institute for
Drug Abuse.
Just to be clear, you may remember when they started asking questions about that. You know, we stood up and objected because it wasn't in Dr. Burns' Rule 26 Report. You heard that phrase over and over.
And that's the point. And he agreed. He agreed that he didn't use this NIDA definition in diagnosing Mr. Hoover.
And in any event, and I'm quite sure that we'll hear about this again when Ms. Zamboni's lawyers get to stand up and talk to you, but take a look at that when you get a moment. It's not what Dr. Burns relied on.
And the important thing here is that you're not going to be given a definition of "addiction." You're going to decide that question using your common sense and your life experience. But even if you look at some of this -- these other definitions, there's -- the requirements include a definition of addiction as a chronic relapsing brain disease. A brain disease. Where was the evidence of that in this case? And relapsing. "Relapsing" means someone who keeps coming back over and over and over. Where was the evidence of that in this case?
You heard about maybe a quit for 24 hours or something like that. There was -- that's not a relapse.
If someone decides to stop doing something for a
short period of time and they start back up again, is that relapse? That wasn't what Dr. Burns said from the stand.
That wasn't the standard he used when he testified on that point.
So Dr. Burns doesn't use this definition. And if he didn't use it and he was brought in here as the expert on addiction, the question you have to ask yourselves is why are the plaintiff's lawyers talking about it?
There's an important point. You heard a lot about Surgeon General's Reports. You probably actually -- you may have learned -- I know I did when I first started looking at this -- that how many Surgeon General's Reports there are. There are a bunch of them.
Here's one of them. And the 2000 Surgeon General's Report said that historically, the great majority of smokers, more than 90 percent who successfully quit smoking, did so on their own, that is, without the assistance of a formal cessation program. That tells you something.
And Dr. Burns said something about that as well.
He said that more than half of the individuals who have ever smoked have been able to quit smoking. More than half. That is, there are more people alive today who are former smokers than are current smokers.
Now, one of the things that we all, in using our common sense and even listening to Dr. Burns's testimony,
might consider on the question of addiction is this concept of withdrawal, right?
What was the evidence on that? The evidence was that whenever these unspecified attempts to quit were made, and you really only heard dates attached to two or three of them, and we’ll talk about those in a moment. But what you heard, the testimony you heard, was with these unspecified attempts that Mr. Hoover became irritable, he wasn’t himself, he was cranky. For how long? Did they answer that question for you? No.
How many times did he try? Did they answer that question? Did they even try to answer that question for you? No.
The little bit you heard on this was that Mr. Hoover, even when these attempts were being made to quit, was able to do all the normal things that he was doing in a day.
Now, this is the plaintiff’s burden. You've been sitting here for a week in a case that is supposed to be about whether or not in the first instance Mr. Hoover was addicted to smoking.
And there are a lot of unanswered questions even at the end of all this time. If they had the evidence, they would have brought it to you.
Now, the evidence they did bring was just in the form of Dr. Burns. So we have to talk about him for just a
second.
Dr. Burns, the $3.5 million man. This is a man who makes almost $5,000 a day testifying and who, just for the couple days he was in front of you, made $14,600.
Last year he made $400,000. And this is all just testifying on behalf of plaintiffs in tobacco cases.
Now, I had to bring this back up to you guys one more time, even though it's -- I don't want anyone to strain their eyes too much in looking at it. But this is the chart that shows just in the last three years what Dr. Burns has been doing in terms of testifying in cases for plaintiffs' lawyers.
Remember, he said that he reviews the cases. Every time he testifies, he testifies a smoker was addicted.
He also was asked the question, "Do you ever turn down any cases?"
"One or two a year. Out of all these cases, maybe one or two a year," he says. If he doesn't find that the smoker was addicted, so he doesn't testify.
You get to decide. No one else. You get to decide whether or not Mr. Hoover smoked because of choices that he made or because of an addiction that he had.
You decide that based on the evidence that was presented to you, and it was their burden to bring that evidence to you.
So we suggest that based on the evidence that you've seen in all the days you've been here, that when you get to this question, that the check mark should go in the "no" box.
If you do that, the case will be over.
But I'm going to go through a few more of the questions with you all because it'll be your call, and you may decide that you'd like to examine the other questions as well.
So question two on your Verdict Form is going to be: We, the jury, find that the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely that Mr. Hoover's addiction -- more likely than not that Mr. Hoover's addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Hoover's lung cancer. Yes, no. Your decision.
That's important, remember, because even if you conclude he was addicted, the analysis doesn't end there.
That alone doesn't mean that Mr. Hoover recovers, because he has -- it has to be that they prove to you by a preponderance of the evidence that it was his addiction that caused his lung cancer, not something else.
We talked about this in opening. You may remember this slide. There's two elements to this. It's not just that Mr. Hoover was addicted, but that it was his addiction that was the legal cause of Mr. Hoover's lung cancer.
You know, I'm going to show you the language, what
that means. We talked about that at the very beginning of the case, sort of legal cause, and I'm going to show you the language in a second. But I first want to show you this graphic, which I think explains it perhaps better than the language does.
What it means is that you all have to conclude that they proved to you by a preponderance of the evidence that not only was Mr. Hoover addicted, but that addiction was the direct cause, the continuous cause and a substantial cause of his lung cancer. And that something else wasn't there in between his addiction and his disease. That instead, it was a straight line: Addiction leading to lung cancer.
Here's what the jury instruction will tell you, is that Mr. Hoover's addiction is a legal cause of lung cancer if it, in the direct and natural and continuous sequence, produced or contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer or death.
So was Mr. Hoover's addiction the legal cause of his lung cancer?
Here's the evidence that you heard. First of all, number one, the judge is going to instruct you that Mr. Hoover's own conduct was a contributing legal cause of his lung cancer.
So you know right off the bat that Mr. Hoover is in there somewhere. Somewhere in here between addiction and
lung cancer is Mr. Hoover.
The judge is going to give you that instruction.
What else do we know? We know that based on the testimony you heard, Mr. Hoover didn't make a serious attempt to quit smoking until 1988. You heard the testimony from the witnesses. Your recollection will govern here. But the question was put to all of the witnesses that came in.
Mrs. Zamboni testified that she thought the first attempt to quit maybe was the early '80s, although she said she wasn't sure that at he really tried to quit. We'll go over that in a little bit.
Of course, Mrs. Zamboni would be the person who would know best. She knew him from 1966 on. They were -they moved in together in 1969, married in '71, and they lived together until 1992.
Is there anyone on the planet who would know better than Mr. Hoover's wife whether or not, A, he was making an attempt to quit and, B, if it was a serious attempt to quit?
I know that David Hoover took the stand, and he said something that he remembered some things in his childhood about that, when he was small. But, remember, you heard the stories. Mrs. Zamboni at times was trying to get Mr. Hoover to stop smoking.
If he was making an attempt, why would he keep it a secret from his wife? Of course he would say that he was
trying to quit. And that would be a significant thing.
That's not something that a young boy of eight or nine or something like that is going to remember. And the woman who he's married to, who has been on him about his smoking, she's going to forget?
Mrs. Hoover told you -- I'm sorry. Mrs. Zamboni told you that the first attempt was the early '80's and maybe not even then.
Now, we know if he had quit smoking any time prior to '76, then medically, more probably than not, he would not have developed his lung cancer.
Now, this is just a really important point that Dr. Burns explained. It was his choice prior to that time to continue to smoke. That choice is what led to his lung cancer.
If he had made a different choice, if he had any time prior to '76 decided, "Hey, my wife is saying I should stop taking smoke into my lungs. The messages, the pack warnings which have been on there for years now, I'm going to try. I'm going to stop."
If he had made that choice, you heard from Dr. Burns, he would not, more likely than not, he wouldn't have developed his lung cancer. It's the choice. In Mr. Hoover, that leads to lung cancer.
"Addiction" is an easy term for people to throw
around, but when you start looking at it -- and you guys have now learned a lot more about all of this than you probably ever thought you would. It's not -- it doesn't survive sort of a first pass, that you can just -- all sweep this under the rug of addiction.
Addiction isn't the reason why some people start to smoke, why some people stop to smoke. It doesn't explain why some people try to quit and try hard and others try barely or not at all. It doesn't explain why millions and millions of people have quit smoking.
Now, if you want to distill this entire question down to one question and answer exchange with Dr. Burns, it's this: Dr. Burns told you that addiction doesn't prevent people from quitting smoking. And remember, it's the smoking that caused the exposure within Mr. Hoover's lungs, that caused his lung cancer. So it's why was Mr. Hoover smoking?
Dr. Burns told you. He said, Look, when you quit smoking, the day before you quit, the day you choose to quit and the day after you quit, you're addicted.
What's the difference, then? What is the difference when someone is addicted, according to Dr. Burns, but they stop smoking? It's their choice. They made an effort. They made a decision, and they took action that overcame their addiction. They made the choice. And that choice, again, is what leads to someone not developing lung
cancer.
Dr. Burns told you that people, even addicted smokers, are responsible for their own actions. And in this case, addiction didn't stop Mr. Hoover -- even if you conclude he was addicted, it didn't stop him from trying to quit, and it didn't stop him from successfully quitting.
We know that because at the end of the day, he did quit. Mr. Hoover quit cigarette smoking.
So the question was his choice of when to start trying, when to get -- when to make a serious effort to quit smoking.
So addiction doesn't prevent smokers from making the choice to quit.
Now, the best evidence we have of that in the case of Mr. Hoover -- because, remember, that's who this case is about, right, is Mr. Hoover and not millions of other smokers -- is what happened to Mr. Hoover in 1988? You'll recall he went in in early '88 for a couple of surgeries.
The first surgery, he didn't smoke for four to six weeks afterwards. And the second surgery, it was about four weeks. But that was the testimony, and no one disputed that.
Now, you heard from Dr. Burns. Here's what happens. When you stop smoking, the nicotine goes -- leaves your body. It takes about two to three days for the nicotine to leave your body. But then there are those nicotine
receptors that he talked about in your brain that have been activated by all the smoking you've done. They need time to go back to normal, and that's the withdrawal. That's the -what smokers feel when they stop smoking and they deprive themselves of nicotine.
You heard from Dr. Burns that after about a month or so, the brain of a smoker who has stopped smoking for about a month resembles the brain of someone who has never smoked.
So the brain is normal again. The withdrawal symptoms have subsided. And that's where Mr. Hoover was not once in 1988, but twice. Twice.
So now he stands at a moment where he can make a choice. It's not nicotine that is causing him to smoke. Why do we know that? We know it because he didn't have nicotine in his body anymore.
It wasn't the nicotinic receptors in his brain.
Why? Because his brain had returned to normal.
It was a choice, a choice that Mr. Hoover made.
And that's what caused him to smoke, not addiction.
It was his choice and not addiction which led him to continue to smoke and which led to him developing lung cancer.
Now, I think it's important to note that there has been some back and forth -- and you are going to hear a
little bit more about it today, I'm sure -- that there are some disputes about what actually happened to Mr. Hoover's smoking after 1988.
Medical records, we're going to talk about those. They all say no smoking after '88, but you heard some testimony to the contrary.
But to be clear, nobody, nobody took the stand and testified to you that Mr. Hoover's smoking returned to the same level it was before '88. You heard -- David Hoover said that after his '88 surgery, his father maybe bummed a few cigarettes off of him.
Mrs. Zamboni didn't say that he was smoking the exact same after his '88 surgery as he was before. So something clearly happened. He exercised control. He exercised a choice.
The point is that that was a choice that was available to him all along, and we know he could have done it because he did it.
Even under the plaintiff's view of the world,
Mrs. Zamboni -- we played her deposition testimony for you -we'll get to see that in a moment -- where she said that Mr. Hoover quit smoking and that she never saw him smoke after -- in 1992, never saw him purchase cigarettes, never saw him carry cigarettes.
So we know he quit. If he quit, he was capable of
making that choice. And if he made the choice to stop smoking and he made that choice before 1976, more likely than not, he wouldn't have developed lung cancer.
He's not alone. He's one of the 55 million who quit, certainly. More than that have quit over time. But 55 million people today have quit.
And why do we know -- you know, Mr. Hoover was no different from these 55 million. Smoking the same types of cigarettes. They all had brains, right? They all had receptors in those brains that all got activated by nicotine.
They all experienced the effects of nicotine, all these 55 million people who have successfully quit smoking. They saw all this advertising. And we will talk about advertising in a few minutes here. But the one thing that no one can say is that Mr. Hoover was somehow individually targeted for advertising.
There was no -- there was no evidence that there were any promotional materials ever sent to him, that he received things in the mail, that he was on a mailing list or anything.
Mr. Hoover was in the same environment of cigarette advertising and things like that as the 55 million people who successfully quit. Just like them, that advertising somehow didn't interfere with them exercising the choice to quit.
And remember what Dr. Burns said when I asked him
this question: Those 55 million who quit, most of those people would, under this definition that you've brought into the courtroom, would be considered addicted?
And what did he say? Yes.
So the evidence is clear. Even addicted smokers can make the choice to stop smoking.
Dr. Burns even agreed. He says it's up to the smoker to make a choice. No one can make that choice for them but the smoker.
He's not alone. The Surgeon General says the same thing in the '86 Surgeon General's Report, that cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue the behavior. That's the choice.
Here, the Surgeon General says the choice to light up is always yours. Ultimately, you are the one who has control over your behavior. The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth.
And as I said before, Dr. Burns agrees that smokers, including addicted smokers, are responsible for their smoking behavior.
The evidence was that before his '88 surgeries,
Mr. Hoover never made a serious attempt to quit.
You heard what Mrs. Zamboni said. There was an attempt in the early '80s. It lasted maybe a little bit
of -- bless you -- maybe a day or so. And that was the first attempt.
Now -- and then cast your memory back to everything else you heard about quits and things like that. Did you hear anything else about how long they lasted, what was being done? Over all that time, with all of the time that you all have put in, did you hear anything like that?
The fact is that if I told you that I was going to make a serious attempt to get into shape, and you said, Well, that's great. And I said, Yeah. So ten years ago, I exercised for a day. Before that, I hadn't, and, you know, maybe a little bit over the course of a decade.
You wouldn't think that I had made a serious attempt to get into shape.
The serious attempts came as a result of the surgeries that Mr. Hoover had in the late 1980s. And when he -- when he got there, nothing was different, all right?
No one came and testified that there was something that Mr. Hoover learned in 1988 that somehow changed his motivation, you know, about the risks of smoking or anything like that.
The nicotine was still there. The cigarettes were still there.
He made the choice, and that's what changed it.
Now, I told you we were going to talk about this --
the instruction that you're going to get from the Judge that Mr. Hoover, himself, is a legal cause of his death.
This is what the plaintiffs have brought you. They claim, right, that Mr. Hoover smoked because he was addicted and that he was unaware of the risks of smoking, and it was the fact that he was unaware of these risks that led him to smoke and caused his disease.
When the Judge tells you that Mr. Hoover is responsible for, was a legal cause of his own lung cancer and his death, what that means is two things. First of all, it means that Mr. Hoover had to be able to quit, right? Because if he couldn't have quit, then he's not responsible. If there was nothing that he could have done, then he's not responsible.
So we've already told you -- you already know that he could have quit because he is responsible. That's number one.
Number two -- and remember, if he had quit earlier, he wouldn't have gotten his disease.
The second thing it means is that he is at least partially responsible for not attempting to quit, that is, for not knowing, not acting on the knowledge that smoking was dangerous.
He is himself a legal cause of his disease. That's what that means.
Now, just to remind you, this isn't lawyer -- this isn't lawyer talk. I'm saying that, had Mr. Hoover quit by '75, more likely than not, he wouldn't have gotten his disease. That's what Dr. Burns told you.
And it's not just 1975. There were moments along the way where Mr. Hoover could have made a different choice.
In 1964, the Surgeon General's Report comes out.
You saw national news everywhere. And you heard -- you heard the summary from Harry Reasoner. It's clear now. Smoking -no one is going to tell you that it's safe to smoke.
He laid out the results of all the different things that the Surgeon General concluded were caused by smoking.
In '66, the warnings go on the pack. The warnings say that cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
In 1970, the same thing. Now you have a warning that says that cigarette smoking is harmful to your health.
Every way along that line, Mr. Hoover could have made a choice, all the way up to 1975.
And let's be clear about this. The choice. I'm not sure what to conclude about this question of when Mr. Hoover actually started to smoke. There is -- the testimony all over the place.
Mr. Hoover, in his own hand, says it's between 17 and 20. The only person who claims otherwise is Mrs. Zamboni. But it's not as if the choice to smoke is made
at a moment in time and you are locked in down the road. That's a choice that Mr. Hoover made has an adult. And he made the choice as information kept coming in to him. As an adult, he made the decision as a 30-year-old, as a 40-year-old, as a 50-year-old, even though the Surgeon General's Reports are coming out, even though the coverage is out there -- and you heard that the coverage was excellent on these things -- he's still making choices.
It's not like when he's 17 years old, he makes the decision and he lives with it forever. That doesn't make any sense.
And one of the things you get to do is you get to use your common sense in these cases. You're probably happy to hear that. You don't check that at the courtroom door.
You bring your life experience and your common sense with you into the deliberation room.
Let me take a moment and talk about -- since we're talking about witnesses here, sometimes lawyers will make a deal about the fact that we, that is, the defense, didn't call a bunch of witnesses for you.
That's a distraction in this case for a couple of reasons. One is it's the plaintiff's burden. They had to -we didn't have to bring any witnesses to you. We didn't have to present a case. They were the ones who had to, by a preponderance of the evidence, prove to you that Mr. Hoover
was addicted and his addiction was the legal cause of his injury.
But there's another reason why in this particular case we didn't need to, because their witnesses really were our witnesses. I mean, we've already quoted to you some of the things that Dr. Burns said. I mean, I could have, I guess, called a witness to tell you that Mr. Hoover could have quit smoking, but I didn't need to because Dr. Burns said it for you.
He said that, you know, no one but the smoker can make that decision.
Mrs. Zamboni -- I could have called a witness to say, Well, you know, what do you think? Did Mr. Hoover quit for good or not? I didn't need to. We played you the deposition testimony from Mrs. Zamboni, where she said he did quit for good.
I could have called a witness who said if he had quit before '76, more likely than not, he wouldn't have developed his cancer. I didn't need to. Their witnesses said that.
And the facts were our witnesses, frankly. I mean, the facts don't need to get paid $4,800 a day, make $400,000 a year testifying in these cases. The facts lay out our defense for you.
So the facts are Robert Hoover. They speak for
themselves.
Now, talking about witnesses again -- this is an important point, and we will -- we'll revisit this in a moment. But did Mr. Hoover try? Did he make a serious attempt to quit? And the answer you got changed. We asked the question of Mrs. Zamboni. The very first quit attempt, happening in the 1980s, Do you know whether he was actually trying to quit smoking? And her answer was, No, I can't actually say that I'm positive he did try. That's what she said under oath in her deposition, her deposition, by the way, in August of last year, not, you know, years and years ago or anything like that. In the course of this case.
At trial, when she comes in here and she's going to present a claim asking for money damages from you all, I asked her the question, But you're not positive he tried to quit in the early 1980s, are you, ma'am? Her response, I'm pretty darned sure. I'm pretty darned sure.
Well, you'll get to decide which answer you'll credit. And we'll talk about some of the instructions that the Judge is going to give you about what you do with conflicting testimony and the credibility of witnesses.
But I'd submit to you that the evidence, when taken in total, shows that standing between addiction and Mr. Hoover's lung cancer was Mr. Hoover's choices. It was his choice to begin and to continue smoking, choices only he
could make, to ignore warnings he was receiving. He needed to make the choice to stop smoking, which he did, ultimately.
So when you get to this question on the Verdict Form, it's going to ask whether or not you believe that the plaintiff has proved by a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Hoover's addiction was the legal cause, we submit that the answer is "no."
Now, again, if you check "no" to either of the first two questions, the case is over. You'll see on the Verdict Form, it'll say, "If you check no, stop. Sign the Verdict Form." You come out here, report to us and you go home.
But I have to continue on down the Verdict Form a little bit longer, because you may choose to go there yourselves, and that's your choice.
So I'm going to move to question four, and this has to do with the question of what percentage of responsibility for Mr. Hoover's lung cancer and death do you allocate to the parties, all right?
So there are going to be three lines on there.
Now, the important thing to remember right off the bat is that we already know if you get to this question, that you will be putting in a number for Mr. Hoover. The Judge will instruct you that Mr. Hoover's actions were a legal cause of his own death, and so you must assign responsibility to the
plaintiff and that you can go 100 percent. You can decide that Mr. Hoover's actions are the 100 percent reason for him developing lung cancer.
Now, what are some of the things that go into that equation? How do you get to 100 percent?
Well, look at what Mr. Hoover knew and look at Mr. Hoover's decisions and decide for yourselves whether or not he was responsible for not quitting sooner.
Now, remember, we asked this question of Dr. Burns, and he said that Mr. Hoover was likely aware of the risks of smoking by the late 1960s.
So right off the bat, when it goes to the knowledge part of this equation, by the late 1960s, he knew. We're going to present evidence here that's going to suggest that it was earlier than that, but even their own expert said by late 1960s, hey, people knew about the risks of smoking.
But it wasn't just the generalized messages that Mr. Hoover was getting that matter here. You have to think about Mr. Hoover, because that's what this case is about.
This case is about Mr. Hoover first and foremost, and he had other sources of information.
Beginning in 1966, he came into the life of Mrs. Zamboni, and she was a nurse. She had been trained for a year before they met.
You know that -- you heard the testimony. She
studied the functions of the lung. She took care of people with smoking-related illnesses. She treated people with respiratory illnesses.
She's a built-in medical professional, living in the same house with him, waking up to him, talking to him, obviously interested in his health.
And she told him that he shouldn't smoke.
She said that he had shortness of breath, told him to quit smoking, that it wouldn't help.
What was his response? What was his response?
You heard it. No dispute about this in the record, ladies and gentlemen. He'd clam up. He didn't want to hear it. He'd walk away and he would ignore her.
Now, I want to be clear about this. I'm not criticizing Mr. Hoover. None of this should be intended, and I mean absolutely no disrespect. These were the choices that Mr. Hoover was entitled to make.
But they are his choices. And the fact that Mrs. Zamboni -- and we all might wish that he had made different choices in hindsight -- doesn't change the fact that they were his choices to make and that only he could make those choices.
And that's why he bears responsibility, because of the choices he made. We're not criticizing. We're simply pointing it out.
There were other things that he knew. Remember, his own father was a smoker and died of a heart attack. Mrs. Zamboni's own father smoked and died of lung cancer. These were people who were familiar with smoking.
And Mr. Hoover wasn't living in a cave. He wasn't off in some cabin in the woods somewhere. He kept up on current events. He read books, he read newspapers, he read magazines, and he watched the national and local news. And you've seen some of the coverage that stories of smoking and health received there.
The best evidence that Mr. Hoover understood the risks was that in the face of all of this, in the face of Mrs. Zamboni telling him that he needed to stop smoking, that this wasn't good for him, was what he didn't say. There was no one who came in here to testify ever said that in response to these messages, "You need to stop smoking, it's not good for you," did he say, "That's not true. I heard something else, that someone told me that maybe it isn't bad for me."
He never said -- and we asked these questions. Did your father -- we asked this of David Hoover and Mrs.
Zamboni. "Did your father ever say that he thought smoking was safe?"
He never said that. He never said that he thought smoking was good for him. He never said he was confused.
"I'm not sure whether smoking is good for bad for me." He
never said any of those things.
And, again, he could make that choice and not attempt to quit smoking, but all that means is that he's responsible for that and responsible for the fact that up until 1988, he didn't make a serious attempt.
Now, I don't know what you're going to hear from the other side on this point, whether or not they're going to say, ”Oh, yes, absolutely. There's definitely evidence he made serious attempts to quit before 1988.”
If it happens, I'll be as surprised as anybody.
But the person who knew him best, the person who knew him best testified under oath that she didn't recall that Mr. Zamboni (sic) tried to quit smoking any earlier than the 1980s. This is what she said.
No. It's not playing.
(Video played in open court as follows.)
Q Let me ask you this. The first time that you recall him trying to quit smoking, do you know what decade it was? Was it the 1970s or the 1980s?
A I don't think it was that early. It was probably the '80s, early '80s.
(Video ceased playing.)
MR. ISASI: And remember what Mrs. Zamboni told you about that first quit attempt. She said the first time Mr. Hoover quit, he only quit for about 24 hours. 24 hours.
What else did she tell you? That there were times when Mr. Hoover would say he was going to quit. He would say, "Okay, I'll do it tomorrow. I'll do it next week," or something, and the day would arrive, and he wouldn't do it, because he didn't want to.
Here are the things you'll see. Mr. Hoover never did -- these are the long list of things that you sometimes will hear and we ask the witnesses about that people will do when they're trying to quit smoking. He didn't throw away his ashtrays. He didn't throw away lighters or matches.
He didn't -- there's actually only even testimony of one time when he threw away his cigarettes. Do you remember he was on a boat, and they saw the pack of cigarettes go overboard or something like that? That was the testimony.
Most important, he didn't ask for his family, his friends or his doctors to help him. He didn't try to get the support.
And I submit to you, it's because he didn't want to quit, and that was his choice.
Now, we know that prior to the late 1980s, there were times when Mr. Hoover had to stop smoking, just because he was in a hospital and he was having surgeries done, and they wouldn't let him smoke in the hospital. But you didn't hear any testimony about difficulties he had with that.
Mrs. Zamboni was there the whole time. She was there for these surgeries. She testified about it. Did you hear her say, "And you should have seen the wreck he was after that"? This was sort of a forced attempt, and Mr. Hoover showed he could refrain. He could control his smoking.
He also -- the evidence was that there was never anywhere that he said that he wouldn't go, he couldn't go because he wouldn't be allowed to smoke there.
He wouldn't avoid places because he couldn't smoke
there.
And that's what leads to those final quit attempts in 1988, two different surgeries. The evidence is -- and this is undisputed, folks. You didn't hear any contrary evidence. In '88, these two surgeries happened, and for four to -- four to six weeks, Mr. Hoover didn't smoke.
And he didn't need help. He did it. There's no evidence of anything other than he just didn't smoke.
Now, the evidence is, as I said, clearly after '88 something changed, and his smoking wasn't the same.
He may have effectively quit by 1988, other than bumming a few cigarettes.
David, David Hoover, his son, said that maybe he saw, you know, his father bum a cigarette, but he never saw him smoke as many as five after the surgery. He never saw
him smoke a pack.
And, in fact, we asked him the question flat out. "The only smoking you're aware of after the 1980 surgery was your experience you told the jury yesterday about, bumming a cigarette here or there?
"That's correct."
That's the evidence. That is the evidence, the only evidence of the amount of smoking he did after '88.
Mrs. Zamboni didn't tell you anything about that in her testimony.
And I think it's worth reminding you all that this isn't just witnesses using their recollection. We've got actual medical records that discuss this.
In July of 1988, we have a medical record for Robert Hoover that says that he was a 50-pack year smoking history prior to January of 1998 -- or 1988.
This is before lawsuits, before anyone had a reason to come in and worry about whether or not, you know, the date on a quit or something like that and all the things you've had to deal with. This was a time when he was seeking medical attention, and it was important for him to give accurate information. And no one, no one who was there has testified that Mr. Hoover was embarrassed about his smoking. So don't let them pull the wool over your eyes on this one. You cannot make up facts. Facts are stubborn things. These
are facts, these medical records.
Again in 1988, quit smoking a half year ago -- July of 1988, 50-pack year, quit half year ago.
August of '88, in his own hand, Mr. Hoover writes that he no longer smokes.
How long? 50 years. And as we said, you do the math there. Since he was born in 1918, that means that he's reporting that he smoked -- he started smoking around age 20 here.
Two years later, all right, if -- this is the longest embarrassment about smoking you'll ever see. For two-and-a-half years later he's still apparently covering up the fact that he's smoking. Even though his son says, other than maybe bumming a cigarette here or there, he's never seen him smoking, after his '88 surgeries. But they'd have you believe that even two year- -- two-and-a-half years later in his own hand he's writing that he no longer smokes. Not true, that he never quit smoking.
One of the last medical records we have reports that Mr. Hoover had quit smoking.
You'll have these records in evidence, and take a look at them. This is the record I spent some time with Dr. Burns on, the one where in the paragraph above it, it says the wife reports such and such. And then even in this paragraph, it says, "According to his wife, he had no alcohol
in the past ten years."
But then Dr. Burns -- because that's not a good fact, apparently for them, that he had stopped smoking since '88, Dr. Burns says, "Well, you know sometimes these things get carried over from -- you know, from some other medical record."
Where's the evidence of that? You don't get to just speculate like that and pretend that's a fact, particularly when you can look at a record yourself. I mean, that's the point here. Look at these records, because this isn't what -- you don't need a doctor to explain what a check mark in a box here that says, "Do you smoke?" What does that mean?
You all are absolutely capable of reviewing these medical records and making these decisions for yourself.
What does that mean? What does it mean when he writes that he hasn't smoked since '88?
Does this really look to you like something that came from some mystery hospital years ago that is an error in transcription?
We had some tough testimony in this case, testimony about alcohol, testimony about marital discord, difficulties in relationships. And it brought me absolutely no joy to have to present that evidence to you all.
You heard the judge at the end of Mrs. Zamboni's
testimony tell you that the evidence was so that the whole truth would be known.
We are, in fact -- we had to bring that to you. I told you when I stood up in front of you at the very beginning that you were going to get half the story unless we stood up and we would tell you the whole story. And one of the reasons why Mr. Hoover's alcohol intake is important in this case is because you heard from -- you heard from Dr. Burns that if you are a heavy drinker, it's going to interfere with your ability to quit smoking.
I am not casting any judgments about Mr. Hoover. It's just -- it's a fact, and that's all it is. It's a fact that his difficulty quitting smoking, if he had any, would have been related to another choice he made, which was drinking. I didn't make that up. Dr. Burns told you that.
If someone is trying to quit while they are actually drinking heavily, they will be less likely to be successful.
That's another choice he made, a choice that he is responsible for, no one else.
Now, did Mr. Hoover quit smoking for good? Apparently that is in dispute in this case. I don't know why.
The question was: "Do you know whether Mr. Hoover was ever able to quit smoking for good?
"ANSWER: Yes.
"He did?
"Yes."
(Video played in open court as follows.)
Q Do you know whether he was ever able to quit smoking for good?
A Yes.
Q He did?
A Yes.
(Video ceased playing.)
MR. ISASI: That was the testimony of Mrs. Zamboni in August of last year, now, again, before she came in front of you all.
And her lawyers are going to ask for a lot of
money.
We're going to see some other instances of the changing story of Mrs. Zamboni. But one of the things that's important is you get to make an assessment of a witness' credibility. You get to decide whether or not a witness is being forthright to you.
And you will read in the jury instructions there's a concept that if you determine that someone is being false in something material, something important, false in one thing, you can conclude that they're being false in other things, and you can make the decision of whether or not to
credit the testimony of someone.
We will come back to this point in a couple of moments. But the claim that she made in front of you that he never quit smoking is contradicted by other things she said even in front of you. I mean, the stories just weren't straight.
She said that -- in addition to saying that she never saw him smoke after his 1992 surgery, these were answers I got on the stand, that she agreed that he never bought cigarettes after the 1992 surgery, that he never carried cigarettes after the 1992 surgery, and that when they were living up in North Carolina, which is where they went after he was treated for lung cancer, that she never even heard of him bumming cigarettes off of anyone while they were up there.
Remember, they're living in a trailer on the property that they have that they were building that house on. So it's not like he can go to some other room in the house or something like that and hide this from her.
And David Hoover, who came in to try to help his mother out in this case, he can't help out on this because everyone agrees that he didn't visit his parents after they moved up to North Carolina until the very, very last couple days of Mr. Hoover's life.
So you can't point to his testimony and say, "Oh,
there's evidence that he was still smoking in 1992."
David Hoover agreed that he didn't have any real knowledge about Mr. Hoover's -- Mr. Robert Hoover's smoking after the 1992 surgery, and that Mrs. Zamboni never told him that Mr. Hoover, Mr. Robert Hoover, had bummed cigarettes off of anyone after that.
I'll remind you what Dr. Burns himself said, "Smokers are responsible for their own behavior."
You know who would agree with that, by the way?
Mr. Hoover. Mr. Hoover would have agreed with that. He's a man who made his own decisions and stuck with them. He taught his son to take responsibility for his own actions, and he didn't blame others for the things that he did.
There's no more eloquent statement of that than in Mr. Hoover's own handwriting, his diary entry, the diary entry in 1999 when he's talking about that he's having trouble walking, and he said, "Now, I must pay for smoking."
You know what you won't find in that diary? You won't find any statement, "I was fooled. I was misled. I feel like I was duped," or anything.
Mr. Hoover understood taking responsibility. He understood choices.
We asked David Hoover about his father, and we asked him, "Do you -- and you do not think there is anything that anyone could have said or done to make your father quit
smoking, do you?"
And he said, "No, I do not."
Remember that when we get to the question of reliance and the information that was out there. Was there something that someone -- that was being said or not said that would have changed Robert Hoover's conduct?
David Hoover said, "I believe we all make choices and, yes, my father made his choices."
Now, back to the question of whether or not Mr. Hoover had quit smoking. Here's the -- here's the testimony. We played it for you. "Do you know whether he was ever able to quit smoking for good?"
At deposition, "Yes."
At trial: "No, no."
At deposition: "Yes."
(Video playing in open court as follows.)
Q Do you know whether he was ever able to quit smoking for good?
A Yes.
Q He did?
A Yes.
(Video ceased playing.)
MR. ISASI: Now, maybe we're going to hear about stress again. Maybe we're going to hear about, you know, that there's been more research done on the case or something
like that.
This isn't a subtle point, ladies and gentlemen.
And it couldn't be more contradictory. There's no way to reconcile those two answers.
In front of you, she said -- she said, "No, no. He was not able to stop smoking."
Before she walked in this courtroom to ask you all for money, when we took her deposition, she said, "Yes."
This isn't a slip of the tongue, Oh, I remembered something. That is -- that is up, down. That is left, right. That is a complete contradiction.
And think about -- one of the things you get to do -- and you'll hear this in jury instructions. One of the things you get to do is you get to assess the credibility of the witnesses through their demeanor, through the way that they answered questions.
Do you remember when Mr. Pendell was taking her through her direct examination? She could remember every -every detail, every nuance. The things that he wanted her to testify about, she had them down cold. And she gave them, and that was that.
When I started asking her questions, suddenly she wouldn't agree with some straightforward things, like, Did you ever observe Mr. Hoover lighting one cigarette off another?
Well, in her deposition, she said, No.
At her trial: Yes.
We had to read that to you.
What did your father die of?
In her deposition, she gave a straight answer:
Lung cancer.
At trial, I had to -- I had to work with her a little bit just to get her to admit that it was lung cancer. And in the end, she wouldn't agree. No, I don't assume anything.
Her answer -- she didn't have any problem with the question at her deposition.
Now, just a simple question about her own smoking. You understood your parents didn't approve, right, of you starting smoking when you were young?
At her deposition: It was not approved of by my
parents.
I asked her here: That's because you knew your parents wouldn't approve of smoking?
I'm not sure whether they would have approved or
not.
Was your husband the kind of man who was easily swayed by advertising?
Do you remember that?
Her answer at deposition: No.
At trial: I don't know.
And then: Did you ever consider filing divorce from your husband?
It was a thought, yes, at her deposition. Her answer was 180 degrees different here.
Did you ever consider filing for divorce from your husband? Same question word for word.
ANSWER: I never really thought about it.
So when you are thinking about assigning responsibility, you have testimony that's uncontradicted.
You have Mr. Hoover's own words in his diary. You've got medical records. And the only things that contradict that, and only a little bit, frankly, are the testimony of Mrs. Zamboni, who's going to be asking you all for money, who has an interest in this.
If you consider that and you decide that you should not credit that testimony, then the only evidence that will be left is evidence that shows that Mr. Hoover was 100 percent responsible, 100 percent responsible, for his own injuries.
Now we get to the final significant topic, the one I'll spend the most of the remaining time on. And that is the fifth question on your Verdict Form, which was whether or not Mr. Hoover's lung cancer and death was caused by something the defendants said or didn't say. And this is how
it appears on your Verdict Form: We, the jury -- I'm sorry.
I thought I may have heard something. We, the jury, find that the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that the following defendant or defendants is or are liable for fraudulent concealment that was a legal cause of Mr. Hoover's lung cancer and death.
So what is fraudulent concealment? You're going to get a jury instruction on this, all right? It has two requirements: One, that Mr. Hoover reasonably relied to his detriment on the defendants' concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking and that that reliance was the legal cause -- there's that word again, or phrase -- legal cause of Mr. Hoover's lung cancer and death.
So the translation for that is you can't harm someone by concealing information if they already knew it.
If they know something, then the fact that someone was hiding it doesn't harm them.
Put it another way: Did Mr. Hoover develop lung cancer and die because he didn't know smoking was dangerous, because of something that was hidden from him by a tobacco company?
Did Mr. Hoover develop lung cancer and die because he didn't know smoking was dangerous?
Well, was the information that smoking was
dangerous really secret?
You saw a lot of documents put up, the ones that say, you know, confidential on them and things like that. Remember, the tobacco companies that we've heard so much about, they were fierce competitors in the market. You even heard Dr. Kyriakoudes agree with that.
So there's lots of reasons for documents to be stamped confidential. The fact that it's stamped confidential doesn't mean that there are things within the document that aren't known.
We'll give you just a couple of examples. Dr.
Burns agreed that people have known for a hundred years, close to a hundred years, that nicotine, all right, was what smokers smoked cigarettes for. He agreed.
Florida Health Notes. This is from July of 1906, more than a hundred years ago. "Today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction." Addiction. They're talking about addiction a hundred years ago to cigarettes.
Moving forward again here in Florida, in October of 1965, "Nearly all Floridians have heard about the Surgeon General's Report on smoking and health, which was released in 1964."
This is, I think, one of the ones that captures it the most. Sometimes common sense language beats all these
statistics about 90 percent of people knew and 95 percent of people knew.
This is Dr. Daniel Horn, who's the head of the U.S. National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health. This is in 1968. I talked about this with Dr. Burns.
"You could stand on the rooftop and shout 'Smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they didn't already know."
That's not a tobacco company saying that. That's a doctor who's involved in the public health service.
They talked about secrets. You heard about the list of ingredients and components of cigarette smoke. That was something that was provided by the tobacco companies to the Surgeon General.
Here's some other things that you heard about during the course of this case, the phrase "psychological crutch," that that was used in a tobacco company document. You'll find that in reports released by the United States Government right in the same year. No secret.
This is one of my favorites. You may remember that during the -- Dr. Burns's examination, this document -- you heard about Claude Teague a few times, I think. Claude Teague was at Reynolds. And this is -- this is what -- the syne qua non quote. "Nicotine is the syne qua non of tobacco products."
Was this document -- was this document -confidential document ever, you know, showed?
No, no, not at the time.
You go back 22 years to Reader's Digest, and you find the exact same concept. This concept, that is, that nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco, and it's what makes tobacco tobacco, that's a concept that was known long before Surgeon General's Reports, long before tobacco company documents were made public.
Other information out there. You know, we've talked about the pack warnings.
You did hear a little bit about this today. So I'm just going to mention to you briefly the Roper. These are polls that were taken that asked people, basically, you know, where are you getting your information? The questions in the '59 poll were: Who would you be most apt to believe if one of these organizations said that there was no connection whatsoever between lung cancer and cigarette smoking?
All right. So the question is, someone is going to say there's no connection between lung cancer and cigarette smoking. Which of these organizations are you most likely to believe?
Well, the American Cancer Society, if they came out and said that, 39 percent would agree. You can see that all the way down.
The Tobacco Industry Research Council, which you've heard so much about, only three percent of the people said that they would believe that statement if it was made by the Tobacco Industry Research Council.
You can go forward another nine years. What's the most reliable source of information on smoking and health?
The organizations like the AMA, the American Medical Association, and the ACS, the American Cancer Society. You go all the way to the end, again, five percent, five percent of people said that they thought that the tobacco companies were reliable sources of information.
But let's bring this back to Mr. Hoover, right?
This isn't about other smokers and what other people may have heard. Let's bring it back to Mr. Hoover.
Those statements you've heard about, the Frank Statement, all these other things that you heard so much about from Dr. Kyriakoudes, is there any evidence that Mr. Hoover heard this?
No. There's none. There's no evidence. No one tried to tell you that he saw the Frank Statement, that he started or switched smoking brands or smoking at all because of something he saw in an ad, that he saw any tobacco company statements about smoking and health.
There's no evidence that tobacco company statements about smoking and addiction were ever seen by him.
Tobacco industry interviews, interviews with some of those folks, none of that, no evidence, none whatsoever.
Staying with Mr. Hoover. We asked the witnesses who came in, Did he rely on advertising?
There was no doubt or controversy in the Hoover household about smoking, okay?
He never switched a brand because of cigarette advertising. He never switched brands because of -- or selected a brand because of cigarette advertising. He didn't continue to smoke because of cigarette advertising. He never said that he thought that a tobacco company's advertisement was untrue or that he relied on a cigarette advertising.
The best evidence that cigarette advertising -- all those ads that they put up in front of you were a big distraction -- in this case comes from Mrs. Zamboni herself.
We asked her: Was your husband the kind of person who was easily swayed or convinced by advertising?
Here's what she said in her deposition. And don't just listen to the words, but like you are entitled to do as a jury, watch the demeanor. Watch the way she answers the question.
(Video played in open court as follows.)
Q Was your husband the kind of person who was easily swayed or convinced by advertising?
A No.
(Video ceased playing.)
MR. ISASI: There is no doubt in Mrs. Zamboni's mind that Mr. Hoover, an accomplished salesman himself, was not the type of person who was going to be swayed by advertising. Don't let them tell you otherwise. That's not -- this isn't me. That's Mrs. Zamboni talking.
Now, nevertheless, they did bring Dr. Kyriakoudes to you. And he went through a bunch of ads; and, you know, he didn't try to tie them to Mr. Hoover or anything like that. As a matter of fact, you had to wait through several hours of his direct examination until the very end of the day yesterday -- you may remember. Mr. Carter got up and one of the first questions that he asked him about was, Hey, what do you know about Mr. Hoover?
THE COURT: Mr. Isasi, you know you're at 70 minutes, right?
MR. ISASI: Yes. Thank you.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. ISASI: He said that he wasn't here to discuss whether or not Mr. Hoover relied on any Reynolds or Philip Morris statements, that he hadn't done any research on -historical research or anything like that on Mr. Hoover. He didn't know whether Mr. Hoover saw any of the cigarette ads or tobacco company statements.
He's paid hundreds of thousands of dollars, but he
is, frankly -- he's the wrong guy to answer any questions about Mr. Hoover.
If he could have offered an opinion about Mr. Hoover, don't you think he would have?
Now, what's going to happen is Mrs. Zamboni's attorneys are going to get up and they're going to argue.
Ah, but you get to do something, ladies and gentlemen. You get to infer. You get to infer -- even in the absence of any actual direct evidence that Mr. Hoover saw anything, you get to infer that he saw this and it influenced him.
And you know what they're going to say? They're going to say, You know that because he kept smoking, and that's what the tobacco companies wanted him to do. That's how you know the advertising influenced him, because he kept smoking.
That is a circular argument if I've ever heard one.
He kept smoking because of the advertising, and that's how you know he was listening to advertising, because he kept smoking.
Where in there do they acknowledge, A, that this was a man who was not swayed by advertising, and, B, that he had a choice?
The fact that he continued to smoke isn't evidence in and of itself of anything. There are gaps that they didn't fill for you, ladies and gentlemen.
By the way, Dr. Kyriakoudes didn't say that.
That's going to be lawyer talk. Dr. Kyriakoudes did not say -- and, ladies and gentlemen, you can infer that Mr. Hoover would have -- was influenced by this advertising. You can infer that Mr. Hoover was led to continue smoking based on that.
The evidence is that Mr. Hoover never heard, read or saw any statements by a tobacco company. None.
In fact, the only thing we know about Mr. Hoover's decisions about smoking come down to this: One time, there was testimony in this case, just one time, about why he switched brands. That was a question that I asked. I asked Mrs. Zamboni, Didn't he say that he had switched brands for taste? Yes.
And the question on information, what was out there, you heard that -- Dr. Burns told you that by 1975, more information wasn't the solution. People knew.
By 1975, if Mr. Hoover had stopped smoking,
Dr. Burns said it is medically more probable than not that he would not have developed cancer.
And just a reminder, folks. We are talking about, whether you agree with it or not, a product that remains legal to this day. We, as a country, have decided people can smoke.
So we would submit that when you get to question
five that asks whether or not the plaintiff has proved it is more likely than not that the defendants are liable for fraudulent concealment, that's the withholding of something that Mr. Hoover didn't know, didn't already know, that you conclude that the answer to that is "no."
I'll take one minute to talk about this. I told you about this date at the beginning in my opening statement, May 5, 1982. You are actually going to be asked, if you get this far in your Verdict Form, to say, okay, even if you find that Mr. Hoover relied on some statement, did he do that after May 5 of 1982?
Was he relying on some omission, some false statement, by a tobacco company in May of 1982, and did that false -- that reliance lead to his developing lung cancer?
We know the answer. The answer is no. We know that answer for two reasons: One, because Dr. Burns said that he absolutely would have expected Mr. Hoover to know about the risks of smoking by the '60s, by the end of the '60s; two, we know that he lived with a nurse who was working in an ICU, who was dealing with people who had lung injuries, smoking-related illnesses, a built-in professional; three, according to Mr. Hoover -- I'm sorry, Mrs. Zamboni, he had tried to quit. He may have only tried to quit for 24 hours, but he had tried to quit.
If you don't think smoking is dangerous, why would
you try to quit?
So he's not relying on anything after May of 1982. If you get that far on the Verdict Form, just look to what Dr. Burns said. Dr. Burns said that by 1981, 95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking, and 90 percent of them realize that their health could be affected.
So even if you found that he was relying on some information that he didn't know and that somehow that -- that what he knew or didn't know caused him to develop lung cancer, that's not the state of affairs in May of 1982.
After all, by 1975, Dr. Burns told you more people knew that smoking was dangerous than knew the name of the President of the United States.
And so if you get this far, to question six, I'd submit that the answer -- if you are asked -- if you get to this question, is that the only reliance -- and we don't think there is any -- but the only reliance would have occurred before May 5 of 1982.
Now, you're also going to be asked questions about fraudulent concealment and conspiracy. That's -- those questions, though, require you to have decided already that there was a material omission and that somehow Mr. Hoover, because of something he didn't know, he developed lung cancer.
There is a lot of information we simply don't know about Mr. Hoover that they didn't bring you that would help to answer these questions. It's a failure of proof on their part.
We don't know what brand was the first cigarette that he smoked. We have no knowledge about when he smoked his second cigarette. We have no knowledge about when Mr. Hoover became a regular smoker, no knowledge about how much he smoked.
David Hoover was asked this question: Bottom line. You have no information about your father's smoking before you met him?
That's correct.
This conspiracy that you heard about which began back in 1953, the first evidence of that that Dr. Kyriakoudes presented to you was this Frank Statement, the one that ran in the papers. There's no evidence he ever saw it. The conspiracy had no effect on Mr. Hoover.
So if you get that far, we're going to ask that you read the question carefully and submit that the evidence supports only one conclusion: That, no, that the plaintiff has not proven more likely than not that Philip Morris or Reynolds is liable for a conspiracy to commit fraud.
You also, if you get that far, are going to be asked that same question about the date. That is, there
still has to be reliance before, after or both of May of 1982. And, again, we submit the evidence supports only one conclusion there, that there was no reliance on anything on or after May of 1982.
So now we get to the last question that you will resolve, except for one more, which is damages. Here's what it looks like. What's the total amount, the total amount of any damages sustained by Merle Zamboni for Merle Zamboni's loss of companionship and protection and her mental pain and suffering as a result of her husband's injury or death?
Now, the plaintiff didn't try to prove up that number to you all. No one came in and testified and tried to assign a value of that to you.
And they get to go second. They go after me, which, you know, is the way things are, because they bear the burden of proof. They have got to prove every one of their things to you, every element of their claim to you by a preponderance of the evidence.
So I don't know what they're going to say about this. I really don't.
I don't think that they're going to give you a number. I don't think they're going to put a fill-in-the-blank there, but you're going to hear about ranges. I'm sure they'll be throwing different types of numbers out there for you.
But they just didn't give you any proof, anything that would allow you to sort through all of that.
There is no claim for financial loss here. There is no claim for loss of pensions or anything like that. I just want to make sure everyone is clear on that issue.
So there's really no basis in the evidence for you to reach any kind of conclusion.
I don't know what they're going to ask for, but I don't think it's going to be $10,000. I don't think it's going to be $20,000. I think you're going to be hearing about things in the millions of dollars. And I'd submit to you that no one should be made a millionaire because of decisions that their former spouse made 50 years ago, 40 years ago about smoking that, while we -- while we all wish had been made differently, were nevertheless his to make.
Question ten, and then I'll be done. If you get this far, and we submit you shouldn't, you are then going to be asked a question which is whether or not Mrs. Zamboni is entitled to punitive damages. All right?
So what are punitive damages?
So punitive damages are only available for conduct that was the legal cause of Mrs. Zamboni's -- of Mr. Hoover's lung cancer.
Those damages only get awarded to the plaintiff. And the most important thing about this is, these are extra
damages.
When you go back, if you award any damages whatsoever to Mrs. Zamboni, you put them on that line here, right? You will -- that award will fully and fairly compensate her for her claims.
Punitive damages are different, all right? In addition to the full compensation, punitive damages are an extra. They are designed for two things. They're designed for punishment and deterrence. Punishment and deterrence.
The punitive damages, just so we're clear, only go to the plaintiff. This isn't one of those cases where punitive damages get awarded and they go to some, you know, charitable organization or something like that. Those are additional dollars that would go to Mrs. Zamboni for her claim.
So you won't be awarding damages to any public health agencies or anti-smoking organizations or even other smokers.
Here is the thing to keep in mind about punitive damages. The standard. You have to be convinced that Mrs. Zamboni is entitled to punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence. That's the -- that is the highest standard we have in a civil case, the highest standard, and it means you have to have been presented with evidence that's precise, explicit, lacking all confusion. It has to instill
a belief or conviction without any hesitation.
So, to put it another way, if you're unsure, if you are unsure of whether or not you should award punitive damages in this case, you've answered the question. You should not, because it doesn't meet the standard.
You have to have no hesitation.
And there are lots of reasons why punitive damages should not even be considered in this case.
The -- first of all, the most important is that the conduct that's at issue, the conduct they've spent all this time talking about, that conduct -- and I'm just going to present one document for you -- this is a document -- this is from the Reynolds president. We talked about this earlier. It's Mr. Galloway.
Here's one of the things that -- this is back in '68. He wrote that "if there is a safer cigarette, let's continue and increase our efforts in this program."
This was part of their marketing plan for 1969.
The things that they complained about, the things that they say harmed Mr. Hoover aren't things that are happening anymore.
For example, cigarette ingredients, not a secret. The ingredients were released publicly. The FDA has been regulating cigarette companies for five years now, and they have a responsibility to make sure that what goes into
cigarettes is safe.
Those organizations you heard about, CTR, TIRC, you're not hearing about them anymore. You don't hear about those organizations. They don't exist anymore. They're not issuing statements on behalf of the industry, anything like that.
You've heard from even the testimony today, the companies don't dispute, do not dispute that smoking can cause disease and that smoking is addictive. And they have disputed that for almost 15 years now.
So there can't be another agreement to try to create a question in anyone's mind about whether or not smoking is addictive. That is out there.
The documents you heard about, they're also out in the public domain. Anyone can go -- the judge will tell you not to do it yet because you're still on the jury. But anyone can go online and look at these documents.
There's simply no need to deter, to deter the further act, the kind of acts that the plaintiff is complaining of in this case. Without the need to deter, the purpose of the punitive damages is lost.
So we submit if you get that far, that based on these changed circumstances, that we respectfully submit you would check "no" as to punitive damages for Philip Morris and for the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Thank you. I know it's been a long week, and it's even been a long day, and I have contributed to the length of that day. But I hope you understand that the case that we had to bring to you, the whole story, was important. And the reason we took the time to it was because at the end of the day, you need to ask yourself the question, even during plaintiff's closing, ask yourself the question, everything they talk about, what does this have to do with Mr. Hoover?
Thank you.



MS. YATES: Yes, please, Your Honor. Thank you.
Counsel, Mrs. Zamboni.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your time and attention. I will not take too, too long, but I do have some important things to say, now that all of the evidence is in.
I stood before you in opening statement and previewed for you what I thought the evidence would show.
And I said to you I thought it would be two ships passing in the night. Different road maps. Bash tobacco versus evidence that relates to Mr. Hoover and who Mr. Hoover was.
And I believe that is what the evidence showed.
The dots did not connect to my client, Philip Morris.
And two pieces of evidence -- two pieces of testimony left no doubt in my mind that I had given you the correct road map and said it would be two ships passing in the night.
Number one. Dr. Burns was their only expert to come in and talk about Mr. Hoover, right? He came in and he talked about him, and there was no mention of Virginia Slims cigarettes anywhere in Dr. Burns' expert report. You heard Rule 26.
And her Honor asked Dr. Burns, Do you mention Virginia Slims in your report? And Dr. Burns said, No. It didn't matter to him.
Number two. Dr. Kyriakoudes came in here, and he tells the same historical advertising story about tobacco, no matter what the facts are of a specific smoker. It doesn't matter to him.
But the facts do matter. And for that reason, I told you I would focus on the evidence relating to Mr. Hoover and some of the choices he made and what we know about Mr. Hoover, not a generic, typical, hypothetical smoker out
there somewhere. Mr. Hoover.
And I gave you three themes: Undisputed facts, no evidence, so no disputed facts, and some decisions that Mr. Hoover made, some of his choices.
And I am not here to judge those choices. I'm not here to second-guess those choices. But there was evidence of certain choices that he made throughout his life.
Let me turn to my first point, undisputed. The only Philip Morris brand of cigarettes in this case that Mr. Hoover smoked was Virginia Slims. That remains undisputed.
The earliest Mr. Hoover could have smoked Virginia Slims was 1968. Dr. Kyriakoudes confirmed for me that it first went on the market in 1968.
And every single pack of Virginia Slims -- I probably sound like a broken record. Every single pack that Mr. Hoover picked up had one of the Surgeon General warnings on there. Every single one.
You've seen those warnings. I'm not going to repeat them.
Second thing. The next thing I addressed with you was what I thought you would not hear evidence of, no dispute because there's no evidence.
So let's take a look. No witness told you exactly when Mr. Hoover started smoking Virginia Slims. No evidence.
You heard from Mrs. Zamboni that twelve years -over twelve years, but she didn't know when he started any particular brand, including Virginia Slims.
And there's no evidence that he actually started in 1968 when the cigarette first came out in the market.
The evidence is that it was probably his last brand that he smoked. So if we deduct twelve years from, what,
1988, 1992 -- I'll come to the quit evidence in a minute -that gets us to the late 1970s or early 1980s when he probably started Virginia Slims.
You get to evaluate the facts, and you get to
decide.
Next, I told you there would be no evidence in this case as to why Mr. Hoover started smoking Virginia Slims. None. And let's look at the evidence.
As I predicted for you, there was some testimony that Mr. Hoover liked the color of the package of the Virginia Slims cigarettes. There is no evidence that the reason he started or continued to smoke Virginia Slims was those colors of the packet. None.
You heard he liked them. He had business cards.
But it was not given to you as the reason he smoked them.
Let's look at some actual testimony.
This lady and the other lady we had in the courtroom were taking down every single word. And as a
result of that, I get to show you some of the actual transcripts that we've been able to look at each day.
So what do we have? David Hoover does not know why his father smoked Virginia Slims.
"QUESTION: Your father never told you why he smoked Virginia Slims, did he?
"ANSWER: No, he never told me why he smoked any
cigarette.
"QUESTION: Right. But you're not telling the ladies and gentlemen of the jury that he smoked them because of the colors of the package?
"ANSWER: That's correct.
"QUESTION: In fact, you don't know the reason why he chose to smoke any brand, including Virginia Slims, correct?
"ANSWER: That's correct."
That's the actual testimony.
And what evidence did you hear about packaging and
packets?
Well, you heard about a successful campaign on the Marlboro cigarette. They introduced the cowboy. They introduced the flip-top packet.
The biggest success in Philip Morris's advertising played no role in any decision Mr. Hoover made. There's no
evidence he smoked Marlboro.
So nothing on Virginia Slims' advertising was highlighted for you, except you saw two ads; and I'll come back to those in a minute.
Why didn't they show you any of the Virginia Slims successful campaigns? Because it was a brand that was advertised to women. You can fault Philip Morris for that, but it's not relevant to this case.
Now, what else did Mrs. Zamboni say about why Mr. Hoover smoked Virginia Slims, or any brand?
"QUESTION: And you have no idea why he chose one particular brand of cigarette over another when he became a regular smoker, right?
"ANSWER: Correct."
I also told you that no witness would tell you why Mr. Hoover switched to Virginia Slims from his prior brand.
No evidence.
I also told you the evidence would show that everyone agreed that by the time Mr. Hoover's -- Mr. Hoover picked up his first Virginia Slims cigarette, he was over 50 years old, more likely in his late 50s, early 60s. The 1964 Surgeon General's Report had been out for at least four years, likely, several more. And every pack of Virginia Slims that he liked the colors of had a warning, every single packet. And that, as I predicted, is exactly what the
evidence showed.
Finally, on this point, I told you no evidence would tell you exactly when he stopped smoking Virginia Slims. And that's true because the evidence of when -- and I believe the evidence shows Mr. Hoover did quit smoking -- or if he quit smoking is very mixed. And I'll come back to that.
And just as I promised you in opening, you saw no evidence that Mr. Hoover relied on any advertising from Philip Morris, nothing, including Virginia Slims. Nothing that plaintiff showed you in the Philip Morris documents connects to Mr. Hoover.
Let's take a quick look at some more testimony.
Oops.
It says -- some of this is Mrs. Zamboni, but the first one is David Hoover.
"QUESTION: Your father never told you that he chose any brand of cigarette because of an advertisement, did he?
"ANSWER: Not that I recall.
Mrs. Zamboni.
"QUESTION: In fact, Mr. Hoover never told you that he selected a brand of cigarette because of cigarette advertising; isn't that right?
"ANSWER: That's correct.
"QUESTION: He also never told you that he switched brands of cigarettes because of cigarette advertising, correct?
"ANSWER: Correct.
"QUESTION: And he never said to you that he continued to smoke because of cigarette advertising?
"ANSWER: Correct."
What I previewed for you in opening is exactly what the evidence showed.
Before I move on to my third theme, I need to focus on some statements made by plaintiff's counsel in opening statement. So I need to take you back about a week.
Let me go briefly back to my predicted road map, that plaintiff would bash tobacco companies, try to make you angry. Ads everywhere, internal documents, and yet, not a single piece of evidence that Mr. Hoover saw, heard, relied on a single thing that a tobacco company did or said. And you heard some real doozies.
In fact, Mr. Oliver said to you in opening Mr. Hoover smoked the brands, quote, heavily marketed to men.
That's simply not correct when it comes to Virginia
Slims.
What you saw was "You've come a long way, baby."
And as Dr. Kyriakoudes testified, that cigarette was made just for women.
We don't know why he selected that brand. No
evidence.
Now, before I continue, I need to spend a minute responding to a few of those company documents. I told you in openings I wasn't going to respond to them all because I wanted to focus on Mr. Hoover and what the evidence is to Mr. Hoover.
But as I predicted, some of those were pretty tough to sit through.
But I want you to take a step closer to the evidence. And when you're, I anticipate, seeing some of those documents in Mr. Oliver's closing or Mr. Pendell's closing, what do they have to do with Mr. Hoover?
Let's go back to a couple. The video, Death in the West. Those statements by those company employees were so ridiculous, they turned it -- it was turned into an anti-tobacco campaign document.
There's no evidence that Mr. Hoover ever saw that video, either because he lived in San Francisco, the one place it was aired, or that he somehow got the anti-smoking program that they were referring to.
And, you know, if you're delivering a message and have no credibility, three percent, five percent -- when your credibility is that low, your message is used against you to help people quit.
You also never heard Mr. Zamboni (sic) or David Hoover talk about the film. No evidence. That's a red herring to get you angry.
Other secret documents. Some of them were public presentations to university people, what they were saying and then reporting in an internal document.
Nicorette gum. Remember the business dispute between Dow Chemical, Merrill Dow and Philip Morris. It never stopped Nicorette gum going on the market, a successful product. But there's no evidence Mr. Hoover ever tried to get it, couldn't get it, wanted it.
I think I said that to you in opening. That's another red herring to try and make Philip Morris look bad.
Like I said, you have to ask yourselves: What does this have to do with Mr. Hoover? And, specifically, for my client, what does it have to do with Mr. Hoover and his decision to smoke Virginia Slims after he was age 50?
And I told you in opening I wanted to focus on that post-1968 time frame. And so let me circle back to that now.
What do we have here going on in the '60s?
I'm sorry.
MR. OLIVER: Go ahead.
MS. YATES: Okay. We have the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, the biggest stop sign in American public health. I'll come back to that.
In 1966, Mrs. Zamboni is a licensed nurse. She meets Mr. Hoover and they marry -- it's just sort of off the edge of my board -- start dating, and then they marry in 1971, '72.
The first pack, the first warning, 1966; and then you saw the warnings change.
But this timeline in the '60s is book-ended by two important admissions by Dr. Burns. And you've heard them from Mr. Isasi, so I won't spend a lot of time on them.
"If Mr. Hoover had quit smoking in 1964 when that report came out, it's more likely than not he would not -- he would have avoided developing lung cancer in '92, correct?
"That's correct."
Long before he picked up Virginia Slims.
"QUESTION: 1968. It's your expectation, isn't it, Doctor, that Mr. Hoover was likely aware of the risks of smoking by the late 1960s, correct?
"ANSWER: I think it's likely that he was aware of that at least at some level, yes." Dr. Burns.
None of these facts are in dispute.
Let me turn to my third theme, Mr. Hoover's decision to start smoking and continue smoking.
Mr. Hoover made choices. Nobody came into this courtroom and told you that Mr. Hoover thought it was safe to smoke cigarettes. To the contrary, Dr. Burns said at least
by the '60s, he knew it wasn't.
Consistent with Dr. Burns are Mr. Hoover's own words several years later. This is Mr. Hoover's diary entry, September 13, Friday, 1991. "I can't walk without breathing problems. Now I must pay for my smoking. I'm sorry. Now I must pay for smoking."
Those are Mr. Hoover's own words. That's what he wrote down in his diary.
As I said in opening, focus on the evidence relating to Mr. Hoover.
And with that, I need to turn briefly to Mr. Hoover's quit attempts. What really happened? You get to decide. Did Mr. Hoover quit? I think the most credible evidence is that Mr. Hoover quit in 1988. We'll look at that.
Did he quit after one or both of those smoking-related surgeries in 1988? Did he quit after his January 1992 lung cancer surgery? Let's see if we can unravel the evidence.
First, let me briefly set the stage and start before 1988. You did hear some general testimony about quit attempts, right? Mr. Hoover came in here and said, when I was a child, maybe the '60s or the '70s; Mrs. Zamboni, the '80s.
You heard about an uncompleted Smoke Enders, some
general testimony.
You never heard that Mr. Hoover never asked for help from a doctor or a family member. And you heard Dr. Burns say it's motivation of the smoker, willpower, and it's external support.
So let me turn to 1988. We have medical records. You will have the medical records. And here are the dates of the records: July 26, 1988; July 27, 1988; August 10, 1988; December 1, 1990; and October 22, 1992.
The medical records never changed their story. Multiple consistent entries long before any lawsuit.
Let's look at them in chronological order. I hope you can see that.
So the first one is from Henry Ford Hospital, and it's a doctor's note, and it refers to Mr. Hoover. It's July 26, 1988. I think it's 50-pack year smoking history prior to January 1988. This is in July 1988.
Next doctor's note, July 27, 1988, again a doctor note. "Tobacco 50-year history. Quit half a year ago."
That puts it right in about the same ballpark, early 1988. Those records are consistent.
Now, let's move on to Mr. Hoover's own handwriting, no lawsuit pending. Mayo Clinic, August 10, 1988. "Information for your physician.
"Do you use tobacco now? No.
"In the past? Yes.
"Type and daily amount: Cig, one pack."
I'm not sure if that's one or two.
"How long?
"Fifty years."
Mr. Hoover's own handwriting, information for his
doctor.
Next one, "Information for your physician." Same hospital, Mayo Clinic. 12/1/1990.
"Do you use tobacco now? No.
"In the past? Yes.
"Type and daily amount? Cigarettes, two packs.
"How long? Fifty-five years."
So four consistent notations in the record. Two entries made by doctors and two entries directly from Mr. Hoover in his handwriting. The medical records don't change their story.
Mr. Hoover's drinking. This is a tough subject. I bring it up for one reason. Look at this entry, again, in Mr. Hoover's handwriting, December 1, 1990.
"Do you use alcoholic beverages? No.
"In the past? Yes.
Type? Gin, whiskey.
"Weekly amount? A lot.
"How long? Many years."
Why would Mr. Hoover be incredibly honest about his alcohol intake and yet not be honest about his smoking? You get to decide. Don't you fudge on both, or you're honest on both? You get to decide.
And then for the medical records we move forward to 1992, to Mr. Hoover's final hospitalization in October. And this is a record dated October 22 from Memorial Mission Hospital in North Carolina. And this is -- he was admitted via ambulance from actually the other Transylvania Community Hospital. And the source of information is "family," and it says, "Merle Hoover."
So Merle Hoover is the source for this information.
And there's another thing saying the source of information. "Other," not checked. "Patient," not checked. "Family, Merle Hoover," checked.
I want to take a minute and remind you what Mr. Oliver said about this record in opening, because he discussed it there, and they like this record for the family history of tobacco use, information. I think that Mr. Oliver said Mrs. Zamboni was telling the person writing this down that he started smoking at age twelve and that he had been smoking two-and-a-half packs a day over his lifetime.
So on that entry, starting at age twelve, they embraced what Mrs. Zamboni was telling the doctor.
But what's interesting then is when you get to the
next page, we have Dr. Burns saying, "Maybe they got it from other records or maybe she didn't provide that information."
So plaintiffs only want you to think the smoking history is the correct version. But once we get into the quit history, that's not from her.
There's no evidence that that information is from any source other than Mrs. Zamboni.
So throughout this note, there are several entries as described by the patient's wife. She states there's talk about the alcohol, but he quit.
And he was a heavy tobacco smoker until his surgery, that's the 1988 smoking-related surgery, and has not smoked since.
You have all these records. The story doesn't change, and they're nothing to do with the lawsuit.
But the medical record story does not end with the actual records. Something interesting happened in this courtroom. Mrs. Zamboni was on the stand and her lawyers never asked her to explain this entry in the medical records.
No explanation from the very person that the entry was attributed to. Ask yourselves why. Don't check your common sense at the door.
Let me go back to the 12/1/90 record. This is where Mr. Hoover is giving the information to the doctors.
Why didn't -- and we know that this form was being filled out
actually jointly, because remember Mrs. Zamboni said, "Oh, I know the medicines. I filled out the medicines for doctors." She's a nurse. She knows that better than you or I would.
So they're filling out this form together. Why didn't Mrs. Zamboni, a nurse, say to Mr. Hoover, "You know, the doctors might be able to help you quit if you say you haven't quit. So why don't you just be honest with the doctors?"
Instead, Mr. Hoover wrote the note that he had quit. Why was Mrs. Zamboni not asked any questions about that entry?
And something else interesting happened in this courtroom. Plaintiff, through Dr. Burns, tried to get the source of information to these other medical records instead of Mrs. Zamboni. And this is the entry in the record. "Mr. Hoover will be moving in the near future to near Asheville, North Carolina, and copies of his records will be forwarded there as he will be seeing a radiation oncologist in that area."
That absolutely makes sense. The man had finished his radiation treatment, and he may require ongoing treatment.
But no evidence in this case that Mr. Hoover's old records from Florida relating to his radiation oncology made it to the Asheville hospital and an emergency room visit.
Don't you think if there was a form in those records saying "old records received," that you would have been shown that evidence? No evidence.
Make sure they connect the dots. The dots are being thrown out there. Make sure they connect.
I need to turn to something else incredible that happened in this courtroom. In order to be consistent with Dr. Burns that plaintiff never really quit, I need to briefly turn to an attempt to show that Mr. Hoover did not quit, despite the medical evidence. And I told you in opening that it helps Dr. Burns if Mr. Hoover doesn't quit. It helps his story, right? He was so hopelessly addicted. He couldn't quit.
David Hoover took the stand, and you were shown this photograph. Mr. Hoover and Amanda in a stroller.
By the way, I'm not sure that's a cigarette in his hand. There's some other object in the front of his hand.
And Mr. Hoover -- let's look. Oops. Sorry. Let's
look.
Mr. Hoover was asked roughly how old his daughter Amanda was in this photograph, and David said -- talked about how old she is now and say, "I would say she's about two in that photograph."
Fair enough.
Then what happened on redirect examination
questioning by Mr. Pendell? Let's look.
"What year was your daughter Amanda born?
"ANSWER: I want to say 1985.
"QUESTION: How old is she today?
"ANSWER: Say again?
"QUESTION: How old is your daughter Amanda today?
"ANSWER: She's 29 now.
"QUESTION: Okay. And it's 2015, correct?
"ANSWER: Correct.
"QUESTION: Okay. So would you agree with me she's 28 now in 2015, she was probably born in 1986?
"ANSWER: Yes."
Why? Because they want that photograph where they say there's a cigarette in Mr. Hoover's hand to be after 1988.
The lawyer gave a different year for the birth date of the little two-year-old girl in that picture.
We -- I sat on the stand and read testimony of Diana Sulewski, and that was the birth date, 1985. It wasn't 1986, as Mr. Pendell suggested to Mr. David Hoover.
So their attempt to get a timeline after '88, in '88, after 1989, it fails. That picture was likely either '87, maybe early '88, but around '87.
No date on the photo, so we can't pin it down exactly. But you heard what happened in this courtroom.
The only other thing they showed you was an undated photograph of Mr. Hoover in a boat, a white pack of cigarettes in his pocket and a cigarette in his hand, and they said that was after 1988.
But where does that get them? It's an undated photograph.
That means that Mr. Hoover and Mrs. Zamboni, remember the form they filled out together, they weren't truthful to the doctors. Ask yourself, why would Mrs.
Zamboni mislead her husband's doctors? Why? Why would she say he quit four years earlier when Mr. Hoover was dying?
It's his last hospital visit. There's no incentive to make things up then.
Why didn't she say to the doctors, "He could just never quit. He tried. He just couldn't do it"?
You need to assess the evidence that occurred outside this courtroom, in the medical records and in the courtroom as part of this lawsuit.
Memories typically fade. They don't get better.
Now, just one other fact to put in context. In 1991, we know that Mr. and Mrs. Hoover at the time, Mrs. Zamboni now, were traveling in their motor home together.
Mrs. Zamboni had over the years said to Mr. Hoover, "You need to quit. I don't like the smell. You're smoking too much."
Ask yourselves, a non-smoker and a smoker in a
motor home. If he was smoking, you would have heard that from Mrs. Zamboni.
Don't check your common sense at the door.
Let's look at what Dr. Burns said. You know, he, as I predicted, selected one avenue. He doesn't like the medical records. Smokers lie. Well, what about Mrs.
Zamboni? She was giving information, too.
So the strong-willed, no-nonsense, make-up-his-mind-and-he-can-do-it, successful salesman, intelligent, he accepts responsibility, just couldn't quit. Unlike millions of other Americans who mustered up the will power to quit, according to Dr. Burns, Mr. Hoover just couldn't do it.
That's just not supported by the evidence, ladies and gentlemen.
But at a minimum, if he didn't quit in 1988 with all those entries, he was no longer a regular smoker. And Dr. Burns told us somebody who's an occasional smoker, a non-daily smoker is not addicted.
So you as jurors get to decide which version is credible. Only you can decide. We tried to bring you the evidence. And that's part of the instructions the judge will give you.
Where does this lead us? This case was exactly what I predicted, bash tobacco, some hypothetical, maybe
typical smoker, but it wasn't Mr. Hoover, the smoker. And not Mr. Hoover who had any connection to Philip Morris.
None.
I don't stand here pretending I'm asking you to do something easy. I'm asking you to award no money to a nice lady. But being nice and being sympathetic is not enough in a court of law.
Plaintiff has to prove all of their claims by a preponderance of the evidence, the claims that they have made in this lawsuit.
I'm not going to go through the Verdict Form. I'm sure you're happy to hear that. But Mr. Isasi, suffice it to say, went through it, and I agree with his assessment of what your responses should be.
And Mr. Oliver or Mr. Pendell can stand up here and say, "We've proved that smoking caused his lung cancer."
That does not get the job done, ladies and gentlemen. He has to prove that an addiction to smoking cigarettes directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing his lung cancer so that it can reasonably be said that but for his addiction -- without his addiction -- not his smoking, his addiction to smoking cigarettes -- would not have occurred.
That's a mouthful.
We've looked at the choices. We've discussed legal
cause. I believe after you've answered questions one or question two, you stop. You're done.
This is the last time you'll hear from me. I'm not sure if you're relieved. Plaintiff goes last because plaintiff has the burden of proof.
If the evidence is even or you believe us more, in our favor, they have not met their burden. They have to have a preponderance, the greater weight of the evidence.
I don't know precisely what Mr. Oliver and Mr. Pendell will say. I'm going to guess that they're probably going to try and make you angry at tobacco again. Some of those documents. Some of those stupid things that were said.
But I do ask you to ask yourself, what does this have to do with Mr. Hoover?
Finally, Mr. Hoover did not begin smoking Virginia Slims until he was after the age of 50, probably closer to age 60. The Surgeon General's Report had come out. Warnings were on every packet of Virginia Slims.
Even Dr. Burns believes that Mr. Hoover was aware of the risks by the late 1960s.
And Mr. Hoover's own words (pointing).
Keep asking yourself, "What does this have to do with Mr. Hoover?"
If Mr. Hoover is in a painting that they tie the dots, make sure he's in there. Make sure those dots connect.
Finally, ask yourselves, "What would Ms. Yates say in response? What would Mr. Isasi say in response?" Because I think you know by now I'd probably have something to say if I got a chance, but I don't.
Thank you for your patience and your attention throughout this very important process. Our system would not work without our jurors like you. Thank you.
Thank you, Your Honor.
