closing statement mr. paige: good morning. so as mr. kaczynski actually said in jury selection, it is been a long time, right? it does not seem like that long. three weeks ago today, i think, when y'all started and it seems like yesterday. so i guess they say, time flies when you are having fun. hopefully, i do think that y'all learned a lot during this trial that probably you did not know coming in, and i know that because we all saw and appreciated the amount of notes that y'all took. and so as you will remember three weeks ago, there was 250 of y'all that were brought in, and we talked to every one of you. and i know mr. kaczynski -- we remember where each one of you was sitting, who was sitting on the left side of the room, who was sitting on the front row, who raised their hand to the first question, and we all agreed, we all, both sides, wanted y'all to be 4765 our jurors in this case. and we appreciate your time and your consideration, and we know that y'all paid attention. we know y'all have your own families and friends and lives, and you are here listening. we appreciate it. on behalf -- david is not here right now, david sales, who tried the case with me. he will be here. he had somewhere where he had to be this morning. the court knows about it. he will be here around lunchtime. he wants to be here. ina is not here yet. she is coming. y'all have seen her during the trial, and it takes her a while to get to where she needs to be. so usually she gets here around ten, and she will be here. but she appreciates your time and consideration and sacrifice that y'all have made. and bryan is here. and i wanted to explain to you, i do not know if i explained it at the beginning, he could not be here at trial because there are rules of the court, and one of the rules is called the rule of sequestration, and if you are not the party, you are not allowed to be in the courtroom. so the party is only the -- even though he has a claim, he is not the personal representative. 4766 so when you bring a case, a wrongful death case, it has to be brought by the personal representative. that was ina. she is the only one permitted to be here. but bryan is here today, and he appreciates your time as well. and robert, i told you during the beginning i could not work without him. he is my friend and my neighbor, but i am probably would not be able to do a case without him being here, and adam helped me as well. and the defense, i want do not want to say we fight, but we have issues during the lawsuit, but i respect them immensely, mr. kaczynski and his team and ms. arnold. and hopefully, even though david is not right here now, hopefully there will be no sidebars, because if there is, i'll be in trouble. so i'm going to try not to say anything that they will bring me up there. today, as you all know, it is an important day and -- (ms. ahrens entered into the courtroom.) mr. paige: it is an important to both parties. it is a big issue. you-all have heard about it. you have been here. you know how much it 4767 means to both parties. and you-all have -- you know, we do this for a living, but you guys are here now, and this is your opportunity. you have the -- you know, the power and the ability to say what you think is right and what is wrong, what is acceptable, what is not acceptable in our society, what is good and what is bad. and, you know, coming in here, i know from doing these cases -- i'd be naive to say that i do not know that people have preconceived notions about smokers. i know that. and -- but, as we said at the beginning -- and we know that cigarettes are a legal product. that is not a secret. we know that. but the issue is -- it really is, how did we get here to this point in life in society where this is okay that 500,000 americans, ninety percent of them starting as teenagers, are going to die from the smoking-related illness while their clients profit and lied about it and concealed things. so how did we get here? because we know in 1900s there were 140 deaths in the world from lung cancer. that is a true fact. a hundred years ago in history is not 4768 that long ago, and you-all see the line that is going down now because the truth is out, people are being educated. they are now -- they are now being regulations, and it is a legal product, but the line for consumption and death is going down in society. and a hundred years from now, you have to wonder -- because a hundred years back, you know, it was not happening, and a hundred years from now people may think, how did this happen, what happened here, how did it happen where there was a society where 30 million people, 30 million americans -- and, again, you know, there were issues where karl ahrens -- i'm going to talk about it -- everything that came up in this trial, i'm not shy. i'm willing to talk about every issue, and i want to talk about every issue. and karl ahrens whether he first started experimenting or whether he became a regular smoker in the navy, which seems like that is when it is, because we do not know for sure, but that is when he probably became a regular smoker. but we know that by the age of 24 is where the frontal lobes of the brain really fully form. so, you know, that is a business model. that is 4769 been their business model. that is how they made money. and so at the beginning of the trial, i said to you at one point in opening -- i usually say it in closing -- but there is a song -- and a friend of mine told me -- and i have a friend who does the same type of work i do -- and it is by elton john and called mona lisa something. he says, "i thought i knew, but now i know that roses never grow in new york city." but when you came in here, did you really know that there is arsenic, cyanide in every puff of cigarettes going into a smoker's lungs; that nicotine is a drug as addictive as cocaine and heroin; that it goes through the brain in seven seconds with each dose of nicotine. and even dr. dorce admitted when people are 20, 30 years old, and they are smoking, it is -- it is -- natural, it is natural for somebody to think, "hey, when i get older, i'd quit. when i get older, i'll quit." and then when they are 40, 50 years old and they have a hard time quitting, one or two things are going to happen. either, a, they will quit, and they will be fine, hopefully, thank god; or, 4770 b, they will not quit or they might quit, and they will not be okay, because we know statistically sixty percent of them will die a horrible death, a smoking-related death, that are not fine, lung cancer, emphysema, throat cancer, heart disease, stroke, bladder cancer, pancreatic cancer, stomach cancer. those are diseases that people get. so that is their legal product. again, it is a legal product. nobody is going to jail here, but this is a civil lawsuit in a civil society where people from the community judge whether or not corporations should be able to do what they did and cause harm to the amount of people that they did while they made a ton of money. and you have to decide if you think that is right or that is wrong and whether what they did was bad. okay? what they did when they lied, when they all went to the little rooms, their executives and scientists, they had their papers, and they had all their knowledge. and they knew exactly what was going to happen, there was no doubt -- you know, "doubt is our product", "doubt is our product," but they had no doubt when they were in their little rooms making all their money what was 4771 going to happen to regular people. so, you know, that is why we are here. and so you will decide, i guess -- you will decide if it is okay because they want to blame one hundred percent of fault on karl ahrens. and you will decide if that is okay, that a corporation can do what they did and blame all their victims, all their victims one hundred percent. and we do accept partial responsibility because i know. i know from when i very first did this, when i very first started doing this type of work and they said to dr. proctor, you worked for mr. paige 15 times over the past, what has it been, eight years, and it is not easy to get a case to trial. it takes time. you see the type of work that came into this. and so i know -- and even though ina -- ina loves her husband, loves her husband, loves her husband, she does not think he did anything wrong, and that is natural. but i know, in your minds that everybody must think, hey, the smoker has to bear some responsibility. if somebody tries to quit 10 times, they could try 11 times. if they try 20, they can try 21. i know that. i know y'all believe that, and i know most 4772 people probably do believe that. and that is why we do accept partial responsibility. but likewise, is it okay to have a defective product, a defective product where the filters do not work, where the lights do not work, where it is highly addictive, and added chemicals. and they say, hey, we are not going to bear any responsibility, and they do not have to. it is my burden of proof, and i think we brought you overwhelming proof. so the first slide i want to show you is -- you know, we brought you top experts and they -- i -- i do not want to say they criticize -- they talked to dr. proctor respectfully about the money he is made over the past 20 years doing this type of work. you guys know he is the top guy in the world, if not in the country, in the world on this topic. okay. so if i have to hire dr. proctor to come here and teach you the truth, that is what i have to do. hey, look, i do not -- i wish i did not have to pay him any money. but the truth is you got people -- you know, he is -- in any field if somebody is the top person in their field in the world, they are going to be compensated. and so if i hired somebody like dr. pach, 4773 pach, whatever his name, and brought him to you and said, let him explain the conspiracy to you, i probably would not be able to meet my burden of proof. so we brought you -- and i'm not apologizing. i'm proud that we brought you some of the top experts in the world, dr. proctor, dr. hurt from the mayo clinic. he started the -- i think it was the first inpatient treatment facility for nicotine addicts in the country. that was dr. hurt. dr. ruckdeschel, i was fortunate when i went through the medical records, and we do that, we look at who is the treating doctor, who treated my client. and i find out that he is the ceo of moffitt cancer center. he is published all over the world on this topic. so these are the -- excuse me. these are the people that we brought you, and so what you do know now and what you did not know, or you may have known, but this is from the ftc report. and you guys have learned that cigarette smoking is the greatest single public health problem the nation has ever faced. that is not me saying it. that is the 4774 evidence in this case. that is the truth. that is the truth. so people who know people -- you know, sometimes you work with people and you say, why is this guy running outside in the rain and goes smoking by himself, why is this poor guy walking downstairs and sitting there and -- all by himself with smokers, what are -- why are they doing it? because nicotine is a drug. it is a drug addiction. and the surgeon general -- it was not until 1988 that the surgeon general issued a report where they established and they -- you know, revealed to the public that it was a drug addiction. and there is no -- you know, it is not -- and, again, a fair question is, is this a habit, do people do this out of habit, or is this a drug addiction? and it is a drug addiction. the facts of the case are every smoker of every cigarette is getting 1 to 2 milligrams to his brain with each cigarette, ten inhalations with each cigarette that go seven seconds to the brain, and the nicotinic receptors grow, and when they are active they need more drug. and that is how drug 4775 addiction works, whether it is cocaine, heroin, alcohol, drug addiction. you say, hey, people know -- people know it is going to be bad for them. people who love their families, they love their families, they want to live as long as they can, they want to see their -- they want to see their kids' weddings, they want to meet their grandchildren. nobody wants to die early. so what is it that is making these people do what they are doing? people may think that they do it because they like it, they like it. but what is there to like? what is there to like? it calms you. it makes you feel good because when you do not have it you do not feel good. if somebody says, hey, i'm not going to smoke today, they are going to have a hard time not smoking that day. and they will feel better when they smoke. and then they will think, hey, when i get older, hopefully i'll quit. and hopefully god willing they will, but it is a drug addiction like any other drug addiction. and that is why a lot of people -- you know, when they do not know what you-all know now, 4776 they may blame their family and say, hey, you know, my family member had a choice. it was my family member's decision. but when you look at their own documents -- see, that is the thing, they let america believe it is a choice. they tell america it is a choice. hey, it is a free choice. it is a victim's choice. it is a victim's choice. in their internal documents they say the complete opposite. when they go into their rooms and they tell their little secrets, their dirty little secrets, they say this is not a choice. they know where -- nowhere in their documents do they say it is a free choice, let the people choose. you will not find a document like that, because if there was one, they would have showed it to you, i assure you. it does not exist. the other thing that we now know, and i alluded to it, though, is that ninety percent start as teenagers, whether it is 13, 18, 19 -- i think it is 99 percent start by the age of 24. and you know why that is, it is because the frontal lobes on a teenager are not fully formed. most people when they are age 35, 40 years old do not begin to smoke. you know, you are not going to 4777 say, hey, i'm going to start smoking now, because those are the parts of the brain that deal with rational decisions, dealing with consequences, thinking about the future, and so that is why that is where they target, that is where they direct their money to, that is where they put all their resources. and so while they are lying and while they were watching americans lie -- i'll show the next screen -- they knew that people just like karl ahrens -- 500,000 americans every year would end up dying, people with families, fathers, mothers, you know, brothers, sisters, daughters, whatever and that did not matter to them. so today you get to hold them accountable, and we will ask you -- we will go through -- there are important issues, one is class membership, one is -- which i'll talk about. the other is apportionment of fault, and then we will talk about the fraud and the punitive damages. so the first issue i do want to talk to you about is class membership. and as you-all know from the trial, this case started out -- stemmed out of another case. there was a class action filed in 1994, and it was for florida residents 4778 from a different time, a different era -- oh, not like -- that is why we talk about present day -- people born in the '30s, '40s, and '50s who ended up getting a smoking-related disease in the '90s. and that was -- this case was a short case, as long as it seemed, the real case lasted about a year and there was a lot of evidence. and there were findings in that case where that jury just like you made certain findings based on the evidence that they had. and it went all the way to the florida supreme court, and it is the law of the state of florida that what they did cannot be denied. there is denial that they entered into a conspiracy, that they concealed important information. that is a fact. that is a fact as if you found the issues yourself. but for that to apply, we have to prove to you, it is our burden of proof that karl ahrens was a class member. and so this issue, if you look at it, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was that a legal cause of his cancer and death. it seems simple. and it is important. it is very important. and we know now -- and, again, it is my burden of proof, but obviously their 4779 defense is that he is not a class member. and i submit to you that through his life, they had in their class of smokers that they always wanted him to be a member of, they always wanted him to be a member of their class until he got sick and died. and this is -- what i'm showing you is even if he started smoking at 18, their goal is -- and it is in their own documents that they want to get in the minds of kids when they are young. that is their whole -- their whole business plan, get in the minds of children when they are children, and when they get older in their teens, they will experiment and then we can get them hooked and get them addicted. then they will be tomorrow's business for the next 25 years. these are the business plans. these are the documents that you are not supposed to see that you are seeing. this is philip morris when they talk about children being very impressionable, remembering things they hear and see long after they have occurred. that is why they are giving candy to kids. they do not want a 6-year-old, a 7-year-old, an 8-year-old to start smoking, this is not what they are doing, but they are trying to create a favorable impression in the mind of children, 4780 knowing that they become -- look, it looks cool, it looks glamorous. and then they are saying -- in 1960, they were saying 14- to 24-year-olds will represent -- and karl at that time was 21 -- will be our -- our business, tomorrow's business for the next 25 years. and that was karl. so in their internal documents, that is what they wanted. they wanted him to -- to become addicted to their product. they wanted him to be a long-term smoker. they wanted him to belong to this class of all the other people who we now know all died, or were really injured from the product. so the class membership, this is what -- we talked about this a little bit in opening. class membership, when you heard -- the judge just instructed you on the law, and you heard it. there is nothing about whether smokers have choices. that is not going to be an issue as to whether or not you can include or exclude somebody from the class. when you include somebody in the class, it is just that issue that i read to you, and i will tell you the instruction in a second. choices that people may have. you know, 4781 people can choose to try to quit. people make choices to try to quit. just because you choose to try to quit does not always mean you are going to be successful. that issue goes to comparative fault, which is another issue. ability to quit, every addict has the ability to quit. if that was the issue for class membership, nobody would ever be a class member because any addict, whether you are a nicotine addict, an alcoholic, a heroin addict, addicts can quit. knowledge of the dangers, that is an issue that goes to the conspiracy, concealment, the reliance claims and those fraud claims. and brand usage, whether he smoked one brand or the other, that is an issue for a different thing. but class membership, it is not about those issues. so i have to spend a little bit of time on class membership because it is such an important issue here. so this is the instruction that the judge has told you-all about, addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of lung cancer in mr. ahrens if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer so 4782 that it can be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes, the lung cancer would not have occurred. so you have to ask yourself when you weigh the evidence, did the nicotine -- did the addiction to nicotine -- was he addicted to nicotine or did he smoke for reasons. and if he was addicted to nicotine, was that the reason he smoked. but for his addiction, would he have smoked that many cigarettes for that many years and still develop lung cancer? i submit to you the evidence is overwhelming that nobody does that, and they know that. they know that nobody does that. and again, the addiction, this is important, too, because it does not have to be the only cause. it is not about class membership. that is why i asked you guys, respectfully, to keep your eye on the ball. if you follow the law, i submit to you mr. ahrens was a member of the class clearly, because even if you believe that he had choices at some point where he could have quit or could have tried harder or should have quit, which we do not deny, that does not exclude somebody from being a class member because addiction -- and this 4783 was the law, the law that you-all obviously -- you know, we know that you will follow, it says addiction need not be the only cause and it can occur at the same time -- other things can occur at the same time, as long as the addiction contributes substantially to producing the death or the illness of the person, and then you are a class member. and so we have to prove our evidence by the greater weight of the evidence, and in this case on the addiction issue, we brought you -- there were two experts that were brought to you, dr. dorce and dr. hurt. i'm sorry. so this is one of the issues is believability of witnesses, and i'm going to go through some of the instructions. the judge just read this to you, but you have to consider the expertise, the experience, the knowledge, the training of these experts in saying who do you believe more. and, quite frankly, we do bring you experts to see if somebody was addicted to nicotine or not, but one of the reasons that i did go over the definitions with dr. dorce is that you-all -- you know, you-all are laypeople, intelligent people. 4784 you do not have to be a doctor to be able to see whether or not somebody meets the definition of addiction. karl ahrens is not here for somebody to make a medical diagnosis of him. so there was a lot of things that dr. dorce did not know but that we do know, and even based upon what we do know -- and i submit he did not have all the criteria for the dsm-5, but in considering whether somebody is addicted or not, you consider each expert. and you do not have to consider dr. dorce at all. if you feel that dr. dorce was not qualified or not being frank or not being honest and not being forthright, you can disregard everything that she said. but you have these two experts and we brought you -- you know, again, it is an important case for my client. and we brought you dr. richard hurt. we brought you dr. richard hurt. you know he is treated thousands of patients for nicotine addiction. he devoted his life to this. and then they brought you dr. dorce, and she does not treat people for nicotine addiction. people go there for other reasons. in fact, they tell people to bring cigarettes to her facility. 4785 that is what she does for a living. she is never -- never been asked to lecture to anybody other than juries when she is been hired by them. and so this is what they asked dr. dorce: why do people smoke? and she said they smoke because of a habit, they smoke because of routines, they smoke because of control of weight. these are the reasons that she told you when she was on the stand in direct examination. and one thing that she did not tell you in direct examination is that the primary reason people smoke is for nicotine. they know that. they know that. and she knows that. and so when dr. dorce takes the stand and she gives you all the other reasons, she does not tell you the primary reason. you have to ask yourself, why would not she be telling me this, why is she not telling us about the nicotine. because there are -- that people want to smoke just for the taste or just because it is a habit, they can go smoke cigarettes without nicotine if they want. but nicotine is there for a reason. it is there for a reason, and they know it. we also know that they knew much more about nicotine than was even in the published 4786 literature. they know how important nicotine is. and when you look in their own documents, when you see why are people smoking, why do they think the people are smoking, how are they getting people to be customers for 30, 40, 50 years, people who want to quit, people who are trying to quit, people whose family are asking them to quit, people who are saying, hey, i like it, and they know in their own documents that they are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug that they designed, the products that deliver nicotine, that their industry is based on nicotine. and there is nothing in there anywhere, anywhere in their documents where they are talking about let us give people a choice, let us make the nicotine levels low enough so people can quit when they want to. in fact, they say the opposite. they talk about how low can we keep them and keep people addicted. and so when you look at even dr. dunn, who was a scientist for philip morris who gave a speech, one of the things -- he gave two speeches. one there was information, and the other one there was not. he had internal memos which had some things that he did not reveal in his speech, but when he was writing his book and he signed his 4787 book to a friend, he said, "no doubt about it, it is all about the nicotine." and they know that. so, you know, i think now -- hopefully now that you-all realize that that is what it is about. it is about the nicotine. and they are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. that is how they designed their products. and if they are going to be in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, how can they be marketing to teenagers 21 years of age and under? in fact, dr. leung from lorillard said they should never market to anybody 21 years or younger. and so they know that sixty percent of their consumers are going to grow up and die; whether it is fifty percent or eighty percent or 90 percent, there is a large percentage of these teenagers in our country who are going to smoke their products, who are going to get addicted -- not everybody is addicted. some people could smoke a few cigarettes, some people could smoke a couple here and there and quit whenever they want. that happens. but people who smoke a pack, two packs a day, those people are generally addicted to nicotine. people are smoking all day long. and 4788 then why would they want to market a product to teenagers, who they know 50, ninety percent are going to become addicted and sixty percent are going to die a pretty bad death. and so these are the different definitions of addiction that we brought to you. it is a chronic relapsing brain disease, despite harmful consequences. you know, that is drug addiction. people will use it chronically. people will try to quit and start again, try to quit and start again. that is relapsing. and they do it despite their knowledge of a harmful consequence. those are all the different definitions of addiction that we went over with dr. dorce. they are from nida, the american psychiatric association, you know, compulsive use, repetitive behavior of activity despite adverse consequence. so you have to ask yourself, is that what karl ahrens did? was he addicted? was he somebody who was addicted, or did he smoke just because he liked the taste and he smoked and he can take it or leave it whenever he wanted to? and so here is what we know about karl. again, ninety percent start as teenagers. he smoked for 35 -- approximately 35 years. look, his 4789 family said he started at 18. his son said he started before that. dr. dorce said between 16 and 18 because people experiment. and we know that he quit around '91-'92 because not only is that what his family said, but they filled out -- he had filled out a survey in 1991 or '90 or '91 that he was smoking merit ultra lights. he smoked a pack to a pack and-a-half a day. 200 to 300 hits of nicotine to the brain every day. first thing in the morning. when he tried to quit, he would have a withdrawal, a well-recognized withdrawal. he smoked despite the harmful consequences. and he would make multiple attempts. and even when he quit for a day or two days or three days or a week, he would relapse and go right back. that is what addiction is. it is a chronic relapsing disorder that people do despite the harmful consequences even when they want to quit. and that is addiction. and so we know the asam, the american society of addiction medicine, they say in their own criteria that the two most clinically useful tests to determine physical dependence are the fagerstrom and the heaviness of smoking index. 4790 so those are the two that scientists and doctors -- i know there is a book, the dsm-5 which we talked to dr. dorce about. and, again, i'm not shying from that book. i still feel confidently that mr. ahrens did meet all those criteria. but that is a book for psychiatrists for mental illnesses. most people when they go -- when they want to stop smoking, they want to go to their doctor, they go to their family doctor, they go to other doctors, and those doctors generally use these two tests. and we know under these tests, that from what we know of karl ahrens, because we do not know everything, but when you go through the fagerstrom test, that he had somewhere between 7 -- and, you know, he could have had more because two of the questions we do not know the answers of, but no matter how you cut it, when you use that test, he was somebody who was considered highly addicted. and the same with the heaviness of smoking index. that is not something that dr. hurt came up with on his own. it is a widely used, well-recognized, reliable test, because they look at -- they look at how soon is this person smoking when he gets up. is he somebody who is smoking 4791 two hours, three hours, four hours, a day later. does it not matter to him when he gets his first cigarette or is he smoking on his way to the bathroom, because that matters because you guys know that the nicotine receptors in the morning are empty. the way they work is they need to be filled, they need to be filled for nicotine, and when you are not getting your nicotine, if you are addicted to nicotine, you need it. you feel like -- you know, you feel better when you have it. you feel like it relaxes you. it makes you feel relaxed. it makes you feel more at ease. so people who smoke within five minutes and smoke, you know, 20, 30 hits of cigarettes of nicotine a day are those that are considered highly dependent, highly addicted. and we also know dr. dorce used the dsm-5. and even when we went through the dsm-5 with dr. dorce, you can go through all the criteria, and the only ones that he did not meet are the two, the one that says recurrent tobacco use resulting in failure to fulfill major roles and obligations, and even that book says that that rarely -- rarely happens with tobacco use because you cannot -- there is most places you can smoke, 4792 you can at work or things like that. so that one barely even is applicable. and the other one he did not fulfill was the one where, you know, continued despite knowledge of problems because he did not yet have a problem before he quit smoking. so i submit to you that, you know, he was highly addicted under any criteria, and he -- ultimately he tried to quit and ultimately, thank god, he did quit. but, you know, some people who quit, unfortunately, because of the damage that is done, they are still going to get lung cancer, and that is what happened to him. so we know how much time he spent -- when you talk about did the addiction cause his illness, did the addiction cause his lung cancer, we know how much time he spent administering nicotine to his brain. and that is why -- and maybe i was not clear, somebody said to me yesterday that i was not clear in terms of the hours. but what i was trying to say was obviously the day is 24 hours, but people need to sleep, right. so if you take 16 hours a day and you take somebody with the number of cigarettes that he smoked and they smoke one after the other, it 4793 would take him that long to finish all of the cigarettes. and he spent a lot of time doing it. and while doing it, these are all the carcinogens that he is exposing his body to. and all the different carcinogens, cyanide, formaldehyde, arsenic, are all going into his body with every inhalation of cigarettes that he takes. so we know that his lifetime exposures are different than a social smoker. instead of somebody smoking maybe a pack a month, who is really not doing that much damage to their body, he is getting 2-and-a-half to almost 4 million of these exposures because of his addiction to nicotine. and so that is what we know. we know with smoking, people who are exposed to all these carcinogens, fifty percent -- dr. hurt said sixty percent will die from a smoking-related disease. and so what happened with karl -- and this is what, unfortunately, went on to occur that we know that he developed what is called adenocarcinoma of the lung. and we know from doctor -- we know from all the evidence in the case, you-all may remember, with adenocarcinoma, number one, it is an adeno-related disease, 4794 adenocarcinoma of the lung. but the evidence was because of the design changes in cigarettes over time there was more adenocarcinoma of the lung or is more adenocarcinoma of the lung in our society. we know that. and we also know that people who smoke some of these cigarettes with these design changes will inhale more deeply, will inhale more. and with adenocarcinoma, it goes further down in the lung. and that is what happened to karl ahrens. and so his adenocarcinoma that we know that he had when they first did the bronchoscopy, they were unable to reach it. you know, it was not that it was not in the lung. if he did not have lung cancer, they would not have done any more tests. nobody would have said he had lung cancer. this is dr. ruckdeschel, who was, you know, one of the tops in the world, explained to you-all that what happens -- what happens, especially with adenocarcinoma, that the bronchoscopy may not be able to visualize the tumor. and so what they did is they did a mediastinoscopy. and when they did that, they took the biopsy from the lymph nodes, from the mediastinum lymph nodes, and that biopsy showed 4795 that he had non-small cell carcinoma. and what we know is when he was referred to moffitt cancer center, all the doctors at the prior hospital, the pathologist, the surgeon, when they discharged him to his family doctor, they said, hey, he is got adenocarcinoma. it is a single solid mass, which we know. when it metastasizes, it becomes multiple masses through the bloodstream. he had a single solid mass. it ended causing a pleural effusion which happens with lung cancer. it metastasized to the bone, and they knew that it was lung cancer. it was nothing else. there was nothing else. they said, oh, he did not have an autopsy. who has an autopsy? when people know what you die from why would -- why would you want to subject ina or her family to an autopsy of karl ahrens, when every single doctor said he had lung cancer because maybe 20 years later a tobacco company would say you have not proved it with one hundred percent certainty. that is not -- that is not -- that is not fair, and that is not right. they knew he had lung cancer. they put him in a special study for only people with lung cancer. and so everybody at moffitt who treated 4796 him knew he had lung cancer. he had two pathology reports at moffitt. they both came up adenocarcinoma. one of them said consistent with a favor lung primary, and the other one said consistent with lung primary. and both of them called for a clinical correlation. and we know with adenocarcinoma it can only be breast cancer, ovary cancer. he did not have those; we know that. esophogeal cancer, we know he did not have that. stomach, pancreas, colon cancer, kidney cancer, which we know he had a normal ct of the abdomen. and the only other possibility in the world was that maybe he had prostate cancer, which we know all of his urinary symptoms are normal, and he had a normal rectal exam. so it would be physically impossible for somebody to have stage iv cancer of any of those types -- forget he had a single solid mass that looked like lung cancer, that everybody said was lung cancer, that went to the -- caused the pleural effusion and went to the mediastinum lymph nodes and everything, forget that. the adenocarcinoma, could it be anything else? so from a process of elimination, you would have to 4797 know even, without a chest x-ray, that it had to be lung cancer. and so he was treated at moffitt by all these doctors. i mean, these are doctors -- they were not hired by me; they did not know me; they did not know anybody; they did not know the tobacco companies. every single one of them, five different oncologists. we had a gi oncologist, a radiation oncologist, different surgeons. every single one of them, when you look -- i think there was actually more in the medical records who diagnosed him with lung cancer. so if you have any doubt, you can look through those medical records, you will see that every single solitary doctor in the world before we came to court -- well, every single doctor in the world who has ever spoken about him, because there is nobody in on the other side, everybody said it was lung cancer. and so the death certificate says lung cancer. and so then when you put everything together -- and this is just to determine if he is a class member, in all fairness, is he somebody who is a member of the engle class. that is what 4798 we have been litigating, and we know that once somebody is smoking how they cause these changes, nicotine addiction causes these compulsive continual changes that results in lung cancer. this is the surgeon general even saying how nicotine addiction causes cancer. transcribed as follows:) "we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year." (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: even dr. dorce yesterday finally did admit that nicotine addiction causes lung cancer. so, you know, this whole thing about, you know, is it the choice that caused the lung cancer or the nicotine addiction that causes the lung cancer, you know, i submit to you that is not what the law -- that is not what the law says. the law -- if you read the law and you -- mr. carter: objection, your honor, misstates the law. the court: mr. paige, you want to approach? 4799 mr. paige: no. the court: ladies and gentlemen, if you discern any difference at all between what the court instructs you on the law and what anybody else says, you are legally obligated to follow the court's instructions on the law. mr. paige: right. and that is respectfully what i'm asking you, which i know you-all do, and what i'm saying is the law -- when you read the law you will not see any words about choice. all you will see is, was the addiction to nicotine a substantial contributing cause so that but for the -- but for the addiction, if he was not addicted, would he have smoked that much and developed lung cancer. and i submit to you the evidence is overwhelming that he has to be a class member. and on the prior slide -- if you go back, robert -- you know, it talks about -- they even know, again -- we proved our case through their documents. they know internally it is all about the nicotine. they are talking about here without the chemical compounds, the cigarette market would collapse, we would all lose our jobs, we would all lose 4800 our consulting fees. and that is the -- you know, the sad part because there is no -- there is no compassion in there, there is no compassion for what is going on for anybody other than themselves. and they are worried about -- when you look at those documents and you see what their concerns are, where they are concerned -- look, i know they are a business. businesses have to make money. but when you make money, there has to be some morals. and even dr. wakeham, which we will play, said, "hey, we are a moralistic company." how moralistic is it when you know all that they know and they expressed not one concern, not any compassion, not any compassion for any human being but themselves, nothing, zero, and all they care about is whether they will lose their jobs and whether they will be out of business overnight. and all they know is it is about the nicotine, and that is all they are concerned with. and when they now say that he is not a class member, i submit to you it would not be consistent with the law. so once we know he is a class member, that karl ahrens, who has always wanted to be a member of the class, who is a class, then we 4801 know -- and this is what the -- and this is what the argument is. because once he is a class member, we know that you have to embrace the findings as if you found it yourselves. they know that. they know you have to embrace the findings, and they know what they did. the proof is and the overwhelming evidence is that they did these things. so what they did is -- if we can skip the first two -- they know that their products are defective and unreasonably dangerous. the products that karl ahrens smoked, the filters did not work, micronite filters. imagine they tell somebody when all this is going on back in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s that there is this controversy. and they say, hey, we have a filter that is going to take out -- if there is anything harmful, it will be removed. it will be removed. and then the people find out it did not remove anything. they promised me they were going to remove -- they told me that they were going to remove anything harmful and did not remove anything. and then they told me the lights would be safer if i switched to lights, but internally 4802 they knew that people who were smoking lights were getting as much or more tar and nicotine. and the merit ultra lights had 77 percent more free nicotine. they were adding more chemicals to the merit ultra lights to keep the nicotine levels higher. so that is not fair. that is not right. and that is what they did. they were negligent. they were careless. you know, there is an instruction that it says -- the judge just read it, you know, corporations have to be treated like a person, right. and for a person you have to -- you know, negligent, what would a reasonable careful person, a reasonable prudent person, somebody with morals and caring about people, what would they do, were they negligent. and they were negligent. and, you know, there is a book -- everything i knew i learned i knew in kindergarten, right, be nice, be fair, do not lie to people, do not hurt people. you know, think about other people. and they did not do that. they did not do that. and they did everything but that. and that is a problem with them. and they were not -- they were not stupid people. you know, something like this happens in 4803 life for 50 years and you think, how did this happen. these are grown men who were going home to dinner with their families and eating and enjoying all their profits that they were talking about and people were dying and they did not care. and so they were negligent. that is the truth. that is a finding. that is a fact. they concealed or omitted material information, important information knowing what they were saying was false concerning the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. and then they entered into an agreement with each other. so now you have not just one company, you have six companies, and they go to the plaza hotel, right, and they know -- because that is the finding -- they know that -- there is the thing about punitive damages. are they recklessly indifferent to the rights of others, do they care -- how bad is what they did. and they go to the plaza hotel, all these companies, all these executives, all these grown men, and they sit in a room, and they devise a plan where they want people to rely upon it to their detriment. ms. arnold: objection, your honor, 4804 mischaracterizing the findings. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and so you have all these people. and, you know -- and the point is these are real people. this is ina ahrens, and she is lived through this. this is the harm that they knew would happen to families. this is not, like, some obscure thing that happened. it happens every day. think about it, 500,000 people a year in our country, how many people that is, how many people. it is more than a thousand people every day. and how many of them started when they did not know what they knew, and how many did they take advantage of. and so, you know, there is a movie, probably a lot of you probably saw it, maybe the younger ones maybe not, but it is called a few good men, and there is a part in the movie where -- it is at the end of the movie, and there is the two guys, dawson and downey, and so the big guy -- i forget his name -- that was dawson, the little guy was downey. and the little guy says: "how? i do not understand how come we are going to get in trouble. what did we do? we 4805 did not do anything wrong?" and the big guy says: "no. but we did not help anybody. we sat back, and we did not help anybody when we could have." and think about this, for 50 years all these people knowing that people were dying, knowing that they would rely upon them to their detriment and all they care about was one thing, one thing, and that was their money. and so those are the findings and that is -- those are very important in this case. and that is the issue of why class membership is important. the next issue is, was smoking a cigarette -- manufactured by each defendant a legal cause. so we have two cigarettes that we have been litigating about in this case, the kent and the merit ultra lights. and so did each cigarette contribute to lung cancer, that is one of the questions. and so this -- the instruction says the, defendant's cigarette was a legal cause of injury if smoking that is directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such injury, so that it can reasonably 4806 be said that but for smoking that defendant's cigarettes -- so but for the merit ultra lights or but for the kent -- the injury would not have occurred. and then it says in order to prove as a legal cause, smoking of cigarettes manufactured by either of the defendants need not be the only cause. smoking the defendants' cigarettes may be a legal cause of his lung cancer and death even though it operates in combination with the cigarettes of another. so it does not have to be that just the kents caused it or just the merit ultra lights caused it, it could be both. and now doctor -- the issue in this case is that doctor -- go to the next slide -- dr. ruckdeschel said in cross examination, he said at one point, if he had quit in 1980, he probably would have got lung cancer anyway because we know 25 years of smoking is a lot that, hey, probably he would have gotten lung cancer. but we know also that he said that is speculation. who really knows. what we do know is that he did continue to smoke, and as he continued to smoke, his chances -- and dr. ruckdeschel said this, the 4807 likelihood increased and increased and increased until we know with the certainty that he did get lung cancer. so, and the epidemiological studies and the evidence in this case have shown that there is a dose-response effect, and it increases with the length of time each individual smokes and with the number of cigarettes consumed. so with every cigarette smoked, there is more harm and more harm being done to his body. and even we know -- we can speculate what would have happened if he quit in 1980 or what would have happened if he quit in 1970 or what would have happened if he quit in 1985. but what we do know in this case, he smoked until about 1991 or 1992, and what we do know is that each cigarette he smoked along the way damaged his body so that the cancer that we know that he got with 100 percent certainty, not that he may have -- would have gotten it, not that he probably would have gotten it, but the one that we know that he got was caused by all the damage. and, truthfully, it is not really an issue for us. it is more of an issue between them because if after 1980 merit has no 4808 responsibility -- they are still responsible for the conspiracy, by the way. they do not get -- conspiracy, they are responsible even if they did not smoke their cigarette. but then kent would be responsible for all the damage. but the issue is, and i think the overwhelming evidence is the more you smoke, the more the chances increase, the more the likelihood increases until we know with absolute certainty what happened here. so i would submit the answer to those are yes to both. and then the next issue is apportionment of fault. and so once you decide that somebody is a class member and the cigarettes are involved, you have to apportion responsibility. and, again, you know that we have accepted some responsibility in combination with the acts of the defendants on the negligence and strict liability claims. and the judge has instructed you it does not apply to the fraud claims because the law does not allow if somebody does something on purpose, if somebody commits a fraud or they commit a conspiracy, they do not get the benefit of comparative fault in our society. so that is 4809 different. so on the negligence claim and the strict liability claims, we do admit that we bear some responsibility, but it is important to see what responsibility mr. ahrens had in comparative to what the defendants did. so we brought you dr. proctor; and they brought you dr. pach. and i just think it is -- dr. pach said that he was the historian of karl ahrens, but he did not know much about karl ahrens. but he did read the surgeon general report. he did say he read that, and one of things that he did acknowledge is that he was aware either through reading that and reading the book, cigarette century, he was aware of all the harm and lies caused by the defendants' conspiracy. so you have to go back in time to when karl ahrens was growing up, and you apportion his fault. and you have to look at what -- because the rule of the law for comparative fault is what would a reasonable person have done under like circumstances at that time, in the '50s, the '60s, the '70s. what was a reasonable, normal, usual thing doing. that is why i asked dr. dorce, i said, 4810 there is nothing unusual about somebody, especially back then, smoking in their 20s, their 30s, trying to quit in their 40s, taking many, many times and finally quitting. so when he was smoking, in the world he grew up in, smoking was normal, athletes smoked. you know, hank aaron, that is len dawson during the super bowl. the other day it was the super bowl. it would be like cam newton or peyton manning smoking in the locker room, it would be unheard of. but back then, it was normal. it was normal for that to occur. you know, he grew up in a world where, you know, there was nothing wrong with seeing things like that, athletes and santa claus and doctors. and doctors, remember in the 1950s, sixty percent of doctors smoked. and they talk a lot about karl ahrens was an intelligent man. sure, he was intelligent. intelligent people smoke. you know, a lot of smart people smoke. millions of smart people smoke, and people smoke when they are intelligent because either they are uninformed or they are addicted. and karl ahrens, when he started smoking 4811 when he was younger, and his schoolbooks -- you know it is funny, they try to say in his work -- in his work they were teaching him about -- they had a wellness program at xerox, he should have known better, he should have known better. but if he knew -- if he knew better, how come -- how come the executives from philip morris and r.j. reynolds who are going on tv and saying they did not know, how is that okay? so how could he have known more than what they knew, when all the times where they knew internally, but they were lying about it? but he grew up in a world where, you know, this is not even a mixed message. the message was it was healthy and it was fun and it was okay to smoke. and so when he started smoking in the 1950s, did he do anything wrong? was there anything wrong with it? when he was smoking in the 1960s, was there anything abnormal about it? you know, they were spending $200 billion. they will show you all the psas they had on tv. the psas do not compare. you know, they had -- it was -- they would spend more in a day than the public health community would spend in a year. so the public health community, i think if you do the 4812 math, it is about $10 million a day that they spent marketing their product. that is what the public health community would do in a year. so when he was growing up, it is not like it is today. you know, today you go on tv and you can see all the public health service messages about how bad smoking is, and that is a great thing for kids to see, younger kids, kids in high school who grow up with that and they get that message. and there is no competing forces, there is no doubt, there is no confusion about it, there is no nothing. it is clear as can be now, and that is a great thing. but when karl ahrens was growing up, it was a different world, a different message. in fact, even in the textbooks, you know, there is information in there about, hey, smoking is harmful, nicotine is a poison, and then they also talk about, but, you know, there is two sides, you need to make up your mind. and how can you compete with all this advertising that is going on. and think about this. if they are trying to teach it to the school kids in schoolbooks, do not smoke, do not smoke, why, why would they then try to target kids? why would they have all these 4813 messages, mixed messages to kids? what would they even try to interfere with that or compete with that? why would not they just stop doing that? because if the schools are trying to teach the kids right from wrong, the schools are trying to help kids, why are they doing the opposite? what would motivate them? you talk about motivation. what is their motivation. why did they make their choices that they made? (video clip played.) speaker: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered. the brand named most was camel. yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoke camel. do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris, and here is how you can prove it. light up a philip morris. take a puff. (singing.) do not miss the fun of smoking. do not miss the fun of smoking. mildness is a pleasure with pall mall. as with bob cousy, kent is the favorite cigarette of millions of smokers. and all over america, kent with micronite filter is smoked by more scientists and by more educators. 4814 desi arnaz: lucy. lucille ball: yes, dear. desi arnaz: give me a cigarette, will you, hon? lucille ball: do not say cigarette; say philip morris. desi arnaz: oh, is there any other kind? lucille ball: not for you, there is not. granny: i tell you, pearl, winston is good smoking. sure wish you could taste it. pearl: i am tasting it, granny. winston tastes good. granny: like a cigarette should. (singing.) you get a lot to like with a marlboro, filter ... fred flintstone: okay. how's about taking a nap? barney rubble: i got a better idea. let us take a winston break. fred flintstone: that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor twenty times a pack. winston has got that filter blend. (singing.) if you smoke a lot, please be certain that you have got the cigarette designed 4815 just for you. change to kent, change to kent, change to kent. with the micronite filter. (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: and so when you are talking about fault of karl ahrens and you are going to compare his fault to their defective product and their carelessness -- and we are not comparing his fault in 2015, what somebody would do in 2015 or 2000 or even 1990. when you look at that chart, the consumption level is rising and rising and rising until about 1982. so he is doing -- basically in 1960, fifty percent of doctors smoked. in 1970, thirty percent of doctors smoked. in 1982, the consumption level starts going down and the truth starts coming out, and less people are starting to die and, actually, 1982 is when he starts trying to quit. but the cancer survey -- and this is from -- looking at a 1987 survey, this was still saying that about 15 to 20 million of americans, you know, still had some -- they did not know what we know today. and so when you blame the victim 100 percent, i submit to you that is not fair when you consider the world he grew up in, the information 4816 that he had, the information that he believed about his filters, the information that he believed about what he was doing, and what they say internally and what they have said internally, not what they say publicly, not what they want the public to believe, not what they want people to know, but they know internally, they said all along is that it is not a free choice, it is not a free choice if somebody's addicted. and it is been confirmed by the surgeon general. so, and again, i'm not saying he did nothing, that he should not bear any responsibility, but all that i submit to you has to be considered. sure. and again, you know -- um -- um. next one. so i submit, you know -- and i submit you are saying to yourself, okay, but he did not quit until 1991, 1992. why did it take him so long? why did it take him so long? you know what? that is a fair question. that is a fair question. and i submit to you that he started quitting in 1982. it was not a choice. he was addicted. he tried as hard as he could. look, everybody can try harder. everybody can try harder. in retrospect, i'm sure he wishes 4817 he could have. i'm sure ina wishes that he did. but he was growing up in a world that is very different than what we know now. he had totally different information than what we have now. so i submit to you from the time he was born, while, you know, johnny roventini and the candy cigarettes and the world he grew up in, through all the commercials that you saw until about 1982 when the consumption is going down, i submit to you he does not bear any responsibility for that. and we know that the first ten years -- we do not know what he smoked. what we do know is that the defendants had about eighty percent of the market, okay, they had eighty percent of the market. do we know what brand he smoked? we do not. and i'm not asking you to apportion any fault to them for the first ten years because i do not know 100 percent what he did smoke those years. but the next 25 years, we know what he smoked, and we know from 1966 until about 1982, about 15 years, he smoked their brands and the last ten years he smoked ms. arnold's company's brands. so we can break it out into time periods it is 60/40. okay. sixty percent of the time before 4818 1982. i submit to you r.j. reynolds is one hundred percent at fault. and i submit to you for the last forty percent, for that time period, i submit to you that when mr. ahrens was trying to quit, when he was smoking the light cigarettes, when he thought that they were safer, when he was doing the best he could do, i admit that he does bear some responsibility, but i do not think -- it is up to you, you decide what you want to do. these are just suggestions. and obviously whatever you decide. but i would suggest to you that at the end when you compare the fault that the defective product of philip morris to the efforts of somebody who is addicted to nicotine was trying hard, that it is not 50/50 during that time period, but it is more like 25/75. and that is why i came up with these numbers, 60/30/10. and that is how we respectfully submit you apportion fault; but, again, that is just my suggestion. your honor, this will be a good time to break. the court: okay. thank you. ladies and gentlemen, we are going to give you a ten-minute recess now, and then we will return 4819 to continue mr. paige's closing. (jurors exited the courtroom.) court deputy: jury is outside the hearing of the court. the court: thank you, sir. ten minutes. (recess 10:39 a.m. until 10:50 a.m.) the court: as a housekeeping matter, mr. paige is not back -- there you are, mr. paige. as a housekeeping matter, i calculate that it is going to be meal time or past meal time when we get through closings and instructions. so i've had deputy robb distribute a menu to the jury. they are going to place their lunch orders now and target -- i told them to try to target delivery about one o'clock. does that sound about right? mr. paige: from me or for them? the court: for the jury's tummies. does that sound like a reasonable -- when i say about right, does that sound like a reasonable prediction about when we are -- mr. carter: i think it would make sense, your honor, to probably break at the normal time for lunch. i'm gathering mr. paige has probably about 4820 another hour, hour and 10 minutes in his first part of his closing. am i wrong? mr. paige: you are pretty good. you are pretty good. mr. carter: so that would take us right up to about noon. rather than split the defense closing over lunch, i think it makes more sense -- the court: no. i was anticipating we get everything done by one. you do not think so? mr. carter: no. mr. kaczynski: no. the court: well, and that is why i'm asking. i would delay that lunch order, then, and send them out on their own devices for lunch after the conclusion of plaintiff's argument. okay. we will -- i wish i could retrieve the deputy about now. mr. paige: maybe if it gets here early, they can eat it if they want to. the court: is that him? that is another deputy. no, we will let them know that they are going on their own for lunch after all. i'll tell them it was my miscalculation. and that is why i'm asking. 4821 (pause in proceedings.) court deputy: all rise. court is now in session. bring the jury in, your honor? the court: yes. (jurors entered the courtroom.) court deputy: the jury is seated and accounted for, your honor. the court: thank you, deputy robb. before mr. paige proceeds, ladies and gentlemen, i want to apologize for probably getting your mouths watering for nothing. i miscalculated and thought that we would be taking a lunch today, but we are actually going to be taking a break to send you to lunch in the usual manner. so you will be on your own for lunch after all. and with that, mr. paige, you may proceed. mr. paige: okay. so now i want to move on and talk about the fraud claims and the significance of the fraud claims. and the fraud claims are different than what we have been talking about. the class membership, obviously you have to find under the law somebody to be a class member before the fraud claims apply. but for the fraud 4822 claims, they are important for a couple reasons. but -- one reason is because they committed fraud, but another reason is for us to prevail on punitive damages -- well, actually, that is not -- i do not think that is so. so i was mistaken. but with the fraud claims, i just want to be clear that our admission of comparative fault does not apply, and that is not what we are admitting to, because for an intentional tort, the law does not apply for there to be a setoff for comparative fault because of what it is. somebody commits a fraud, admits concealment or conspiracy with the intent that they will harm people, they do not get that benefit, that other people do something by mistake or by negligence. so the first, as we all know -- for me to go through this with you-all again -- and for lawyers, we know that you guys took a lot of notes. and not every jury takes a lot of notes, just so you know. so we know you guys took a lot of notes and i know you guys paid attention. a lot of what i'm saying, you guys are probably thinking to yourself, why is he telling me this, we heard this already. for a lawyer, i do not know what you know or 4823 what you thought. so probably a lot of it -- i apologize if i'm being redundant on what you guys already know. but i'm trying to just walk through the evidence with you and kind of apply it to the law. so i guess that is it. in any event, we know and you-all know now that there was a meeting at the plaza hotel in 1953, and that is when that mouse skin-painting study came out that was on the news and that people then started learning, because that was the first real big news that smoking caused lung cancer. and if you think about it, that was a time in society, again, where i think there was -- there were tens of millions, whether it is 50 million or 60 million americans were smoking, and they did not know what we know now. so there was a meeting at the plaza hotel when that came out. and all the executives were competitors. it would be like if coke and pepsi and whatever, verizon and another cell company got together, we need a meeting, this is a problem for our business, let us talk about how we are going to handle it and because a lot of people are dying and we need to make sure that we handle it 4824 together because if one person steps out of line, we will all lose money. so they go and they meet at the plaza hotel and they carry out this conspiracy that you-all know about for about 50 years. and when you think about that meeting, the reason that meeting is so important, sure, they did tell the attorney general, they had to tell for other reasons that they were meeting, but nobody knew for decades what went on in those meetings, the forwarding memo that you guys saw, because that was not made public. but the significance or the historical significance of it was imagine back at that time, you know, people would not accept about cigarettes what we accept now because we are basically, you know, numb to it or immune to it. but back then, it was more normal and accepted that people were smoking. and people did not think that -- you know, that if it was harmful, it was not going to be okay back then, and they knew that. they actually knew that. they even said that, look, if it is harmful, we will pull our product off the market, okay, which made sense back then. think about it now, if a product came out 4825 today that they knew was going to kill hundreds of thousands of americans that really had no redeeming quality and was a drug, it would not get approved, it would not get approved. so back then, they had this meeting and this they said, look, this is a big study, this could really affect us. let us talk about this as individuals, as real people, what are we going to do about this, okay, how are we going to handle this, because we have -- they did have a responsibility, right. they knew the harm that was going on. they had a chance to change history right then and there, okay. because if they had kept their promise, if they had kept their promise of what people were expecting of them at that time, hundreds -- tens of millions of lives would have been saved. so at that point, they had their meeting and they talked in the meeting. and when you read this, if you look at this forwarding memo, you will see there really was not a concern about what was going on to the public, it was more of a concern about what was going on to them. and they talk about, you know, how they could profit if they could make the first 4826 cancer-free cigarette and how they were going to lock arms and walk together. and that is when really, in terms of history, when this all started and when things could have been completely different. can you show the chart again? is it coming up, or no? so if you look at the consumption chart, when the news came out in 1953, you know, this is what was going on. this line started going down. and that is when people were concerned and people were quitting. and this is when they were having their meeting right there. and that was significant in history because this news is coming out and it is telling people that, hey, look, we have this product, it is now been proven, proven that people who smoke -- cigarettes cause lung cancer. and people were scared, and people started quitting. and at that point, the cigarette companies got together. and if they would have gotten together and said, hey, look, we are making a product that is really hurting a lot of people, there are other businesses that we can do, maybe we go back to the non-inhalable cigarette. -- remember we had this cigarette that was not 4827 inhalable, that did not get deep into the lungs, maybe we did not sell as many, but maybe people were not addicted, but not that many people were dying. maybe we can make it so it is a habit they can break. maybe we take the nicotine out and we spend all of our money marketing that product. they had a lot of choices they could have made. and instead -- and they knew -- you know, their internal memos where they talk about the research that was coming out, there was a lot of research that they showed, dr. proctor or dr. hurt, that was coming out about some of these harms. but they knew the public was not reading -- it was not like their consumers were keeping up with the research. they were keeping up with the research and they were doing their own research. and in their internal memos, they talk about, hey, we know more -- we know a lot more than what is even in the published literature. so when they come forward and make this promise and they tell the people, this is what we are promising you, there is no proof, we accept people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business, that is what a reasonable company would 4828 do, right? if they know that they are making money hurting people, and they tell people who are -- they know -- i'm not going to keep saying the statistics, but they know how many are starting as kids, how many are going to go on to die, how many of them get addicted and they say, look, it is natural that we are going to take your health paramount to our profits, but we believe that we are not making anything that is injuring anybody, and we are going to cooperate with the surgeon general, there is no reason that anybody would disbelieve that. so and, again, at the beginning, in 1954 when they went forward, this is what they said, which now, you know, 50 years later might seem a little funny, but back then, they said if any one of us believed that the product we were making and selling was in any way harmful to our customers' health, we would voluntarily go out of business. that is what they said, and that was what was expected back then. that was not odd. that was not strange. that is what people thought. that is what people expected. and that is what they told people, and people believed it. and, you 4829 know, they made that statement all the way through the '70s. and then here is the interview with the philip morris individuals. transcribed as follows:) mr. bowling: i certainly would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. i think it is important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. i think the real dishonesty is telling people things that are not so. peter taylor: if you were convinced that cigarettes were killing people, would you stop making cigarettes? mr. bowling: oh, i've personally been on record on that for a long time. i'm not in the business of killing people, obviously. i've said all along, simply there are plenty of ways to make a living. i happen to believe in what i'm doing very strongly. mr. wakeham: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. peter taylor: people are smoking a lot of 4830 cigarettes. mr. wakeham: well, let me say it this way. the people who eat applesauce die. the people who eat sugar die. the people who smoke cigarettes die. does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause? i do not know what harms a cigarette smoker or what does not harm them. i really honestly do not know that. you must be trying to get me to admit that cigarette smoking is harmful. i think that if the company as a whole believed cigarettes were really harmful, we would not be in the business. we are a very moralistic company. (the video clip ended.) mr. paige: the point is, i think everybody knows they should have been honest. had they been honest, they could have helped people. and there is other documents that i want to show you about how they intercepted people's ability to try to quit. they did certain things with health assurances and smoking cessation clinics and the gum and the medications as they were coming out. so they had opportunities to do good 4831 things. they had -- any one of those individuals had the opportunity to make the choice to do the right thing, to help people and not -- you know, not pick their profits over human lives. and that was their choice. and with their choices, there were horrible consequences for a lot of people, a lot of people. bless you. we know that internally -- when they were making these statements publicly, we know internally that there was no doubt -- there was no confusion that they knew, you know, with 100 percent certainty that they were hurting people and they were killing people. so here is the lies that we know that was going on. and internally what they were saying is that they had to create doubt, because they knew with what was going on, to sell their product, especially with an addicted smoker, if you talked to somebody who is -- you know, and, in fact, even when you look at the polls that went out, there was a much higher belief level of people who were not smokers and people who were smokers. so the doubt, the confusion, the fact that filters are helpful or lights are helpful or it 4832 may not be proven or the dangers and ingredients would be removed was more readily believable by people who were addicted to nicotine, and they knew that. so in their internal documents, they talk about things, doubt is our product, doubt is our product. we have to provide smokers with a psychological crutch, rationale to continue smoking. and you have to say to yourself or think to yourself or people should think why would they do that, is that fair, is that right. these are bad people who are making bad decisions, and they are making decisions that are hurting other people. and that is -- again, it is not a criminal case. nobody is going to jail in this courtroom, but in a civil society are those type of actions acceptable by individuals who have power. i mean, they had power. you know, who is karl ahrens? he worked -- he went to school. he worked at a computer company, xerox. who are the normal people in society who are smoking, just regular people who are trying to do the right thing or trying to raise their families, who are 4833 loving their families. and they are powerful people. you saw the power they had with their lobbying efforts, the power they had with the media, the power they had to do the right thing and all the money, all the opportunities to do what was right and do what was fair. and instead of saying, hey, the key word is compassion. the key word is helping people. the key word is being nice. the key word is being honest. they talk about the key word is confusion. let us deny the truth. and i submit to you the overwhelming evidence just, you know, everybody knows is that that is a very bad thing, not a right thing for people to do to other people. here is some of the public statements. transcribed as follows:) mr. cullman: i do not believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. we are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. we have smoking habits which incidentally today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters. 4834 i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if they are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god, and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. * * * * mr. cullman: we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. (the video clip ended.) mr. paige: and so, you know, internally they discuss these things because in 1953 -- and you guys probably have it in your notes; but i believe if i recall the numbers were about 3 percent smoked filters, and by the '60s, it was sixty percent. and now it is about 99 percent. so why -- why were people switching from non-filtered to filters, and they were switching because they were being told, if there is anything dangerous, if there is anything unsafe, it would be removed. we are looking into it. we are going to 4835 remove it, but you could be assured in the meantime just smoke this thing with the filter, but internally they are saying, we are really not filtering anything out. but externally they are saying, hey, just smoke our filter. and they knew internally people were switching for health reasons. health reasons are the reason people are trying them. the public has been conditioned to accept that filter effects of charcoal and other fields and when charcoal was added it proved to be an effective advertising gimmick. so, again, this is part of their conspiracy. this is what they were concealing. and when we think later what was being concealed, what was being concealed, you know, they can ask ina ahrens, "oh, did your husband ever know who the tirc was? did he know who the ctr was? did he ever said he relied on a statement from the tirc or ctr? he might -- nobody even knew who they were because they were not telling people that these doctors, who were making statements, were frauds and were being paid by them. how would he know? the issue is what was the ctr and all the 4836 companies concealing from people? what were they not telling people? and that is the problem with the concealment claim. the concealment claim is they had the information. they knew the truth, and they would not tell people about it. and so here is some of their filters. this is the brand that karl ahrens smoked. kent micronite filters. one that more educators and scientists smoked. so when you talk about, he was an intelligent man. a lot of intelligent people smoked. millions of intelligent people were and are addicted to nicotine. it is not their fault. but they capitalize on it; they take advantage of it. educators, teachers, scientists. you know, this one here, how effective are these filters? kents micronite filter approaches seven times the efficiency of other filters in removal of tars and nicotines and is twice as effective as the next most efficient filter. there was no efficiency, zero efficiency, zero. so somebody is using a product. they think that it is filtering something out. it is not filtering anything out. all those carcinogens 4837 that i showed you that people were getting, the arsenic, cyanide, the formaldehyde, polonium-210, that was not filtering any of that out, zero, zero. you know who knew it? you think karl ahrens knew it? they knew it. their clients knew it. they knew it one hundred percent. there was not a mistake. there was no secret to them. internally this was what they are saying. and this is what they were concealing. this is what people had a right to know. people were entitled to know the truth. people are entitled to know the truth. and when they internally say the sale of filter-tip cigarettes -- imagine somebody smoking filter-tipped cigarettes, they think it is doing them some good, and they get throat cancer, lung cancer, some disease. and they find out later, later that this is what they knew all along? is that the way corporations -- is that what we expect corporations to do and act that way? the sale of filter-tip cigarettes is purely a merchandising, sales promotion proposition. people are smoking cigarettes with filters wind up smoking more in order to provide themself with the same amount of nicotine. 4838 they studied compensation. they knew what -- before you got here, did you know about compensation? how people compensated to get the nicotine that they wanted with light cigarettes? they knew about it. we say here is our triple, quadruple filter removing whatever it is; meanwhile, we are giving them a full nice jolt of nicotine. here kent -- kent, the one he is talking about. hey, we are going to exploit some reader's digest that made a mistake. we are going to exploit it because of the safety image. illusion of filtration. smoker of filters is getting as much or more tar and nicotine. and every day, every day they did that thousands of people were dying every single day. you know -- and this is in the '70s. i mean, they still had a chance. i mean, somebody, you know, in the '80s whistleblowers started coming out. in the '90s some of the documents through other means were forced to come over. but, i mean, come on, they had -- you know, the executives of those companies, you know, do you really think they were doing the right thing 4839 when they knew the harm that they were causing people, like karl ahrens, ina ahrens for 20 years she is living alone. that is the damage they left when they -- when they all went home and did their thing and they spent their money and they enjoyed all the things that they benefited from this, they did not think about ina ahrens, and she is home for 20 years taking care of herself because her husband did not know they were going to exploit the kent filter he was smoking? it was not only, you know, karl ahrens who was fooled. all these people thought that filters were safer because now they know, you know, now they know because now -- dr. proctor told you now even the world health organization -- you know, they showed something from the world health organization. we know now the world health organization says they are no safer, took a long time. we know now the surgeon general, all these government companies, now that they have seen their scientific studies that they were doing and their internal documents and they understand compensation. 4840 you look at any of those reports, and they will tell you what they know, how they knew it, and why it took so long for them to learn it, and what the harm was to society of people because of their lies. and they knew too. they knew too because if you look at their documents for nearly 20 years -- this is what they are saying in '72. so remember the plaza hotel was in '53. so now they are writing about it 20 years later. so 20 years later, okay -- we are now talking between '53 and '73, it is 10 million people died, right, 500,000 people a year. so now in that 20 years a lot of people have been hurt, a lot of people have been hurt. and they are writing about it, hey, we have this strategy. it is been great. it was brilliantly conceived and executed. we won important battles. it is been a holding strategy about creating doubt, about the health charge without actually having to deny it, and it helped us defend ourself on three major fronts. litigation, they do not want any litigation. all the litigation that we now know of that -- because we now know about this stuff, they were 4841 able to fend that off for decades, no responsibility to nobody. defend itself on politics. we talk about it -- all the things that they have been able to benefit from where we are. now they have fda oversight from 2009. they were able to stall that for decades. and public opinion. public opinion. let people think it is a choice. we are going to go ahead and do this holding strategy. people will not know what we know. and for 20 years this is what they bragged about internally about how brilliant that was, how brilliant it was. nobody, nobody in the world, no government entity, nobody who got their documents later looked at this and said, boy, these guys were brilliant. nobody, nobody thinks that. so here is what they are saying about -- they talk about how they were able to fend off litigation. an admission by the industry that excessive smoking is bad for you is an admission of guilt. so they are not going to admit. he says here it could open the door to litigation. so they are not going to admit that smoking hurts 4842 anybody. you know, the one element of our legal defense was that there was no dose-response relationship. it does not matter how much you smoke, all the additional cigarettes, we know from the '89 report that every cigarette the person smokes there is a dose-response. every cigarette does cause harm. but here they are saying, no, we are going to tell people it is not a dose-response, and we can hire whatever expert we want, and they will tell the jury whatever we want them to tell them. ms. arnold: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and so this is what they were talking about internally. our medical scientists, witnesses will say whatever we want them to say. that is what they were -- that is what they talk about internally. and that is not what is supposed to happen. that is not what is supposed to happen. let some lawyer look over our shoulder, i will not even concede that one person died of the disease caused by smoking, i will not admit one 4843 person, one person, let alone 500,000 people a year. and so they get involved with the ctr, you know. there was a tirc, and then they changed the name to the ctr. and they start telling people, hey, we got this research that is coming out. it is not really smoking. we know it is not smoking. it is a lot -- smoking might be harmful, but it could be pollution. it could be genetics, a lot of reasons why people are getting sick nowadays. we are learning a lot more about it. and so they have these people who they are funding, legitimate people, some of them, or some of them maybe not, but some people who were reputable, they will give them money and tell them to publish on other topics so they can claim they are affiliated with. hey, look, we are giving money to harvard. we are giving money to stanford. we are giving money to the university of florida. but internally they are not sharing this with these institutions. do you think these institutions would be affiliated with them if they knew what was really going on? the ctr, you know, trying to get a buffer, 4844 some public and political attack, a buffer from that sort of thing, the fact it is a front and a shield. and then they talk about, you know, the tobacco money ain't so dirty anymore. they were able to give their money out to some of these institutions who were having problems getting funding. and around that time -- and this is the other -- this is the other sad part. we do not even know everything that went on there because we only know so much because they had policies in place about destroying reports, throwing things away, rewriting reports. so what we have is good knowledge -- thank god we have -- but internally they are talking about any important letters or documents have to be sent -- please send them home, and i will destroy them. you will not -- this is wakeham telling somebody who he is providing funding to, "you are not allowed to publish anything from any of these findings without me approving it." so they give people money -- that is wakeham from philip morris, that second document. they give them money, and they say, but do not publish anything until i tell you it is okay. 4845 this other document here -- that is philip morris -- philip morris document, and he is talking about where they are doing studies on nicotine, and if the results do not come out like they want them to, they will go ahead and bury those results. and then, finally, they are talking about, hey, we will give some funding, but you can take our money, but you cannot do any research on related smoking to disease -- to cancer or diseases to smoking. and that is what they were doing. so they come here, and they tell you look how great -- the ctr, if you hear anybody say the ctr was good, the ctr was disbanded and the judge told you they were part of the conspiracy. they were not good. they were not good. they did nothing good. they actually got told they cannot do it anymore. they were disbanded by the government, and they were part of the conspiracy as a matter of law. and then here, what else they did. this is why people like karl ahrens, just regular people, they did not have, you know -- and people think -- you know, you talk to somebody who is addicted to a drug or an alcohol, you know, an alcoholic, you 4846 talk to an alcoholic and they will say, hey -- first they will deny, they will deny they are an alcoholic. and then if you really confront them, they will say, hey, it is my life, i'll do what i want. but people like that with nicotine who did not understand it did not have a chance, because here they are, they have the ama in their pocket, the american medical association, they gave $20 million. here they talk about tobacco, state congressmen, they have to get them to believe and understand that smoking is not a factor in lung cancer. then they talk about gori, this whole thing with the tobacco working group, that they were in with the tobacco working group, the national cancer institute was trying to look for a safer cigarette. and the cigarette companies had their scientists on the tobacco working group, but they could not go in the tobacco working group as representatives of the cigarette company. they had to go in in an independent capacity for the cigarette companies, and they could not admit that smoking caused cancer. and all along, they were not sharing the 4847 research with the tobacco -- they were not sharing the research with the tobacco working group. and gori, who was the head, was asking them for favors. and they ultimately were giving gori money. he was crooked. it is not legitimate. you know, those sort of things that happened, wherever they happened, you know, where normal people are affected by decisions that corporations are making and people get affected with whatever part of life, it is not right and it is not fair, and it should not happen. and here they brag about how many congressmen -- ms. arnold: objection, improper argument. the court: rephrase, mr. paige. mr. paige: and the last letter says they have contacts with congress which have always been good, but now better, a systematic approach on capitol hill. we can now count nearly 300 representatives and 75 senators as grade-a contacts, which means that we know them, but more importantly, they know us. so is that legal to do that? yeah, it is legal to do that. is it okay to do that? ms. arnold: objection, your honor, 4848 improper argument. the court: approach? (sidebar discussion held:) mr. paige: if i could finish my sentence, what i was about to say, your honor, is -- i was midsentence. the court: actually, the transcript has you at the end of a sentence. let us not take multiple trips up here. i want to know what your objection is. ms. arnold: i'm sorry to interrupt. my concern is that there is a number of times during the statement where mr. paige has been talking about the morality of the conduct of the defendants in this case. this is a civil lawsuit. the plaintiff has the burden of proof, and it is not appropriate at all for him to be saying these are bad acts or these are bad people, and they should not be doing it, or it might be legal, but it is not okay. the court: do you agree with that? mr. paige: no. and what i was going to say is -- maybe i should put a period at the end, but i was really going to say -- i do not know where i was. i was going to say it is okay to do 4849 that, but when they talk to these senators, they need to tell them the truth. they cannot conceal what they know. that is all i was going to say. the court: i do not think the fact that -- i'm not giving a basis -- i do not think he is crossed any lines. i think to an extent, he is entitled to -- the jury is being asked if consideration of punitive damages is warranted. i'm really not getting your point at all. and i called you up here because i -- in case there was something, quite frankly, that i was missing, but i did not miss that. so it is overruled. (sidebar concluded.) mr. paige: okay. so i have to go back where i was. what i was saying was, if they are going to use their contacts in congress, with the senate, there is nothing illegal about that, that is okay, but when you do that, especially when you are selling a deadly product, it is highly addictive, it would be nice, it would be nice to be honest with our government. and that is what they were not doing. they were lying and they were concealing important information from our government and all 4850 along the way, they were making a lot of money, knowing full well the harms that they were causing. and so this is a -- this is another interesting issue in the case is that you have to put yourself into the 1970s, 1980s, different than where we are today. okay. now, we have somebody wants to quit, there are very -- you know, i think one of the things dr. hurt said -- and this is one of the problems with -- if somebody has heart disease or needs a certain medication, sometimes a doctor could find 50 different medications to prescribe somebody because of the advancements and the understanding of what is been going on. with nicotine addiction, the surgeon general did not even declare nicotine addictive until '88. now, you know, we have the patch, which you heard is not very effective because of the way the nicotine gets to the brain. you have the gum, which is the same thing. we have two medications now, only two, chantix and zyban. and those medications were actually being talked about in the 1970s. so think about the delays of how many 4851 people nowadays -- i do not remember which doctor it was -- but how many people nowadays are able to overcome their addiction to nicotine because of prescription medications that are out there today and because of the knowledge that doctors have today in helping them. you know, we talk about motivation. if somebody was not motivated enough, they were not motivated enough. somebody can wake up in the morning and be very motivated, say, you know what, i'm going to quit today. and by five o'clock, something happens. that does not mean that they were not motivated. you know, then they try again, they fail. and, you know, failure does not feel good. somebody tries a couple times or five times and they fail, and they think they cannot do it. some people give up. some people keep trying. but, you know, i would think that most people try, they want to quit, they try as hard as they can, they keep trying. and some people are successful. and, you know, fifty percent of people, unfortunately, do not succeed. and that is the sad thing. that is the sadness about it because they are real people with real lives with real 4852 families. so back in the '70s when all this was going on, when the cigarette companies had opportunities, you know, the first one is from the tobacco working group which they talked about being involved with, but internally they are talking about "our scientific directors will informally try to persuade gori to eliminate or modify proposals such as smoking cessation clinics." okay. so think about that. i mean, really. they are in the tobacco working group with the national cancer institute. okay. national cancer institute is a public health authority who is trying to help people and save lives. they infiltrate the national cancer institute. they get in there, and now internally this guy gori, who ultimately ends up on their payroll later in life, and they say, look -- internally -- we got to persuade gori that we have to stop with these smoking clinics. we got to get rid of the smoking clinics. this is in 1973. why would anybody in their right mind would try to persuade somebody to 4853 not get involved with smoking cessation clinics that can help save lives, especially when you are responsible for taking their lives? you know, it is one thing if you are going to have that product and you are going to sell the product, and you know the harm, and you are going to be honest with it, and you are going to make sure that nobody under the age of 21 gets their hands on it, and you decide that is what you want to do, and you do that, you are selling a highly addictive product that is going to kill half of its users, and you get it legalized in the right ways and you have it regulated, well, somebody who sells a product like that better make sure they actually encourage smoking cessation clinics, that they help people with medications, that they want people to be covered under health insurance. they wanted the opposite. they wanted the opposite. you talk about motivation and choices. they did not want people to have choices. they did not want them to have smoking clinics for people who wanted to try to quit. here is this guy leo abood who is getting funded, and they say he is fighting clinically an antagonist to nicotine. that is a medication. 4854 that is 20 years, 25 years before there is medications. think of the great things they could have done. 20 years earlier, they could have had a medication, and they cut his funding off. they cut his funding off. and imagine somebody between 1977 and 2000 dies of lung cancer or throat cancer or heart disease or copd, and they never had a chance because the people who were making the product who are lying about it are cutting off funding on people who were trying to save lives. here is the dsm. dr. dorce, you know, we talked about the dsm. the dsm is a fine manual. i have no problem with it. it is for people with mental disorders. and it is made many changes over the years from the '80s to the '90s to now. there is nothing wrong with the dsm. but in 1976, if you look at this letter here, this 5839, you look at the series of letters, what was going on there, they did not want tobacco abuse classified in that manual. they did not want it because they knew that people could get help. if it is a mental disorder, and they put it in a manual, they did not want it because people would be covered under health 4855 insurance, okay? how sad is that? people could be covered under health insurance to help them with a disease that could save their life, and they are going to try to stop that. so they contact this dr. proctor, not dr. proctor that we brought here, another dr. proctor. he contacts all of his friends, and they make anonymous letters to the dsm. and then when dow chemical is trying to come out with the gum in the early '80s, and what went on here was they were giving a lot of money to dow, as you know, for -- technician philipson: humectant. mr. paige: -- humectant. and so dow is going to come out with the gum. they come out with the gum. and dow wants to put newsletters in doctors' offices around the country, hey, we have a new product. if you are smoking and you want to quit, we want -- now we all know about the gum. in 1984, if we want to educate -- doctors want to educate people about the gum, we are going to put newsletters in their offices. no. no. tobacco says, no, no, you are not 4856 going to do that. and they stopped the newsletters, and they stopped dow from giving the newsletters to doctors. it did not happen after the first issue. and so here is more of their statements. transcribed as follows:) speaker: a california doctor said, as a scientist, i find no persuasive evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. a new york doctor told congress, to claim there is no sufficient scientific evidence to establish that cigarette smoking causes disease, it is, in my opinion, unjustified. speaker: turning a cigarette health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. speaker: i cannot point to anything that i would consider the cause of cancer of the lung, but the behavior of the disease does not support the idea of cigarettes being the causal agent. speaker: we believe our product is not injurious to health. speaker: a jury has not come in. mr. stossel: it may not be harmful? 4857 you are not convinced? speaker: it may be or may not be, we do not know. speaker: insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may; it may not. how can cigarette smoking be the cause of lung cancer if the cause of lung cancer is as yet unknown? in fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer. ted koppel: you say cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? ed horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. speaker: the tobacco industry continues to earmark millions of dollars annually on an ongoing basis in unrestricted arm's length research to answer the very questions raised in the surgeon general's report. speaker: do cigarettes cause cancer? mr. merryman: i do not know if they do or not. speaker: i'm not in a position to give you it does or does not answer. mr. tisch: the data that we have been able 4858 to see is all the statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. mr. campbell: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (the video clip ended.) mr. paige: that is 1994. those statements are from the '70s to the '90s. these are people who are making these statements, you-all know, with the intent that smokers will rely upon them to their detriment, meaning they are intending people to rely upon it, knowing they will get hurt. in 1994, they are in front of congress swearing to congress, who are trying to do something about it, who are trying to help people, and their documents are still secret at that time and they are lying, knowing people are dying, knowing that families are being hurt. and they are lying about it, and they are saying we did not know, but karl ahrens should have known, because he worked with a computer that was a big computer, and xerox gave him a newsletter that he should exercise. 4859 you know, i will say this, i have never disputed and i will not dispute that karl ahrens knew at some point that smoking could cause lung cancer, okay. probably when he started, he had no idea. later he probably had doubts. he probably thought the filters are helping him, just like everybody else. and we know that by the '80s -- you know, the '70s it bothered his wife with the smoke. thirty percent of doctors were smoking. and in the '80s his kid comes home, bryan, and bryan comes home, and he is crying to his dad and he says, "dad, i love you. i love you. i want you to quit. i do not want anything to happen to you." and you know what? i do not deny that at that point -- karl ahrens at least at that point probably knew. and then he had a struggle with addiction, and we will talk about light cigarettes. but -- but it took karl ahrens a long time to figure out what they were even denying they knew in 1994. in 1994 they were still lying about it. and so, you know, when we talk about our 4860 conspiracy, our concealment claim, our right to punitive damages, you know -- punitive damages, i asked you guys in jury selection, every one of you, i said, if the evidence supports that they should be punished and the evidence supports that it would be a good thing to award punitive damages against the tobacco companies from doing what they do, would you award significant amount of punitive damages, and all of you said you would. and i submit to you the money for punitive damages does not go -- i told you guys in jury selection. it does not go to the american cancer society. it does not go to charity. it goes to ina ahrens. okay. ina ahrens. this is about -- we are here today seeking justice for what is right, what is right in our society, a civil system, okay. ina ahrens, all she wants is justice. and when we started, i'm proud of her for being here and bringing this lawsuit and seeking the truth for what her family went through. but it is not right, and when you -- when i get to the punitive damages, we talk about harm to others -- because another thing that you may think, look, we are showing you videos of youth 4861 marketing in the '70s and the '80s and you may say to yourself, why are you showing me a video of them targeting teenagers in the '80s? okay. right. that is a fair question. why am i showing it to you? why am i? for punitive damages you are allowed to consider harm to others if it was similar conduct that harmed karl ahrens, and we know karl ahrens started smoking as a teenager. we know he got addicted. we know that was their business plan. their business plan never changed for decades, and that is why we showed you that, because you can consider harm to others. you can only -- you can award -- you can award -- entitlement to punitive damages, you are allowed to consider harm to others. you can only award punitive damages for the harm to karl ahrens, okay? so when we get there, we are not going to ask you to award punitive damages for the harm they did to 500,000 people; but, anyway, i'm getting a little sidetracked on that. so back to where we were. so we know that there was a time in the '80s that karl ahrens was switching to light cigarettes. and we know that he was trying to quit. and we know that they were 4862 not helping people, okay. it is one thing not to help people. if people are trying to quit, you know, i guess somebody might be able to think, hey, you know it is their product. they are trying to make money. they do not have to help anybody to quit if they do not want to. but they do not have to lie about it either, and they do not have to interfere with people's rights to quit. so internally what they are talking about when karl ahrens was trying to quit, when he was trying to do the right thing, when his son was trying to help him, when he did want to be alive, when he did wanted to -- you know, where karl ahrens should be this week? he should be 70-years-old, and he should be fitted for a tux for his wedding. so anyway, that is what they were doing. the next one. and so here are the advertisements. the next one. and so here are their documents with merit. you know merit ultra lights. and so they knew people were smoking merits. and, you know, 4863 77 percent more free nicotine in merits. you know, people are switching to merit for health reasons, for health reasons. they know that. they know people are, you know -- look, they have documents that talk about educated people. they have documents that talk about less educated people. they have documents talking about targeting teenagers. they are going to target whoever they can, okay. so they have different cigarettes for different people. and they know, look -- karl ahrens, he had some marketing background. he got a b minus or b in marketing. they showed his report card. they bring in a guy from ohio university to show you his report card that he got a c plus and a b or a couple bs in marketing. but this -- these people, they know about marketing. so -- and that is why we showed you some documents in the '80s. they started marketing to less educated people, but smart people smoke. and they know with smart people -- look, they are going to put their money where they can get their money. they can get more less educated people, they are going to put their money there. if they 4864 could tell educated people to go lights, they will put their money there. so that is what they did. they tried to intercept people. their documents talk about interception. so this is a time that karl ahrens was trying to quit. and so, you know, this is -- again, you know, this is -- we can throw numbers out, give hundreds of thousands or millions or this and that, but this is a real person, a real life, you know who, got caught up in their fraud. next. okay. so this is their document where philip morris is talking about compensation. and so now you-all -- you know, i doubt that you-all knew about compensation before you came here, but this is just part of that document that they talk about how they would exploit the benefits of smoking to the advantage and profitability of our company. okay. think about that. people are -- they know people are inhaling deeper. they know that there is changes in their cigarette design. they know people are compensating who are going to these products, and they talk about -- you read that document, and you will see what they are 4865 talking about, exploiting that for the profitability of their company. and this is -- we are not in the '50s anymore. this is in 1984. this is when karl ahrens was trying to quit and when he was smoking light cigarettes. and so -- and they knew. and this is the thing we talk about reliance. you may say to yourself today, because it might seem odd. you know, somebody who i meet today and i say, hey, you know, i'm going to sue the cigarette companies. sue cigarette companies. for what? when you hear this and you see what people actually believed back then, what people actually thought back then, you think to yourself how for 50 years was this allowed to happen? and then this is what real people were saying back then through -- transcribed as follows:) speaker: i've been reading a lot of -- mr. paige: through the '60s -- start over. it is the '68 is the first one and goes through the last gentleman is '87. transcribed as 4866 follows:) speaker: i've been reading a lot about it in the paper, but i do not know anyone actually who has got cancer because of the fact because they were a smoker. i mean, it has not been proved in black and write. speaker: well, when they come out and really say, well, you are going to get it, i'll stop then. but when they just keep on saying, some say you do, some do not, i'll just keep going. narrator: throughout your tenure with america, it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? unidentified speaker: throughout my tenure? narrator: yes. unidentified speaker: yes. narrator: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? unidentified speaker: yes. narrator: it is a statement that american tobacco had place great reliance on? unidentified speaker: we issued that 4867 statement, yes. narrator: as far as you are concerned a person is justified in relying on that statement. unidentified speaker: yes. speaker: you know they say it causes cancer and heart disease. do you believe that? speaker: no, i do not. not in my heart. i cannot believe it. i look back at it, people say who make the cigarettes, and i feel like that the one that make the cigarettes should know what they doing. (the video clip ended.) mr. paige: and then -- is this a video now? and then so we -- that is why i'm trying to take you through decades and decades, and we get to 1994, and we know this is what happened again. transcribed as follows:) congressman wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, i'd like to go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. 4868 do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. congressman wyden: mr. johnson. mr. johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxicants -- congressman wyden: we will take that as a no. and again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we would just like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine our products are addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe nicotine is not addictive. mr. tisch: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. johnston: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (the video clip ended.) mr. paige: and so you think 100 years 4869 before that 140 people in the whole world died, and this is where we end up. and now you know -- you know how we ended up here. and you have to ask yourself the question for reliance is the issue -- that is a very long instruction for me to read, but there is an instruction here about did he rely, and this is an important claim for concealment and fraud. the issue is whether or not the concealment or omission of material information regarding the health effects, would it have been important for somebody to know that the lights were a fraud, would it be important for somebody to know that the filters did not work, would it be important for somebody to know they had no intention of removing the dangerous ingredients, would it be important for somebody to know there was never any doubt or confusion at all. did they omit material information that was a legal cause that he reasonably relied to his detriment -- okay -- was a legal cause of his lung cancer because mr. ahrens reasonably relied to his detriment that philip morris and/or r.j. reynolds would not conceal or omit the disclosure of material information. 4870 he would not expect a cigarette company, at least back then -- i mean, people may think differently -- you would not expect a product manufacturer to lie and conceal important information that they knew that can cause you to die. material information is such that it would be important to him that he would not have acted as he did but for the concealment. and then it talks about it can act in the same concurring cause. it does not have to be the only cause. the concealment does not have to act alone because, you know, you are always going to hear this argument about people made choices. choice is a two-way street, right. choice is a two-way street. and there is a difference between a choice of somebody who is addicted to a drug, who is trying to do the best thing they can when you compare it to the choice of a corporate greed who are not trying to do the best thing for anybody but themselves. so this is the material information that was concealed. you know, there was never any controversy. they did not tell anybody about all the different carcinogens or that people who were 4871 smoking had a fifty percent chance of dying. you know, most smokers do not know that. i think dr. hurt said sixty percent, 50 to sixty percent. most people. and dr. dorce said people in their 20s and 30s, they are not thinking about what is going to happen when i'm 40 or 50. and so that is the type of stuff they did not want people to know about. they studied marketing and targeted teenager. they knew all along nicotine was highly addictive as cocaine and heroin. they manipulated nicotine with ph levels. they tell you it had low nicotine. they add ammonia to jump the nicotine back up. and they did not tell anybody about the filters or lights. how would people know those things? you probably did not know those things. they knew those things for 50 years. and so the question is for the fraud, was the concealment of material information from r.j. reynolds concerning the health effects or addictive nature a legal cause. and the same thing for philip morris. and i submit to you the overwhelming evidence is it has to be, yes. 4872 and the same with the conspiracy, their agreement. again, remember, had one person just come forward and tell the truth, anybody, anybody. it is amazing how all the different people who go on tv and say the same thing. but, you know, have the conspiracy, was that a problem, does that contribute to his death. and so the next question, which again is important, is whether or not punitive damages -- do you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris and r.j. reynolds. and so this is what, when you look at punitive damages, are warranted as punishment. you know, what are punitive damages for, right, because you get to punish a corporation -- you do not punish somebody for no reason, right. so punitive damages are to punish somebody who did something really horrible, right, and that is why people get punished. and remember, corporations are no different than people, right. that is a jury instruction. you want to be treated like a person, you have to -- ms. arnold: objection, improper argument. 4873 the court: sustained. mr. paige: and so punitive damages are applicable equally to people and the corporations. they both have to act according to laws and civil laws and do the right thing. and so punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence -- if you cannot consider the engle findings, that is one of the things you may have trouble finding, you may ask yourself, why did i have to sit through -- sometimes we had to see all this stuff, and there is already a finding of conspiracy. but for punitive damages, you have to rely on the evidence that we gave you, and i think we showed you enough evidence, a lot of evidence, not as much as the engle jury, but you have seen a good deal about the conspiracy and concealment, more than most people know about. and so you would have to find -- any one of these. are there four or five? mr. sales: four. mr. paige: that each defendants' conduct, so against philip morris or r.j. reynolds, the defendants' conduct caused the lung cancer, it was so gross and flagrant to show a reckless disregard 4874 for human life. and i submit to you there is no -- it could not be any more clear that they did not care about human life. if you look through all their memos and see everything they did, you will see there was no regard, zero regard for human life. the next way that punitive damages -- you know, punitive damages are punish, but also to deter other corporations who look at this and say, hey, look what they did, look what is going to happen, we will be held accountable for our actions by members of our society, members of our society will get to judge us and see if this is acceptable or not. ordinary people, regular people will come in here and say, is this okay what we did, are we going to tolerate this, or are we going to try to tell people and tell corporations and deter others that, no, this is not right, this was not good, this is bad, and you are not going to do that. each defendant's conduct showed an entire lack of care that they must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences, which could not be any clearer. they never cared about the consequences. they cared about -- they cared 4875 about the money they were going to make, but they did not care about the harm at all, or that each defendant showed a reckless disregard for the safety or welfare or that they showed a reckless indifference to the rights of others. and i submit to you -- you only have to find one of them -- every one of them is applicable to what they did. every single one of them. and so these are some of the people. and you look at them and you think, you know, why -- why did they do this. you know, why would they do what they did. why did they conceal what they did. you know, they are grown men. and i think we all know what it was about, and we all know what they were indifferent about, and what they did not care about and what they did care about. and so when we get to punitive damages, for entitlement to punitive damages, when you look at what they did that was reckless and disregard the rights of others and why they should be punished and what they did, you know all along that the nicotine with the fraud they talk about internally, this is an r.j. reynolds document, "we have played down the role of nicotine," right, 4876 hence, the non-smoker, people who do not smoke, people who do not smoke, they do not understand, they do not know what nicotine is about. so we have to convince a non-smoker -- you are not going to convince an adult to smoke, right? i'm not going to convince a grown adult to smoke, so what am i going to do? i'm going to make money. we will convince teenagers whose brains are not fully formed, whose frontal lobes are not fully formed -- is an 18-year-old an adult under our law? yes. but 18-year-olds, why would they want to market and target young kids who are leaving for college, away from home for the first time, young men who are going away to the military to leave their homes for the first time, why do they want to target them so badly? why not just target 30-year-olds or 40-year-olds? because they know they are more susceptible, and they can convince them with wholly irrational reasons why they should try smoking, in the hope they will discover what it will be with the real satisfaction, which is nicotine. there is a document in there that i did not talk about in this, but it is in evidence, where it 4877 talks about targeting the young adult smokers, and they talk about the military and why the military is so susceptible. and one of the things they talk about is it is good because there is boredom, they are bored over there. so they put the cigarettes in the rations -- again, i was not in the military, but from what i understand, there is some times if you do not do -- you know, if you smoke, you do not have to do the push-ups or something, so you get more breaks or whatever it is. but they have their reasons why they target less educated, more educated, teenagers, college students, military, young military, and they do it for a reason and they do it not with education, not with telling people. you know they do not go and tell people, hey, we are going -- you are going to smoke, and you are going to become a drug addict, you will become addicted to a drug and you may think later it is about this or that. no, they convinced them with irrational reasons, once they are hooked, they are an addict, and that is a great thing, that is a great thing for them. go on. and so this is from the '89 sg report. it says, "if the adult rate of smoking 4878 were to continue at the present level, the impact of smoking on the future health and welfare of today's children would be enormous. research has shown that one-fourth or more of all regular smokers die of a smoking-related disease. if 20 million of the 70 million children now living in the united states smoke cigarettes as adults, then at least 5 million of them will die of smoking-related diseases. this figure should alarm anyone who is concerned with the future of today's children." and we know that it is alarming and it should concern anybody, everybody, and we know who it did not concern and it never concerned. and so this is a video. transcribed as follows:) mr. stossel: eighty percent of all smokers started before they were 21. speaker: cigarette manufacturers are not interested in obtaining new business from teenagers in our society. mr. stossel: how can you stay in business if you cannot hook the kids? speaker: we have been in business very well, 4879 thank you, for some time now, without attempting to hook kids. we do everything possible to discourage teenage smoking. mr. stossel: they are passing out free camels. tobacco companies have been doing a lot of this lately. their code says, we shall not give cigarettes away in any public place within two blocks of any center of youth activity, and here they are passing them out in front of a david bowie concert. lots of kids here. cigarettes were also passed out at concerts given by the talking heads and the animals. you pass out free cigarettes at these concerts? i do not see you passing out free cigarettes at frank sinatra concerts. speaker: there are many, many adults at those concerts. mr. stossel: the concerts says 40 to 60 percent of the audience is under 21. the tobacco code also says, do not give cigarettes to anyone under 21. we asked a 16-year-old to try to get some. speaker: i'd like regular. thank you. i just went up and asked for cigarettes, and they did not ask me for any id or anything, so 4880 i just got it and walked away. mr. stossel: this videotape made last winter by the chicago lung association shows young people being given bright cigarettes. sixteen-year-old joe was given a pack. seven of nine young people who asked for cigarettes got them. the chicago lung association sent people out. kids got them. ms. browder: i cannot address that. i can tell you what the sampling code is for cigarette manufacturers, and the sampling companies are sworn to adhere by that code. mr. stossel: but they do not obey. ms. browder: they are supposed to obey it. mr. stossel: kids see the billboards all the time. tobacco companies spend so much money on advertising that nearly every other billboard in america promotes cigarettes. ms. browder: i think the cigarette manufacturers have the right to advertise their product. i think they have the right to sponsor a variety of events, as they do. i do not think it is illegal, so why not. (the video clip ended.) 4881 mr. paige: and so we go back in time, what they are doing there they have done for a long time. and so here is from when karl ahrens was a kid. and here is the point again when i showed the document earlier from the johnny roventini from the marlboro, the philip morris -- "call for philip morris." and it says, hey, we want to get in the mind of them when they are children because it will carry on with them for a long time. and that is the same thing with the candy cigarettes. they are giving candy cigarettes or not objecting to candy cigarettes. i do not think it is their intent to get a 5-year-old, a 6-year-old, a 7-year-old to smoke back then. i do not think that would happen anymore. but -- but that was the world that these kids were growing up in. so if you were in the '40s or the '50s and you were growing up, or the '60s, and kids were smoking candy cigarettes and cartoons were being used to advertise cigarettes or santa claus was being used to advertise cigarettes. you know, that was the world that people grew up in. so whether they started experimenting at 16 and 17 and became a regular smoker at 18, that is 4882 what they knew would happen. and it continued into the '60s. you know, the '60s, they were -- schoolkids were writing letters to the tobacco companies asking, does your product hurt people. you know, maybe some of those kids were concerned for their own parents. and they would write back to the schoolkids and say, no, no, it does not, it is not been proven. they would give them information. these are documents where they knew and they were -- considered them to be potential new smokers. we went on to the '70s. think about this, they are talking about interviewing kids at beaches. but the other one, this is an interesting document because when you are a corporation and you are trying to look at problems, you know, hey, i'm a company, i want to see how i can increase profits and what are the problems that are facing my industry, my company. and in that document to the right, they are looking at future problems and they consider, think about that, increasing educational programs to prevent young smokers from taking -- young non-smokers from taking up the practice of smoking. and the people who are writing that for the 4883 industry considered that to be a problem, a problem, that kids would have a right to be educated about what was really going on, about what was really the truth. and that is what -- that is the reprehensibility of their conduct. that is why companies should not be able to do that. and people should know if you are going to do that, if you are going to really not protect -- you are not going to protect the kids but you are going to go hurt the kids, that is why punishment is warranted and that is why other corporations should be deterred. and they go on, this is both retrospective, you are looking back, teenagers, it is all about the teenagers, young adult smokers, they call them young adults. but they are talking, you know, 12 percent; by 18, 68 percent. and without them, without the young teenagers, and they put it in -- kind of poetically, "just as a population which does not give birth will eventually dwindle." and that is what they consider the teenagers to be. if they cannot give birth, if they cannot have the teenagers, then they are going to dwindle and they are going to lose money. and all -- most 4884 people with -- most people -- you know, karl ahrens was an intelligent man. most intelligent people would think that would be a good thing not to have young people starting to smoke so they can grow up to be addicted or grow up to die a horrible death. and then with the ph levels, you know, this was another big thing for them. you know, how are we going to go ahead and keep the ph levels up? what is the optimum composition of cigarette smoke? and it talks about, you know, the amount of nicotine is not being obtained by accident, you know, how low can we go, how low can we go. we have to determine the minimum level that will allow continued smoking that will keep people smoking. so the sad thing about this is while they were doing this internally, they were lying to congress and saying it was not even addicting. so they were telling people, hey, it is a habit, people can do with it as they want to. they do not have to do if they do not want to. it is a free choice. it is a habit. but internally they know darn well this is not a habit -- for some people, you have a light 4885 smoker, again they call them chippers, people who smoke a few cigarettes here and there. some people might do that. but people -- when you are smoking, 20, 30, 40 cigarettes a day and you get 200, 300, 400 doses of nicotine a day, they want to make sure you are going to get the right amount of nicotine to keep you coming back for more. because as long as you keep coming back for more, they are going to keep making more. and then this is lorillard where they talk about their program to augment -- nicotine augmentation program. and they talk about free nicotine and, you know, the document -- "generally agree that this kind of small amount of free nicotine is more desirable than a large amount of bound nicotine." they talk about dr. spears in there. and so, you know, that is their whole deal. they are going to add ammonia, they are going to add diammonium phosphate. they will do whatever they can to have the best amount of freebase, the free nicotine so you will get the biggest kick. and all along, they will tell you it has a low amount of nicotine. and so these are more documents about that, 4886 that the ph increase is above 6, "the nicotine occurs in a free form which is volatile, rapidly absorbed by the smoker and believed to be instantly perceived as a nicotine kick." the goal, "determine the minimum level of nicotine that will allow continued smoking." and what does ammonia do? "ammonia liberates free nicotine, which increases the impact and satisfaction." so, you know, that is stuff people should be entitled to know about. smokers should know if they are adding diammonium phosphate, ammonia to their cigarettes to get the right nicotine kick, especially when they are telling them it is a low nicotine level. a low nicotine level does not mean anything as long as they are adding the chemicals to give it the bigger kick. why did they do this? this is why punitive damages, when you look for it, look about it, why are punitive damages warranted, for more money, our basic position is this is what they knew all along. and this is why, you know, back in 1968 they were going to be subject -- there is no controversy, and we are going to be subject to a 4887 finding that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. they knew it all along, they knew they were doing it for money, they knew people were dying, they had no compassion or anything for anybody who was being harmed. and they did it on purpose. it was not a mistake. it was not just a foolish statement that a couple people made. it was a conspiracy that went on for 50 years. and so we talked about this, why punitive damages are warranted and why you can consider harms to others. we spoke about that. and it has to be by clear and convincing evidence. that is different for the class member. it has to be the greater weight of the evidence and more likely than not to be a class member. for the other claims, the conspiracy, the concealment it is to be more likely than not. punitive damages, because, you know, they are serious, it is important, the law provides that it has to be by clear and convincing evidence. you have to really clearly -- the evidence has to be clear that what they did warrants punishment and deterrence to others, and i submit it could not be any more clear. 4888 and so we would submit that the checks for both of those should be yes. and so lastly -- i'm on my homestretch. i said this yesterday. but i really am. i get hungry at 12:00. so i'll have to eat soon. i'll take you through the last part of the case, which is compensatory damages. and so one of the things that we asked for in this case, in a civil case there is no restoration. okay. the law does not provide that they restore all the harm that they have done. it is impossible. so the civil justice system provides for compensation, that you have to compensate for pain and suffering, for mental anguish, for what you did to other people. and obviously if restoration was available, ina would be the happiest person in the world. she is lonely. she does not want to be alone. but that is the reality she lives with. so the law provides when you hurt people and when you disregard other people and they suffer alone for 20, 30 years, justice provides for fair compensation, right? total compensation is total justice. and this is -- you know, she -- you know, 4889 ina had a tough life. she, you know, grew up in an attic, and she met her husband, had a future with him, loved him. and, you know, he was a real person. you know, he was a good father. he was a good husband. he was a good father to bryan, you know, and he was a real person. and when you think about that he died when he was 57 and now he should be about 77 and still have time with his family, to meet his grandkids, and go to his kids' weddings. he missed all that, and missed that with them as well. so what amount is fair compensation, right? so what i submit to you is you have to do it differently for bryan and for ina. so you have to decide what is the fair compensation for bryan ahrens -- i'm going to do bryan first. so for bryan, you know, it is his father, and they had a good relationship, and he loved his father. and his father died when he was 23 years old, when his father was 57. and so what is fair compensation for the past and for the future, because it is not just for what he is been through, but what he is missed for the future, and i would submit to you, you know, there is no significant -- no more significant loss 4890 than the loss of a loved one, right. it is a significant loss. the compensation i think y'all would agree would have to be significant. so for bryan -- this is what i'm suggesting -- and it could be more; it could be less. it is totally up to the six -- the eight of you. and i would say this, that when you go back in the jury room, it is not just one person, you know, everybody has a voice back there and everybody has to be heard and everybody has to talk and everybody has to have their opinions heard and considered, you know, and i think that is important. but for fair compensation, for bryan for the loss of his father, his real father in his real life, we would submit to you $2.5 million for bryan. and for ina i would submit it would be far more substantial. you know, she could use her husband. she could have used him for the past 20 years. and so i would submit $10 million for ina would be fair and reasonable compensation for what they did. and so that is what we submit. again, 4891 that is a suggestion for you all to consider. and in closing, and i'm done, i would just say that -- thank you again for your time. i know it was a long today, and i appreciate your attention and your consideration on behalf of ina and bryan. i really truly do. and i'm going to sit down now. and then they are going to have an opportunity to talk, mr. carter is going to speak, then mr. kaczynski and then ms. arnold. so i know that you-all will listen to them. and the only thing i would ask you to do is just remember that the law provides me to go last. i'll do my best to keep it short when i go at the end, and we will be able to respond to what they say to you. and i thank you-all very much for your time. closing rebuttal mr. paige: so i know you guys have had a long day, the last thing -- and i know that it is tough -- tough place to be right now. everybody wants to go home and i know you guys probably know the evidence as well as you know it, right. so what i do have, i wrote it down, and you waited a long time to be here, and you all have been here a long time, i do have something to say in response to what they said. i'm not 5076 going to waste your time with responding to every single thing, but i do have to respond to some of the things they said that i think need responding to. so i hope you will be patient with me and allow me to do that. you know, sitting here and listening to this stuff, you know, it is tough. it is tough to listen to that. and mr. kaczynski said, i think he said at one point, you know, before he was doing this, i guess, you were in the military, right? mr. kaczynski: uh-huh. mr. paige: yeah. and, you know, before i did this, when i put myself through law school, i worked as a roofer and i was the kettle man on the roofing crew. so to do this now, to be here in front of you guys on such an important issue, you know, it is -- it is amazing. and sometimes i sit there and i listen to this, and i say, boy, oh boy, it would be a lot easier to be back on the roof. and just have some peace and quiet and be left alone. but i do think that this work is important. and i think the truth is important. and i think that what they said and how they 5077 said it, i could respond to almost everything they said. the first thing, and mr. carter said, and again, i know mr. carter, he is a nice man. i have no problems with him. but when he said that i said that i admitted partial responsibility, it was like a ball fake, or that i was trying to fake something. you know, i take issue with that. because, you know, when i first started doing this, as i told you, and i met -- i remember i met people and i would tell them this, and we would talk about it, and i do think it is important. even though ina did not think that her husband bears any responsibility, because she lived with him and she loved him, i do think it is important that we do admit partial responsibility because it is probably the truth, right? and so for me to come in here, and tell you, look you in the eyes and say he bears no responsibility, it is all their fault. i could not do that with a straight face. i would not be able to. so if you think that it was some sort of ball fake or some sort of a lawyering, i assure 5078 you it was not. and so i want to respond to some of the things that they said, and again -- and so, you know, when i listen to what they told you, i wish i could put where you cannot see the other side, because we have a divider there, and it is what they told you, and so i wish you could not see the other side right now the way i did this, but you can, so you already know the punchline on other side -- no, it is okay. to each of them, but i'll go through them quick, i'm not going to waste a lot of your time. i may take a little time, i do not want to tell you how many pages that is, that is not the only page, so ... but -- because you probably saw me over there, add this, add that. so, you know, dr. dorce, she came here and they asked her, the 20 cases, how many people did you say were addicted, and she said three. she is 15 percent. which does not make sense because when you think about it, we know 50 to eighty percent, ninety percent of regular smokers, pack a day or more, are addicted to nicotine. she said 15. so when mr. carter stood up 5079 here, he said, oh, dr. dorce said three people were addicted; dr. hurt said none. but what mr. carter did not tell you, in all due respect to mr. carter, you probably know this, that every time dr. dorce testifies, she always says that addiction was not the cause of a disease or the death or an illness in a lawsuit because she knows that is the issue. okay. she knows that is a crucial issue in the case. that is what we have been talking about. and it is not whether or not addiction is the only cause. it is not whether or not addiction is -- you know, dr. dorce even said, people who are addicted suffer complications. so, but for the addiction this is what happens. people do get sick. you know, they said, oh, we may have said some bad things. they do that, they stand here and say, oh, there is some things that they said, people -- that we would not say those type of things now, and it is kind of, you know, to ingratiate, you know, to say, hey, we do not really think good about them. but if they do not want to be responsible, they do not have to be responsible. it is my burden of proof. 5080 but when they say that to you, hey, there is some bad things that they said. they do not think -- mr. kaczynski made it very clear -- he does not think, and he is entitled, he does not think they are responsible for anything they said, nothing they said. and i ask you to think to yourself, because you have to think when they are talking, you know, do you really think that it would be any different, if it was a different smoker? do you really think if mr. ahrens did not quit, they would have said, oh, he could have quit. and if mr. ahrens would have quit after two times, they would have said, oh, look how easy it was for him to quit. if mr. ahrens would have relapsed after he quit, they would say, oh, look at him, he chose to go back. you cannot win with them. you cannot win with them. so -- ms. arnold: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. paige: you know, so when they tell you he quit. so for mr. ahrens, you know, this 5081 is mr. ahrens' case, he quit so he cannot be a class member because he quit. think to yourself, who do you think they think is a class member? ms. arnold: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and so, you know, that is why when they say use your common sense, you all -- you know, i know you will use your common sense. so use your common sense and think, who do you think that mr. kaczynski, mr. carter, and ms. arnold, who do you think that they think is a class member? mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor, personal. the court: approach. (sidebar discussion held:) the court: the problem is everybody objected. i think and you think, which is not -- is improper terminology in the first place, but let us talk about what they are condemn, what they are arguing for and not what does he think, what does she think. i did not get your -- what -- is that -- that is not what 5082 you were -- tried to object to. ms. arnold: your honor, his comments were disparaging us in this lawsuit and that is -- the court: it is rebuttal. he is supposed to disparage your argument. that is the -- ms. arnold: disparaging us for defending ourselves in this case and criticizing us -- mr. sales: this all came from the defense. ms. arnold: criticizing us and arguing that mr. ahrens was not a member of the class when it is their burden of proof. the court: i do not consider that improper argument. but, you know, he is off on references to people -- refer to their arguments, not their -- mr. paige: okay. i got it. the court: -- not their personal stuff. wait a minute. while we are down here, my -- this thing is down, i'm having trouble hearing him. can you get me -- (sidebar concluded.) mr. paige: so, one -- the next thing mr. kaczynski showed you were those polls. and 5083 he said, hey, who was going to believe the tobacco companies, look how low the public opinion is for the tobacco company, only 5 percent of the people believe us. and that is the whole point of the conspiracy. you know, that was the whole point. that is why they gave $20 million to the ama. the ama was with them for a long time. i do not remember the years, i'm not going to say it. that is why they started the tirc. they went through the ctr. and they had all those doctors that you could see on tv who are saying things that nobody knows if they are affiliated with the tobacco companies. so that is why when they look at those polls, what mr. kaczynski in his argument failed -- what was not said was that 47 to 64 percent of the people believed the ama, who they were with, and you will see the documents in evidence that they did give them a lot of money and they finally distanced themselves from them. in what year? mr. sales: '76. mr. paige: in the '70s. also, you will see that people believe 5084 independent laboratories. that is why all these doctors were saying they were independent. they did not know. that is why the tirc -- the ctr was disbanded by the government. they were forced to disband. and so when they come here and tell you how good of research they were doing, the ctr and the ti were co-conspirators. that is not me talking. i mean, that is a fact. that is a fact in history. that is a true fact. mr. carter said, when he went to moffitt, there was no diagnosis of addiction in the medical records. so how could he be addicted? how could karl ahrens be addicted when no doctor at moffitt ever diagnosed him with nicotine addiction, right? and that is why you need to think, does that make sense? does that argument really make sense when he did not go to moffitt until five years after he quit smoking? who is going to diagnose him with nicotine addiction? what does that mean? they say that i say things to try to get you, you know, passionate. i am passionate about this. and so -- and the things that ms. arnold 5085 talked about at end, all that stuff about other people, it is relevant for punitive damages because the law, not that i wrote, but that the law in florida is that you as jurors can consider harm to others when you are considering reprehensibility, how reprehensible is their conduct, is the law in the state of florida that you shall consider the reprehensibility of their conduct towards others when you determine whether or not punitive damages shall be awarded, and then, if and then you decide it is warranted, you only punish for the harm to karl ahrens. that is the law. so if i did not tell you about the harm to others, i would not be doing my job. you know, he told you that karl was asymptomatic when he went to moffitt. look at the medical records. he presented with fatigue, a cough and shortness of breath, that is what he had. you know, no doctor -- there is not one medical record where any doctor was puzzled and said this might not be lung cancer. he told you that mr. carter said that he told his doctors that he quit seven, eight, 5086 nine years ago. so when he went to moffitt in 1996, the doctors asked him, when did you quit smoking? and you will see some of the records say '87, some say '88, some say '89. you know, think about it. in 1996, so it is 2016, if somebody asked somebody about something that happened, when did you go to this doctor, when did you do this, oh, it is five years ago, it is eight years ago, somebody could be off a couple years. but what they did not tell you is that they know, and we read to you the question for admissions, that philip morris has in their own files today a survey that was filled out by karl ahrens in 1990 saying that he was a current smoker of merit cigarettes. so why all the debate about 1988? why would we even talk about that? you know, it is not even -- it is not a fact. the fact is when karl ahrens was alive and when he was smoking, not retrospectively, the day he was smoking in 1990, he filled out a survey that they had in their files. and they know that. they said that he did not have primary lung 5087 cancer. i mean, he had a single solid mass, pleural effusion, you know -- i'm going to estimate the numbers, it was 90, 95 percent of pleural effusions are caused by breast cancer or lung cancer. he had the mediastinal lymph nodes, that was also about 90, 95 percent from lung cancer. it was a big, large one mass, which is classic lung cancer. and then he had the carcinomatous meningitis that comes from lung cancer. and, in fact, dr. ruckdeschel made that diagnosis before they even got the pathology back, so there was not even a doubt among any of the doctors. and then they said, well, he did not do any staining to find out. you know, now, 20 years later, we are in court where we have to prove our case by more likely than not, what did more likely than not happen, and they are saying, well, you did not do an autopsy. should have done an autopsy. should have done an autopsy. then we would know one hundred percent. well, those doctors, actually, dr. ruckdeschel said he was one hundred percent 5088 certain. why would he do stains to rule out colon cancer, kidney cancer, esophageal cancer, breast cancer, things that every doctor that devoted their life to treating people and helping people, saving their lives, not one doctor thought they should do that. nobody, had a doubt, nobody in the world had a doubt until we got here. they keep talking about the 60 million americans who quit. dr. dorce admitted that number, it is a number, okay, of that number we know there is a high relapse rate. we know that 8.5 million americans are living with smoking-related diseases. we know that 500,000 americans die every year and we know for a fact that 30 million americans have died. those are real numbers. so the 60 million, that is people who smoked 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, those are people who relapse, who started smoking later, those are people who got sick. the real numbers, the real victims, are the 30 million, 30 million americans, 500,000 a year. think about it. if you saw on the news that something happened to 1,000 people, god 5089 forbid if something happened today and that was on the news, we would read about it for a month. this happens every day, decade after decade, and nobody's reading about it. nobody's talking about it. ms. arnold told you that he quit merit ultra lights in '78 to '80. one, that could not even be possible. they did not make merit ultra lights until 1981. so, you know, you have to use your common sense again as to why -- why would they say that. the next slide. mr. carter: your honor, may we approach on this one? the court: you may. (sidebar discussion held:) mr. paige: let me get my glasses. mr. carter: there is a line that is circled. mr. paige: your honor, it is not -- i'll change. let me see what is needing to be changed. where is it? mr. carter: the next one, the third one, your honor. mr. paige: okay. okay. okay. i got it. 5090 i'll just put -- i'll tell him to omit this one. just take this one out. the court: both of then, right? mr. paige: yeah, i'm going to take both slides out. the court: okay. (sidebar concluded.) mr. paige: and then ms. arnold told you that the only -- the only brand that bryan remembered was merit ultra lights. you know, how valid, how reliable could it be? in 1981 bryan was only 8 years old. think about it, when you are 43 years old, somebody who is 43 years old now, they are going to remember the brand of cigarettes their father was smoking 35 years ago when they were 7 years old? that is the cigarette he grew up with, merit ultra lights, and that is the one he remembers. ms. arnold told you that light cigarettes are safe, that they are safer. we know for a fact today, now we know that the design changes cause people to smoke how they smoke, and the design changes cause more adenocarcinoma in the lungs. it is a fact. it is a proven fact. 5091 so they are not safer. they are more dangerous and they are not safer for people who get adenocarcinoma. that is for sure. the philip morris website today actually says that lights are no safer, okay. but they knew that for decades. when you look at -- you look at their documents, you will see that it is in there for decades. and you think to yourself, why then now, why now, you know, think why now? now we are in courtrooms, we are talking about it. so why now suddenly is this on their website that they are going to admit it? ms. arnold: objection, your honor. the court: grounds. you want to approach? mr. carter: pretrial motion. the court: sustained. mr. paige: i'm going to go through these quick. they say the public health community recommended light cigarettes to the public. that is true. that is a true fact. that they were working with the national cancer institute. remember they had the tobacco working group, and they were working 5092 with them and they were not being honest with them. and they were supposed to, back in 1953 when they did the frank statement, they promised, we are going to cooperate with the surgeon general. we are going to cooperate with public health authorities. that is what we promise you that we will do. and they concealed that. they lied to the surgeon general, they lied to the national cancer institute, and now -- now, in fact, even dr. pach said that he was aware of, that he is read the 2014 surgeon general's report. i asked him, are you familiar with the 2014 surgeon general's report. he said yes. and i asked him, are you aware of the harms caused by all the conspiracy and the concealment done by the industry? he knows about it. dr. pach, who came from the defendant, knows about it. and so they know now, the government now knows, now that the documents are public, what they concealed from them for decades, while people were dying, while they were making money. and that is why they got in trouble. that is why they got in trouble. 5093 the median florida income is $50,000. that is probably true. you know, if dr. pach made $35,000 on one case, compare his qualifications to dr. proctor. dr. proctor makes a lot of money, i'm not here to apologize for him, he is a brilliant man. he is probably one of the smartest, you know, a very smart man. he reads and reads and reads. he knows so much. and you know what, second to him, proctor is probably the most important person in my cases. so he is -- he knows his stuff, and he knows things that are -- that a lot of people do not know. i could hire a dr. pach, but why would i do that? why would i do that? it does not make sense. so now i can stand up here and apologize that i've hired the top person in the country -- mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor, personalizing. personal opinion. the court: mr. paige, you just said the same thing in your previous closing, so i think you can move off this. mr. paige: okay. all right. i guess i said that before. 5094 and then they said to check "no" for punitive damages because they said -- mr. kaczynski said there is going to be another session. and it sounds -- we do appreciate your time here. and it is hard -- you know, we are asking you to sacrifice your jobs, you know, get up early, come here, be with us all day long. everybody should be home for dinner right now and you got to listen to me. but ... mr. sales: three weeks. mr. paige: but the truth is, the session for punitive damages will take one day. opening statements will be like 10 minutes, 15 minutes. they each call a witness. it is about three hours. closing statements are very short. it is not a session, we will be done by friday. and it should not be that we are nervous about punitive damages being a session that you should avoid justice in doing what is right. and i ask you, you know, do not check -- i mean, check "no" if you believe it is not warranted, but the session will not take very long. we will be done by friday. so you saw 36 reader's digest articles, 5095 they told you, but i do not even know if you saw any. but then they wanted to tell you that you did not see any of the $200 billion advertising campaign, that they did not want you to think that you did not see any of that. it was no secret to karl ahrens that nicotine was addictive, but all their people you saw on video, bowling, wakeham, rodgman, campbell, horrigan, heimann, all those people who talked, went on tv and they talked to people, did not know nicotine was addictive, did not know smoking caused cancer, did not know nothing. all they knew was that applesauce might hurt people. i mean, come on. and then they say everybody knew, but they were justified in lying. they revealed the truth, they cooperated with the nci and the surgeon general, but the florida supreme court is wrong. the florida supreme court that affirmed and confirmed all these findings by these defendants that the ti and the ctr were disbanded by law in our country, but they think they are going to convince you that they revealed everything and cooperated with everybody. 5096 and they have a searchable website now, you know, a searchable website that was launched after lawsuits and after karl ahrens died. mr. carter: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: sustained. mr. paige: that is the end of that part. okay. so real quick. again, i appreciate your patience. they showed you the pack warnings and all the warnings, the hundreds of thousands of times that they -- that mr. ahrens saw the warnings. and again, you know, were there warnings on his packages? of course there were. of course there were. does a smoker, every time they go to the warnings -- get a cigarette, sit there and read the pack? do they? do they? does a smoker every single -- that is what mr. ahrens said -- i mean mrs. arnold said. you take a pack of cigarettes and you look at the warning and you start analyzing it. they know that does not happen. in fact, the ftc reports that they get copies that tells 5097 them that people do not pay attention to those warnings, that that warning does not work. they know that. so they know that, you know -- what is all the arguments about warnings? in fact, if the warnings were seen 100,000 times by karl -- that is the same thing. if the warning was seen 100,000 times by karl ahrens, how many times, how many billions and billions and billions of packs of cigarettes were they making every day that had the same warnings while they went on tv and lied and told people the warnings were not true? all these people, they did not see the warnings, but karl ahrens did. they did not see reader's digest, but karl ahrens did. they did not know nicotine was addictive, but -- they knew that nicotine was as addictive as cocaine and heroin, and i will tell you, karl ahrens did not know that. they knew about all the carcinogens of arsenic and cyanide and freebasing. karl ahrens did not know that. there was no way he could have known that. they knew about compensation. they knew their filters were a fraud. 5098 and mr. kaczynski -- oh, well, okay. so -- right. so we talked about choices, you know, and we said this in the beginning, choice is a two-way street, right. it is got to be. you cannot just say he could have quit, so because he did not quit, he is at fault one hundred percent, because that means that would apply to everybody. and so choice, you know, we talked a lot about it, but they talk about choice in their internal documents, and they said over and over and over again that they know that it is not about free choice. internally, when they are sitting in their meetings and they are writing their memos, they never talk about giving a smoker free choice. you will not see that. and so when we talked about filters, and mr. kaczynski says, oh, well, lorillard -- he was smoking a kent. what was lorillard suppose supposed to know? well, first of all, lorillard was in a conspiracy with r.j. reynolds and brown & williamson and american tobacco and all the other companies. if lorillard did not know that filters were no safer, okay, if you think about what 5099 mr. kaczynski is saying, you take it to the logical end, and he says, all the scientists at lorillard did not know that filters were not working, right, people who probably had ph.d.s and who knows what degrees, they are making cigarettes, they are studying cigarettes, they are in laboratories making filters. so they do not know. if they did not know the filters were a fraud, how in the world was karl ahrens going to know? all he knows is the advertisements said that they did work. that they did work. and lorillard talked about exploiting the filters, that people thought they were safer. that is not nice. they know people are dying and they are going to say, we are going to exploit that. we are going to exploit that. those are their words, not mine. so when mr. kaczynski said that they did not know, well, it is their product, they should know. and if they did not know, maybe some of their buddies who they were conspiring with maybe should have told them what was in their memos. but they all knew. they all knew. 5100 so then they talk about alexander spears, this great scientist who is out to help people. well, when you look at his memos, all he is talking about are profits. look at this. they are talking about making a cigarette so they can make money. you look at alexander spears, not once does he say one thing about one person who got hurt. that is not what he is trying to do. and, in fact, if he was such a great person -- what year is that? mr. sales: '66. mr. paige: 1966. so here is alexander spears, the great scientist. he is talking about making a two to three-fold increase in sales. he knows his products are bad. he knows they are killing people and he watches tv, he sees the same shows that everybody else is seeing, and he sees the people that he is working with lying, and he does not have the courage to come forward and tell the truth. he does not have the courage to come forward and help nobody. and that is the great alexander spears that they tell you about. come on. 5101 and so back to the beginning, is karl ahrens a class member? but for the addiction, because they want to tell you that he would have smoked a pack to a pack and a half a day if there was no nicotine. and i submit to you that cannot make common sense. it does not make sense because if it did, if it was about free choice, which is all they talk about, if it was about free choice and it was not about the nicotine, then they would remove the nicotine and give people free choices. they would do that, but they know that is not so. so but for -- all the words that they use, i cannot even remember them and i wrote them down, we have to prove this, we have to prove that to be a class member, just look at the law. if you look at the jury instructions, it says what it says. you know, it is like when i was talking to dr. dorce yesterday and i was asking dr. dorce, it says as manifested by three of the following. that means it is manifested. it means it is manifested, right? no, no, it does not mean that. it means something else. you cannot take the english language for 5102 the english language, you got to go to medical school to understand this because -- i mean, you look at the book, the book says you have to go to medical school. this is not complicated. if i can understand it, believe me, anybody can understand it. it says what it says. but for the addiction, if he was not addicted, would he have smoked a pack to pack and a half a day for 35 years? and if the answer to that is -- if the answer to that is but for the addiction -- if he was smoking because he was addicted but for the addiction, then he is a class member. he has to be a class member. there is no reason to exclude him from the class. he has to be. and they always wanted him in the class before. there is no reason to exclude him now. the law is the law. ms. arnold: objection, your honor. the court: grounds. ms. arnold: exclusion from the class. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and the one thing -- i'm almost done. i'll be done in like five 5103 minutes. so, you know, one thing when they talk about legal cause, they never tell you -- there is always another instruction that follows it. every time -- it is not this or that. it does not work that way. it does not work, okay, it has to be this, it has to be that. you have to choose one or the other. that is not the law. and when they showed you the law, they never showed you the second part of the law. and with every legal cause there is another instruction that always talks about concurring cause, and what that says is it does not have to be the only cause. it could be addiction and choice. it could be addiction and he did not try hard enough. it could be addiction and he should have tried harder. that does not exclude somebody from being a class member. that is why we talked about comparative fault. and that is why we admitted partial responsibility. and so that does not -- mr. carter: objection, your honor. the court: you want to approach? mr. carter: yes. (sidebar discussion held:) 5104 the court: state your objection. mr. carter: your honor, he is conflating class membership with comparative fault. he said that they admitted comparative fault because -- he is talking about the concurrent cause instruction and class membership. that is -- the court: i think he was -- at some point using the term "class" to mean -- i thought he was contrasting the engle class with the target audience of cigarette marketing at one point. mr. carter: now he is talking about the concurrent cause, and then he just said that is more than one thing, that is why we admitted one for comparative fault. so he is now arguing -- court reporter: somebody is rustling papers. the court: those are distinct legal concepts. mr. sales: i think the point of the argument, as i was following it and suggested it to mr. paige, not in reference to any particular concurrent cause instruction is that every time the defense showed the legal cause 5105 instruction, it only showed the first half. the court: i think that was -- i think that was permissible and that is not what drew the objection. i do not think. i think what drew the objection was -- let me get to the plaintiff saying and -- and -- and that is why we are admitting -- he is suggesting and that -- that the concept of comparative fault is -- an analogue or parallel or otherwise the model for the distinction between legal cause and concurring cause. concurrent cause is like comparative negligence, right? mr. sales: there is a concurrent cause instruction and the comparative fault instruction. there is a concurrent cause instruction. the court: well -- mr. sales: that is why i said -- but how about if i just tell mr. paige to move to the next thing? the court: i think -- i think that is probably better. are you asking for the instructions to be reread? mr. carter: i would like the last statement that he compared, where he said 5106 that is why we admitted fault, i would like that to be stricken and disregarded. the court: it could be addiction, it could be -- and he should have tried harder. he is talking about concurrent causation. that does not exclude somebody from being a class member. mr. sales: that is true. the court: and then he talked about comparative fault. and that is why we have admitted partial responsibility. mr. paige: comparative fault. mr. sales: i do not -- and i'm scratching my head still -- mr. carter: given a mistrial motion was made during my closing, i think that is fairly shocking that they are confused about this one. mr. sales: that was pixie dust. the court: well, let me ask myself if it makes sense. i think, arguably, there is no conflation, so i'm going to cut the baby in half and just say move on. (sidebar concluded.) the court: counsel. 5107 mr. sales: are we coming back up, judge? (sidebar discussion held:) the court: a juror just sent up a question. i need some defense lawyers. okay. if i were a stickler i would call the juror out of order for sending up a question at this point, but the question is: "are we, the jury, allowed to medical records of mr. ahrens to confirm our verdict even if they are copied from evidence files?" oh, boy, i do not know what the hell that means. mr. paige: tell them the medical records are in evidence. the court: i'm -- how about if i slough over it. understanding that there is a question about the medical records -- that mr. ahrens' medical records will be available to you in evidence. mr. sales: yeah, are you going to respond, your honor? the court: yeah. i'll do that much. mr. sales: are you going to do it now? the court: yeah. yeah. (sidebar concluded.) 5108 the court: folks, i have a juror question about medical -- about the -- karl ahrens' medical records. the court reporter: microphone. the court: i have a juror question about karl ahrens' medical records. mr. ahrens' medical records are in evidence and will be available to the jury during their deliberations. go ahead, mr. paige. mr. paige: okay. so -- the next one. so the last -- i have two -- i think two more issues and then maybe one little puny one at the end. so the one last issue that ms. arnold brought up was brand product use. and what she was saying is: smoking a defendant's cigarette was a legal cause -- this is the instruction -- of injury if smoking that defendant's cigarettes directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such injury, so that it can reasonably be said that but for smoking that defendant's cigarettes the injury would 5109 not have occurred. and so two things: one, there is another instruction that goes after that, and i'll show you that other instruction, and that one where it talks about -- right after it says: in order to be regarded as a legal cause -- this is the second part of it, if you did not see -- smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds and philip morris need not be the only cause. smoking a defendant's cigarettes may be a legal cause of his lung cancer and death even though it operated in combination with the cigarettes of another -- and so go on. and so that is why we showed you this. and that is -- again, that is the facts of the case. you know, they did -- you know, we know with merit ultra lights there is more compensation, we know about the design changes with adenocarcinoma, we know this gentleman got adenocarcinoma, we know that dr. ruckdeschel said with a 25-year-pack history in 1980 or '81, you know, he probably would have gotten lung cancer anyway, but then he said, the additional cigarettes for the next ten years increased the likelihood. every cigarette 5110 smoked, we know there is damages. there is carcinogens. he went through the whole thing where he showed you the cilia and what is going on with the dna changes. so all that ten years increased the probability until we got a 110 certainty. so we do not have to speculate anymore. mr. sales: more difficult to treat. mr. paige: more advanced or make it more difficult to treat. that is what he said. so, you know, those cigarette, you know, and we are not asking for this, but if you take that again to the logical conclusion of what they are saying, if from 1980 the die was already cast, that is what he is saying, if that is what they are saying, and merit ultra lights bears no responsibility, then you know who else bears no responsibility? mr. ahrens. because he was not -- when he was in his teens and 20s and 30s and thirty percent of doctors in america were smoking in the '70s, that is not what we accepted responsibility for. so mrs. arnold's client, you know, just because -- you know, we could not bring a lawsuit in 1980 if we wanted to, to say, hey, he is probably 5111 going to get lung cancer, it is probably going to happen. they would say, hey, you are speculating, you do not know that. so what we do know is that he smoked for another ten years, and we do know that every time he smoked he was getting formaldehyde and, you know, arsenic and cyanide and polonium and all that stuff and junk into his lungs, and we know that he did have, ultimately, that 6 to 8 centimeter tumor that that contributed to. so i just wanted to respond to that. lastly, you know, we talked about, you know, mr. -- i think it was mr. carter who -- was it mr. carter -- i think it was mr. carter, who talked about that maybe he never smoked kent cigarettes, but then he said, well, we are not going to disbelieve mrs. ahrens, either. look, mrs. ahrens, you met her. she told you what her husband smoked. the fact that, you know, that is what he smoked. if it was something else, she would have told you it was something else. he smoked kents. and what she told you is she remembered something brown. think about it. it is 2015, '16, you know. she is being asked about what she remembers from 5112 the '90s, the '80s, and she is saying, look, i remember brown. she is going to remember the filter on somebody else's cigarettes from 20, 30 years ago, she is remembering something brown. so that is merit ultra light had a brown filter. there is no dispute about it. if you can show that. so that is a merit ultra light. you can see the little sign. you see it on the lighter there. that is a merit ultra light pack, and that is the brown filter she remembered. and before that he smoked kents. that is what mrs. ahrens told you when she was under oath, and i submit to you everything that she said, you know, she was very forthright and forthcoming and what did she say, she told you what she knew, nothing more and nothing less, and that is what happened. and, finally, the last one is not even typed up, it is handwritten. and so mrs. arnold said that the amount that we requested had to be based upon the law. and it had to be based upon the facts in this case, and i agree with that one hundred percent. 5113 because i know -- i do not want a verdict that does not conform with the evidence and the law. okay. i know that that would not be a good thing, to get a verdict that would be too high. okay. that is not good to have it. i wish i could ask for more, but i have to ask for an amount that i know would be supported by the evidence and the law. so if i ask for $100 million, that would not be right. i submit to you that the evidence and the law would sustain a verdict of exactly what i asked for, and that is why we asked for that. and what mrs. ahrens went through, you know, i did not say much about it, but she is having a lonely life for 20 years. she slept alone in her room. she has people coming to her house in the morning. they take care of her, they give her a bath, they get her dressed and then they leave her there. and they come, i think they help her make dinner, then they leave her there. you know, i wish i could ask for more. and, you know, you could -- i would urge you not to give more. you could award more, you could give less, it is up to you. but i think 5114 the amount that we asked for is fair and reasonable in light of the harm and the mental anguish and the pain and suffering that she is lived with and will live with. and that is it. and i thank you all very much for your time. thank you again.