closing statement mr. carter: good afternoon. you heard a story in this trial about a phone call. mr. ahrens talking to an old friend on the other side of the country. he received bad news. the old friend had lung cancer and was given six months to live. after that call, mr. ahrens announced to his coworkers that he was quitting, gave away his cigarettes, went home at the end of the day, walked in the door, asked mrs. ahrens if 4899 she noticed anything different about him, at first she did not. he told her, i've quit smoking. from that point forward, for the rest of his life, he never smoked another cigarette. and that story tells you everything you need to know about the issues that i'm going to speak with you about this afternoon. and it explains why the defendants believe you should enter a verdict on their behalf. may it please the court, counsel, mrs. ahrens, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. my name is ed carter. you have heard me introduced over the course of the past three weeks. i've had the opportunity to talk to some of the witnesses, but this is my first opportunity to speak with you. i'm pleased to be here as part of the team representing r.j. reynolds. i'm pleased that my partner, steve kaczynski, has graciously given me some of his time so that i can have an opportunity to speak to you about some of the issues in this case. after i'm done, mr. kaczynski will talk to you about some of the other issues. now, mr. kaczynski has said it to you 4900 every time he addressed you, in jury selection and in opening, we cannot have a trial without jurors such as yourselves. the lawyers are here, we have to be here, we chose to be here. this is what we want to do for a living. mrs. ahrens is here because she filed a lawsuit. but none of you chose this. we chose you. there a lot of ways that people can contribute to making our country great. these past three weeks you have all contributed by serving on this jury. everyone in this courtroom and in the system appreciates it, and i'd like to thank you on behalf of myself, my team, and my client for all that you have done. now, when this case started mr. kaczynski told you that it was a case about karl ahrens and the decisions that he made when it came to smoking. as this case draws to a close, that is what it is still about. this case was never about whether cigarettes can be addictive. they can. it is never about whether cigarettes cause lung cancer, they do. it is not whether cigarettes 4901 are legal, they are. they are legal to sell and they are legal to advertise. now, dr. hurt spent a lot of time telling you that smoking is addictive. you heard that from judge day on the first day of the trial, it was not an issue then and it is not an issue now. dr. ruckdeschel spent a lot of time telling you that smoking causes lung cancer. you have heard that from judge day in the findings on the first day, it was not an issue then, it is not an issue now. and when we say that cigarettes are a legal product, that is not just me saying that, that is an instruction you have received from judge day. i'd like to pull up that instruction. the defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes, which are lawful activities. that is the law in this case. mr. kaczynski also predicted the plaintiff would spend a lot of time, and as it turned out, it was the better part of eight days, talking about statements and ideas from 4902 reynolds and other tobacco companies, some of which were made 30, 40, 50 years ago. some of them were even longer than that. but if that was all this case was about, whether cigarette manufacturers said things and did things, then none of us would say or think today, we would not be here. we would not have spent the last three weeks in this case. but we did. this case is also not about sympathy. judge day instructed you this morning that you are not permitted to let sympathy influence your verdict. by now you understand that this is a case about karl ahrens and only karl ahrens. it is not about the class action that you heard so much about, it is not about all smokers, and it is not about tobacco companies in general. this is not a referendum about smoking, this is not a town hall meeting about tobacco, this is a court of law. during the past several weeks you heard a lot of testimony about things that did not have much to do with mr. ahrens. organizations that he had never heard of, documents that he never 4903 saw, statements that he never heard. and you heard about things that people wrote that never reached mr. ahrens' ears. why did you hear that? and why did you hear that again earlier today in mr. paige's closing? i submit you heard those things to make you angry, to get you mad, to distract you from the facts of mr. ahrens' case. mr. paige, in his closing argument, at one point said keep your eye on the ball. and i agree, you should keep your eye on the ball. do not get caught up with distractions but focus on the issues that you have to decide and mr. ahrens' life. dr. proctor talked to you for four days in the hopes of getting you so mad that you would decide the case based on emotion rather than on the facts of mr. ahrens life. plaintiff started her case with dr. proctor reading you documents and she ended her case with a video of kristy leung reading more documents to you. again, hoping that you would forget the middle of the case, the part of the case about mr. ahrens. take your eye off the ball and turn your focus away from him. if you keep your eye on the ball, and 4904 focus on mr. ahrens and the facts of his life, mrs. ahrens loses. ladies and gentlemen, you are the only jury who gets to hear the case of mr. ahrens. and you are the only jury deciding the issues that bring us here today. this afternoon i'm going to walk you through the first half of the verdict form that you will receive when the closing arguments are done. before i get into the verdict form, i want to spend just a moment to address the findings you have heard so much about. those are the findings that judge day instructed you were resolved in the prior case. things that mr. kaczynski told you in opening statements were not an issue here. there is no debate, none, that those findings from the class action do not tell you anything at all about mr. ahrens. they do not tell you how to answer a single one of the questions that will be on the verdict form you receive. that is because, as i've said, this is a case about mr. ahrens and you are mr. ahrens' only jury. i'd like to show you the jury 4905 instruction -- summarize one of the jury instructions about the findings. you heard that you must not consider them in answering that first question. the first question that deals with class membership. the findings only come into play if you make it past that question. judge day also instructed you that the findings only establish what they expressly state. nothing more, nothing less. and you must not speculate or guess as to the basis. you heard a lot of evidence in this case about ph, or youth marketing, or various other conduct allegations from dr. proctor, dr. hurt, you may not speculate as to whether those are the basis for the findings. that is in the instruction from judge day. with that, i'd like to turn to the first question on the verdict form, a question of class membership. you heard at the very beginning of this case, back in jury selection, that because plaintiff is the one making the allegations and seeking money damages, she bears the burden of proof on every issue that you have to decide. 4906 it is true then, and it is still true now. and that burden starts with the very first question on the verdict form. this is the first question on the verdict form: was karl ahrens addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? now, there are a number of concepts that go into this question. it is one question but it really has three parts. for those of you who are visual, think of it this way: was karl ahrens addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, that portion in orange is the first concept, addiction. and if so, was such addiction a legal cause, the blue part is the second concept, addiction causation, of his lung cancer and death, in the green, the smoking causation, the medical causation. those are the three concepts that are part of that class membership question. each one of those three concepts presents a separate hurdle, a hurdle, a burden of proof that mrs. ahrens has to satisfy in order for you to check yes on that first question. 4907 the addiction hurdle, plaintiff must prove mr. ahrens was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. the addiction causation hurdle, she must prove that addiction was a legal cause of mr. ahrens' lung cancer and death. and, finally, plaintiff must prove that mr. ahrens' lung cancer and death were caused by smoking. three separate hurdles. three separate burdens. we are going to go through each one of those in turn and show you why we believe the answer to the first question on the verdict form should be no. so with the first hurdle, addiction. here is the evidence that mr. ahrens was not addicted: it starts with the medical records. these are materials that were created long before the idea of a lawsuit was conceived, and they were filled out by the doctors who treated mr. ahrens based on information that mr. ahrens himself provided them contemporaneous with that treatment. i showed dr. hurt a summary of all the medical records when i cross examined him, you 4908 may remember that chart. they were all pretty much the same on the question of his smoking history. he smoked one pack a day, for 30 years, and according to the records dated in 1996 had quit seven, eight, nine years prior. so some point in the late 1980s. none of mr. ahrens' medical records ever revealed a diagnosis of addiction. they never revealed a diagnosis of nicotine dependence, a tobacco use disorder, a nicotine abuse. nothing like that was in any of the medical records. second, mr. kaczynski told you during his opening statement that you would hear some simple facts about nicotine and nicotine addiction throughout this trial, and you did. you heard a lot about nicotine and nicotinic receptors. with dr. hurt on the stand plaintiff made a big deal with nicotine and how it impacts the brain. well, like many of the things you heard in this trial, you only heard half the story from plaintiff. on cross examination dr. hurt admitted that after a smoker stops, the brain goes back 4909 to normal. here is some of the facts. a half-life of nicotine is two hours. as a result, it is all out of the body very quickly, within 24 hours. everyone, all of us, have nicotine receptors. the upregulation we heard about, of nicotine receptors, is not permanent in anyone. the upregulation does not make it impossible for a smoker to quit, and once a person stops smoking, the receptors go back to normal, they -- the concept of downregulation, they go back to normal and the brain of a smoker, former smoker, looks just like the brain of a nonsmoker. remember that, the pictures of the brain? dr. hurt showed a slide that had some pet scans, that are the colored images that went in two rows across the top of the screen. and he showed you how the brain of active smokers were different than the brains of nonsmokers. and he made a big deal about how dramatic those differences were. on cross examination i showed him the same picture, but i showed them for a different reason. it turned out that the smokers in that 4910 study were all addicted. and after two days of nonsmoking, the two images that were on the left side of the screen looked the same. the smoker who had not smoked for two days, his brain looked just like the person who was not a smoker. and by the way, you may recall that the addicted smokers who were used in that study were defined as addicted using the dsm. more on that later. you also heard about dopamine. dr. hurt and dr. dorce both talked to you about the release of dopamine in the brain and how it is not something unique to nicotine. all sorts of drugs, all sorts of behaviors, even dr. hurt, back in the day when he could dunk, that is something that would release dopamine. and the dopamine release from nicotine differed dramatically, as dr. dorce told you, from the dopamine release that occurs with methamphetamine, cocaine, some of the hard drugs you heard about. dopamine did not prevent mr. ahrens from quitting. it did not prevent the millions of former smokers from quitting. and we know this 4911 because mr. ahrens, in fact, quit. you also heard once a person starts smoking that nicotine is gone from the body. that nicotine does not interfere with a smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking, it does not interfere with an individual's ability to make the choice to quit, or the choice to continue smoking, and it does not cause debilitating or life-threatening withdrawal like some other substances do. simply put, all the experts who came into this courtroom and testified before you testified that nicotine does not prevent a smoker from quitting permanently. dr. hurt and dr. dorce agree, quitting smoking is a very doable thing and any smoker can do it. millions of smokers have, and mr. ahrens did. dr. hurt testified that between 1966 and 1979, roughly the time period that mr. ahrens was smoking kent cigarettes, 30 million people quit smoking. dr. hurt agreed many of those smokers were just like mr. ahrens, they were smoking a pack to a pack and a half a day. they were smoking cigarettes that had filters. 4912 they were smoking lights. they were smoking cigarettes that had additives and flavorants. had mr. hurt -- excuse me, had mr. ahrens been motivated, he could have quit during this same time period, just like the other 30 million. for reasons only mr. ahrens knows he decided not to. you heard me talk a lot about 60 million former smokers during my examinations. and that is because today there are 60 million former smokers living in america. that breaks down to 1.3 million who quit per year. today in the united states, there are more former smokers alive than there are current smokers. and of those 60 million former smokers, millions of them were addicted. most of them quit cold turkey. millions of them started as teens. millions of them would have had upregulated receptors, they would have all experienced the pleasure from the release of dopamine, many of them smoked filters, smoked cigarettes with ammonia, and smoked a pack or more of cigarettes per day. and those -- you have heard again today about the teens and people not having fully 4913 developed frontal lobes. that did not stop millions of americans from quitting. despite this, plaintiff brought you dr. hurt and he told you that mr. ahrens was addicted. i want to talk about dr. hurt for a moment. you heard that dr. hurt has made $75,000 so far this year. we are barely into february. $75,000, in the first month, and change, of this year. he comes to court and he says one hundred percent of the time that the subject he is reviewing is addicted. he told you that in this case, he reached his opinions after he saw some medical records but before he read a single page of deposition testimony. he told you that he attended a conference where plaintiffs' attorneys who were suing tobacco companies attended. and he talked to you -- or he told you that he teaches, one of the goals for testifying, is to avoid a yes-or-no answer on cross examination. and i think you saw during the course of my cross examination that he practices what he teaches. dr. hurt applied a two-question test to 4914 determine if mr. ahrens was addicted, that was called the heaviness of smoking index. it was a subset of the other test he used, the fagerström test, that is a six-question test. as i pointed out during cross examination, and as you heard from dr. dorce yesterday, neither the heaviness of smoking index or the fagerström test are tests that a patient can fail. under the tests, everyone is addicted. you saw the scales, both of them have a level that is a 0 and on the heaviness of smoking index, 0 is still low dependence. on fagerström, 0 is still very low dependence. so as dr. hurt admitted, even a score of 0 equals some level of dependence. so if you smoke one cigarette a day, you will be considered dependent on nicotine. it is no wonder dr. hurt can testify that everyone was addicted. even though these tests are tests that a patient cannot fail, you saw that i had to keep dr. hurt honest in the way that he applied them to mr. ahrens. on the heaviness of smoking index he said he was applying a conservative estimate, and he arrived at a score of 5, to make sure he could get him in the high 4915 dependence category. that was dependent on scoring him as 21 to 30 cigarettes per day. that was his conservative estimate. and you will recall, i asked him, if you take the medical records, which all say a pack per day, how many cigarettes is that? that is 20. that is a different score. if it was such an easy answer to the question, why does dr. hurt have to overreach and call it a conservative estimate? dr. hurt also testified that mr. ahrens found it difficult to remain -- or to refrain from smoking in places where it was prohibited. what was his evidence? he gave you two stories from all the way back in the 1960s. so i asked him a series of questions to show that mr. ahrens had the ability to control his smoking when and where he wanted to. here are some of those examples that we saw in the testimony. you learned that mr. ahrens did not smoke in the bedrooms, that when the family moved to texas in the 1980s he started smoking outside. he went to theaters and museums, even back in the dating days with mrs. ahrens, he did not have to leave early to 4916 go outside to smoke, he could make it through those events. he never smoked anywhere on church grounds when they went to church in texas. he did not have any problems from smoking, refraining from smoking at work. he did not smoke in front of friends and family who did not like it. bottom line was you saw smoking did not interfere with any of his social obligations and it did not interfere with any of his work responsibilities. despite what dr. hurt tried to tell you, mr. ahrens was in control of his smoking. he controlled when he smoked and where he smoked. and if the situation called for him to not smoke, he complied. now, plaintiff's counsel asked some questions yesterday about pumping gas and smoking at the same time to suggest to you that mr. ahrens was endangering himself to smoke. and the fact that mr. ahrens did that, from their position the suggestion was that was a sign he was addicted. dr. dorce, i submit, busted that myth. that was not a problematic pattern. a few isolated antidotes is not the basis of a 4917 diagnosis of addiction. the fact of the matter is mr. ahrens could control his smoking and he proved it repeatedly, including, most notably, when he quit for good. we called dr. dorce to the stand to describe to you the methodology and the reasons why mr. ahrens was not addicted. she told you the approach that she took in answering that question and why her opinion was different than dr. hurt's. unlike dr. hurt, whenever the attorneys called dr. dorce, we do not know what her answer's going to be. she needs to study a case. she needs to learn the facts and apply them, her methodology, before she reaches her conclusion. here is some of the differences between dr. hurt and dr. dorce. dr. dorce is the only one of the two who has testified in courtrooms like this that a smoker was addicted as well as not addicted. she is not one hundred percent on one side. dr. dorce was the only one in this case who read all the materials and considered all 4918 the facts available about mr. ahrens' life before she rushed to judgment like dr. hurt. and she does not give the same opinion in every trial. dr. hurt is the one who does that. during cross examination yesterday, mr. paige tried to make a big deal about how dr. dorce does not spend her time publishing and lecturing and that she does not treat patients who solely come to her for nicotine addiction. i'd like to address those. dr. dorce is on the front lines currently treating real-life people with serious addiction. on a daily basis, she treats people addicted to a wide spectrum of substances. opiates, cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin, marijuana, alcohol and, yes, nicotine. she told you she does not deal with patients who are there exclusively for nicotine addiction because she works at an inpatient facility and nicotine users do not need detox. they do not ordinarily require inpatient admission. and you may be thinking, what about dr. hurt? he had an inpatient program at the mayo clinic. i want to talk about that for a 4919 minute. i want to point out some of the math related to his clinic. he was there for 23 years while that inpatient clinic was operating. he told you that about 1600 patients came through that program. that averages out to 70 a year. he said it was an eight-day program. patients come in on a friday, they are discharged the following friday. he said that they had a 52 percent success rate. so you run that math on a average of 35 patients per year who have successfully quit smoking as a result of dr. hurt's program. during that same 23 years that dr. hurt was at that program, tens of millions of smokers quit in this country using other methods compared to the 800 patients who went through his program. mr. paige suggested through the examination of dr. hurt that a program such as his might have been something that would have been helpful to mr. ahrens. you have heard about 1-percenters in recent years. mr. ahrens was a 99.998-percenter. he was one of the tens of millions of smokers who 4920 went -- who quit through the methods other than the 800 who went through dr. hurt's clinic. you heard dr. dorce testify that nicotine dependence does not require the same treatment as addiction to cocaine, heroin, alcohol and other drugs, and that is why dr. dorce does not make a living treating people for solely nicotine dependence. but dr. dorce has treated thousands of individual smokers and she is treated them for smoking as well as their other substance disorders. and when she sees those patients in her daily practice, she uses the same methodology that she uses when she comes to courtrooms. she uses the dsm. now, dr. hurt took the stand and fought with me. he refused to admit at first that the dsm was authoritative on the use of substance disorders as it pertains to tobacco. and that was a change that i tried to point out during the cross examination. i want to look at it, dr. hurt then versus dr. hurt in this courtroom. so he refused to admit to you that dsm was authoritative for tobacco even after he told 4921 you that he taught it at the mayo clinic to other training clinicians who were going to use it. he told you that it was not authoritative even after he acknowledged that it was used by former colleagues at the mayo clinic and that he used it himself last month to find that a smoker was -- to assess a smoker in that case last month. he used it himself last month, and he tried to tell you that this month it is not reliable. when you see that instruction about the credibility and weighing the testimony of experts, that is something i'd like you to consider when you evaluate dr. hurt and his time in front of you. dr. dorce, on the other hand, testified the dsm is the standard tool used by clinicians. applying those criteria to mr. ahrens, dr. dorce told you that she believes in her professional opinion mr. ahrens was not addicted. she told you that mr. ahrens did not experience that threshold requirement, clinically significant impaired or distressed. 4922 instead, smoking was a decision that he made. choosing something you want to do is not a sign of significant impairment or distress. doing what you want to do is not a disorder. it is a decision. and mr. ahrens had the choice and the ability to control that choice and make a different decision if he wanted to. that brings me to my last point on the addiction question. dr. hurt came to the stand and plaintiff's lawyers flashed some definitions of addiction on the screen. those were definitions that dr. hurt could not run away from. i showed you the definition from nida and the definition from mayo clinic. "addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug-seeking use despite harmful consequences." and then from the mayo clinic: "nicotine dependence, also called tobacco dependence, is an addiction to tobacco products caused by the drug nicotine. nicotine dependence means you cannot stop using the substance even though it is causing you harm." 4923 and you may remember, i asked dr. hurt about that definition from his facility and how that applies to mr. ahrens, who we know was able to stop using the substance. under the mayo clinic definition, mr. ahrens was not addicted. there was another definition that we saw yesterday, mr. paige used it, on the website from the american psychiatric association. he used it with dr. dorce. and this was the definition. and i read some additional language, the long definition, so i will not read the entire thing, but i focused in on the language about how it would take over the addicted person's life. it is in the middle there. "take over their life." and that if you have effective treatments, they can eventually get back to living a normal and productive life. you know that mr. ahrens was not someone whose smoking took over his life or that prevented him from leading a normal and productive life. his life was always quite productive, as we heard. and under these definitions, mr. ahrens is 4924 not addicted. when mr. ahrens wanted to make the decision to quit, he was able to successfully quit. because he never experienced a loss of control over that decision, because he never lost the ability to quit, and because he was able to quit when he was addicted -- or excuse me, because he was able to quit when he was motivated, he was not addicted. he was never significantly impaired, never significantly distressed. and that is why mrs. ahrens cannot clear that first hurdle of class membership. i want to talk about the second hurdle. if you find that mr. ahrens was addicted, the second hurdle you have to consider is whether the addiction was a legal cause of his death. now, this is how the court defines legal cause in this context. for his addiction to be a legal cause, it had to directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produce, or contribute substantially to producing, such lung cancer so that it can be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer would not have occurred. 4925 the evidence proves that addiction in this case is not a but for reason of mr. ahrens' smoking. the but for cause of his smoking was his choice, his decision to smoke for as long as he did because it was what he wanted to do, it was what he enjoyed. ask yourself this question: if mr. ahrens was not addicted, would he have continued to smoke? i think we know from the evidence we saw in this case that of course the answer is yes, he would have done so because he wanted to. it was not disputed in this case that smokers smoke for a number of reasons that have nothing to do with nicotine. dr. dorce said it and even dr. hurt admitted it. addiction cannot be the legal cause of mr. ahrens' death because it was never a substantial cause of his smoking. if his smoking behavior would have been the same, whether he was addicted or not, that answers the question. that tells you that addiction cannot be a substantial cause because it did not make a difference. when it says "but for," what that means is if you change that fact and 4926 you run the movie of his life, do you get to the same result? if that is what happens, then it is not a but for cause. in this trial, it does not matter whether we think the choices mr. ahrens made to smoke were good choices or bad choices. that is not what we are here for. what matters is that they were his choices. we are not here to second-guess them. now, mr. paige took issue within his closing, and he may say something about it in rebuttal, he may mock me for saying that mr. ahrens chose to smoke. but let us look at how he chose to respond when he was told over and over again by his wife, by his children, to quit smoking. he did nothing in response. mr. paige pointed out that the word "choice" is not a word in the jury instructions and it is not a word you are going to see on the verdict form. it is a word that is really a concept that is embedded in our common sense. one of the many strengths of the jury system is that we put ordinary citizens such as yourself in the box and we ask you to use your common sense. you should not check your common 4927 sense at the metal detectors downstairs when you walk in the courtroom. one of the instructions that his honor gave you is this one: "your job is to determine what the facts are. you may use reason and common sense to reach those conclusions." so when we talk about mr. ahrens' choices, use your common sense and apply that ability to reason to this part of the class membership question. when we talk about his choices, we are not second guessing. we are asking you to respect them. mr. ahrens had the right to make whatever decisions he wanted to make in his life, to live his life the way he saw fit. with those rights come responsibilities. those decisions, those choices always stood in between mr. ahrens, always stood in between mr. ahrens, between his claimed addiction and his cancer. once he started smoking, he was not on a neverending path to cancer. there were lots of places, lots of opportunities along the way where he had to make decisions and choices to 4928 continue smoking. he decided to take that first cigarette on the night watch when he was bored, he decided to continue smoking despite warnings from the most credible sources of all, his family, his loved ones. every single pack of cigarettes that anyone in this case who was around to see mr. ahrens smoke contained a warning label on it. these are the various warning labels that would have been on the packs of cigarettes that mr. ahrens smoked. there is no evidence that mr. ahrens would have listened to his wife all those years she begged him to quit if he had not been addicted. would he have ignored the begging from his wife and from the sons, or would he have done what he wanted to do whether he was addicted or not? of course he would have because we know what mr. ahrens chose to do. if mr. ahrens wanted to quit smoking and just was unable to do it, you might have expected to hear evidence that he would have ever asked his loved ones for support and help. he never did. for decades mr. ahrens never told his family members that he wanted to quit 4929 or that he was trying to quit. you heard from almost every witness that mr. ahrens was an intelligent man, an educated man. dr. pach came in and told you that mr. ahrens attended an elite high school that had health classes. he showed you that he took graduate courses in marketing. dr. pach also explained to you that mr. ahrens worked for xerox, which at the time was a progressive corporation that was encouraging every employee to make healthy lifestyle choices, including quitting smoking, all the way back in the 1970s. you saw those materials from the xerox corporation, materials that included a lifestyle improvement newspaper called "take charge" that was mailed to the household of every xerox employee. as you heard from dr. pach, very few corporations were doing that at the time, but xerox was. mr. ahrens worked there and he would have been a recipient. mr. ahrens knew the risks of smoking but was not motivated enough to stop. you heard from both dr. dorce and dr. hurt that the key 4930 factor in a person's successfully quitting is motivation and that it requires persistent motivation. dr. dorce told you that motivation has to come from the individual, and dr. hurt even agreed with that. these were dr. hurt's own words: "motivation leads to trying to quit smoking. trying to stop smoking does ultimately lead to most people quitting." that is dr. hurt. i also showed him a manual that he used with his patients at the mayo clinic. it is called "making the decision." and it says, "only you can decide when to quit smoking." that advice from the mayo clinic rings particularly true in this case. only mr. ahrens was in a position to decide when he could quit smoking. and the evidence we presented to you showed that mr. ahrens did not make that decision at any point between 1967 and his final quit in 1991. dr. hurt was right about motivation, the mayo clinic was right about motivation, and dr. dorce was right about motivation. 4931 motivation does lead a person to stop smoking. and because of that, we can judge mr. ahrens' motivation by looking at what the people who knew him said about his efforts to quit smoking. now, what do we know about mr. ahrens' efforts to quit smoking over the years? how do they compare with the motivation we just saw was required to quit? you heard testimony from plaintiff's witnesses that mr. ahrens tried to quit multiple times. mr. paige told you this morning during his closing argument that he did not try to quit before 1982. we have heard the phrase "quality over quantity," and in this case i also want you to consider the quality of mr. ahrens' quit attempts. for the entire time that we know mr. ahrens smoked, you heard about two vague recollections providing examples beyond cold turkey that mr. ahrens used to try to quit. one came from mrs. ahrens. she told you that he chewed gum. she was the only witness that ever said this. and she said that there was one time she recalled that happening during 4932 the entire time she was married to mr. ahrens. the second came from mr. ahrens' son bryan. bryan told you that his father tried the patch. he was the only witness who said that. and he recalled seeing it in 1991. even though you heard from dr. hurt that the patch was not available at that time, it was not available until 1992, according to dr. hurt. for both memories there is a laundry list of unknown details. plaintiff has the burden of proof. the witnesses simply could not tell you how -- how long mr. ahrens used either product, how much of it mr. ahrens may have used, where he got it from, whether he had prescriptions for it, whether he stopped smoking for even an hour while using it, and the list goes on. in both instances, you have memories that mr. ahrens may have done something, but that is as much as you or anyone else knows. and that is really the theme of mr. ahrens' quit attempts over the years. in this case, mrs. ahrens' attorneys have paid lip service to the idea that mr. ahrens wanted to quit, but they provided you very little evidence to 4933 substantiate that claim that quitting smoking was important to him or that he made significant efforts to quit. mr. ahrens' attempts to quit were so infrequent and unremarkable that when i asked dr. hurt, the expert witness who has made $75,000 in 2016, when i asked him, he could not remember the first decade when mr. ahrens tried to quit smoking. it may have been because dr. hurt did not review the materials since june of last year, but more likely it is because there was not a lot of substance to remember. mr. ahrens, according to all the witnesses, there were a number of things that he never did to quit smoking prior to his final quit. he never threw away his cigarettes, he never threw away his matches or his ashtrays. he never made a plan to quit smoking. he never announced to his family that he was trying to quit. he never asked them for help. he never asked his friends for help. he never attended a smoking cessation clinic. the fact of the matter is the evidence shows that quitting smoking was not a priority for mr. ahrens. you heard all the witnesses 4934 describe him as intelligent, someone who was capable of putting his mind to something and getting it done. when it came to smoking, he simply did not put his mind to it. instead, you heard consistent testimony from both mrs. ahrens and dr. hurt, the idea of quitting was something that mr. ahrens brushed off and avoided on multiple occasions over the years. let us think back on a few of the occasions when mr. ahrens was encouraged to quit but brushed it off. in the late 1960s and early '70s, mrs. ahrens began to continually encourage her husband to quit. in the 1970s, xerox implemented its company-wide health initiative that included advice to quit smoking. and you heard the moving story from bryan about how he came home from school crying because of what he had learned and begging his father to quit. he said that smoking was poisoning him. he said that smoking would kill him. mr. ahrens brushed it off, continued with dinner, never got rid of his cigarettes, and did not try to quit smoking. 4935 all of those times were instances when mr. ahrens could have made different decisions. he could have made a motivated effort to quit and he could have persisted in it. times when he could have reached out to his family and say, help me get this done. that never happened. he never asked for help, he never threw away his cigarettes, he never said, i'm going to stop smoking. around 1991, you heard that things were different. mr. ahrens received that call from his coworker in california, the coworker who said, i've got lung cancer and i only have six months to live. it was not anything different than the type of thing mr. ahrens had been warned about in the '70s. it was not anything different than what his own son warned him about that time at the dinner table. it was not different than the warnings on the packs of the cigarettes that he smoked every time he picked up a pack from 1967 until he quit. the only thing that was different was mr. ahrens' response. for the first time he really wanted to quit and for the first time he 4936 made that committed effort. the first thing he did was give away his cigarettes to his coworkers. he had never done that before. the next thing he did, tell his family that he was going to stop smoking. he had never done that before. after he quit, he chewed on coffee stirrers, an item that contained no nicotine. that item kept him distracted and he never smoked. that was something he had never tried before. after taking all those steps, for the first time in his life, mr. ahrens quit for good in 1991, five years before his cancer diagnosis. in other words, he decided he wanted to stop, he made a genuine attempt to stop, and he quit cold turkey on a dime. after that, he never smoked another cigarette, never took another dose of nicotine, he even got to the point where he thought it was disgusting to see others smoke. i want to address withdrawal briefly. you heard about withdrawal in this case. and you heard some testimony that mr. ahrens could have been grouchy or irritable on occasions that he 4937 was trying to quit smoking. compare that to how he behaved when he was smoking and he was told by others that he should quit. when he was told to do something that he did not want to do, he would brush it off, avoid the conversation, and tell his family members to leave him alone. some might describe that as grouchy and irritable, too, but just like the other, it has nothing to do with nicotine. more importantly, remember that experiencing withdrawal is not the be-all end-all of mr. ahrens' story. remember what i asked dr. hurt at the end of my examination. i asked him: dr. hurt, even though you believe mr. ahrens experienced cravings, feelings of withdrawal, and urges to smoke during his final quit, none of those -- none of those cravings, feelings of withdrawal, urges to smoke, caused him to smoke another cigarette or have another dose of nicotine ever again. and he agreed. you remember mrs. ahrens talking about what happened after he quit. she was asked: "did karl ever express how hard it was to stop smoking?" and her answer was: "no." 4938 do you remember that pamphlet from the american cancer society that i showed dr. hurt? it was called smart move, and it had a three-part quiz. it says: "do you have what it takes to stop smoking? there is no magic cure that can help you stop. take this short quiz to find out if you have what it takes." "number one, do you want to stop smoking? "two, are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? "three, are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? "if you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking." prior to his final quit, mr. ahrens never made it through this test. he never wanted to stop and he never told anyone that he was willing to make some changes. when he was motivated to quit in the early 1990s, after hearing that his friend had been diagnosed with lung cancer, after hearing that his friend has six months to live, mr. ahrens succeeded. he quit that day, cold turkey, for good. 4939 nothing caused him to smoke. the evidence does not support the conclusion that he was addicted. but even if it did, the day he decided to quit, the day he committed himself to that process, you heard that nothing stood in his way. addiction did not interfere with his final decision to quit for even one minute, according to the evidence. mr. ahrens made an immediate, decisive and lasting decision. we can take addiction out of the equation when we know that he quit for good, cold turkey, the first time he ever told his family he was going to. and that answers the question of what would mr. ahrens had done but for an addiction. he would have decided to smoke. so even if you decide that mr. ahrens was addicted, that is why addiction cannot be a legal cause of his injury. here is another way to look at what legal cause requires. now, this was something mr. kaczynski discussed in opening. and these are words that come from the instruction his honor gave you. the legal cause must be a direct cause. 4940 it must be a natural cause. it must be a continuous cause. and it must be a substantial cause. you saw that the only direct, natural, continuous and substantial cause of mr. ahrens' smoking was mr. ahrens' decisions. when mr. ahrens made the choice to smoke, the choice to continue to smoke, despite the warnings, choices about controlling his smoking, choices to ignore the warnings, and ultimately the choice to stop smoking, those were choices that he made. not the nicotine in cigarettes, not choices made by reynolds or philip morris. as a result, any disease or death from mr. ahrens' smoking was not legally caused by an addiction. that is why mrs. ahrens cannot clear that second hurdle. turning to the final hurdle of class membership, smoking causation. mrs. ahrens must also prove that mr. ahrens' lung cancer and death was caused by smoking. when mr. kaczynski previewed this in opening as well, that there would be facts 4941 about the medical case that you might expect to hear in a case about lung cancer that you did not hear in this courtroom. dr. ruckdeschel covered this issue. he was plaintiff's medical expert -- and make no mistake, he is a very qualified medical doctor. he was the ceo of the moffitt cancer center and he participated and played an integral role in building that cancer center into a facility that everyone in this area is proud of. he told you that he was confident mr. ahrens suffered from cancer originating in the lung, and he told you that everyone else who treated mr. ahrens at moffitt believed the same thing. but there were a number of things that he had to concede when mr. mayfield cross examined him, perhaps most importantly, dr. ruckdeschel told you that the doctors never, at any time in the course and care of their treatment, actually found cancer cells in mr. ahrens' lung. dr. ruckdeschel explained that when a primary cancer metastasize -- metastasizes it tends to spread from the lung to the hilar 4942 nodes and then eventually to the mediastinal nodes. but just as though they found -- they did not find cancer cells in mr. ahrens' lung, they never found cancer cells in the hilar nodes. the only place they actually found cancer was in the mediastinal nodes. a place where dr. ruckdeschel told you cancers, other than lung cancer, can spread to. in fact, he told you that adenocarcinoma, the cell type mr. ahrens had, is the most common type of metastatic cancer that spreads to the lung area from other sites. dr. ruckdeschel confirmed several physicians described mr. ahrens' as asymptomatic prior to his diagnosis. mrs. ahrens testified that mr. ahrens had no symptoms and was well, up until his diagnosis as far as he knew. dr. ruckdeschel conceded that when he first saw mr. ahrens in june of 1996, mr. ahrens already had a stage iv cancer. and that his care of mr. ahrens, as you recall, from day one was only concerned with trying to make mr. ahrens as comfortable as possible 4943 during his remaining days. the same applies to every doctor at moffitt who saw mr. ahrens. those doctors also knew they were dealing with someone who, unfortunately, had zero chance for survival. while dr. ruckdeschel told you he believes this was a cancer that started in the lung, he also told you that conclusively determining the site of origin was an academic exercise by the time he saw mr. ahrens as a patient. he also told you it would have been considered malpractice to put mr. ahrens through additional testing given his condition because the tests would have been -- that could have been done that would have determined conclusively, they would have played no role in his care and making him comfortable in his remaining days, and that is why dr. ruckdeschel said it would have been malpractice to do them. he told you that there are stains that can be done on tissue of cancer cells to further answer those questions, and that those stains were not done here. at the end of the day, it is plaintiff's burden of proof that mr. ahrens had a primary 4944 lung cancer. the fact that they found cancer in the mediastinal nodes and believed it to be a lung primary, we submit is not sufficient to meet that burden. what was insignificant to the care of mr. ahrens is now very significant to you in the question that you have to answer. and the fact of the matter is, there are questions that remain unanswered. and that is why this third hurdle has not been met. so that takes us to verdict form question 1. based on the evidence in this case, following the court's instructions and applying them to the evidence, we believe that the answer to this question should be no. because mr. ahrens did not suffer from a loss of control or exhibit clinically significant impairment or distress, he was not addicted. he did not meet any of the definitions that plaintiff's counsel used with dr. hurt, does not meet the mayo clinic definition, the american psychiatric association definition, he does not meet dsm. his smoking decisions are not any addiction dictated his behavior. no addiction 4945 was a direct, substantial, continuous but for cause of mr. ahrens' smoking. dr. hurt could not have been more clear. it was one of the last questions i asked him. even though dr. hurt thought that mr. ahrens was addicted, and remained addicted even after he had quit, dr. hurt admitted that mr. ahrens never smoked a cigarette. so, even according to dr. hurt, the addiction that mr. ahrens had never caused him to smoke a cigarette for any of those final years. plaintiff cannot get around that fact. how can an addiction be a direct, substantial, continuous cause of mr. ahrens' smoking even though we have clear evidence in this case that nothing caused him to smoke a single cigarette for the final years of his life? and, lastly, on class membership, when mr. ahrens came to his doctors in 1996, they were not worried about making a record to satisfy a burden in a lawsuit 20 years later. they were dealing with a patient who had widespread terminal cancer and their concern was making him comfortable. that is what they should have done, that is 4946 what we would all hope they would do under the circumstances. but we are here today because of a lawsuit. now, keep in mind that with these three hurdles and class membership, you do not have to agree on which hurdle mrs. ahrens fails to clear. if some of you think that she failed to prove addiction, and others think, no, it was the addiction causation that was not satisfied, and someone else says, no, it was the medical hurdle, plaintiff loses. if plaintiff has not persuaded you, if she has not met her burden on all three of those hurdles, then the answer to this first question must be no. for her to win, you have to agree, unanimously, that she has cleared all three hurdles. but you do not have to agree on the reason why she loses. if she fails to meet her burden on any one of the three, you must answer no. plaintiff does not get a free pass on her burden of proof on these issues. please hold her to all of her burdens. and if you do, i submit the answer to this first question is no. 4947 now, if you answer no to this question, that ends the case. and i believe that is the result that the evidence requires. but because this is my only opportunity to speak with you, i need to go ahead and talk about some of the other questions on the verdict form in case you disagree with what i'm saying. mr. and mrs. ahrens met in 1967. that is where the direct evidence in this case begins. other than the story of how he got that first cigarette on the night watch at the navy while he was bored, we do not know much about the first 30 some-odd years of mr. ahrens' life. mrs. ahrens testified that her husband was smoking kent when they met in 1967. but she admitted she does not have any idea what he smoked before they met. neither glen, the oldest son, or bryan, the youngest son, had any of that information either. when you look at the first ten years of his smoking, sometime '57, '58, until 1967, and ask yourself what the greater evidence -- excuse me, what the greater weight of the evidence shows in regard to that first ten years, as it pertains to brand, it is not even a 4948 question. plaintiff did not bring you any evidence whatsoever on that. there is nothing on their end of the scale for that first ten years. that first ten years is nothing more than a guess or an assumption, and that is not supported by the evidence, and it is not permitted by the law. you cannot find reynolds liable for the first ten years of unknown smoking history. you cannot find philip morris liable for the first ten years of unknown smoking history. and i believe mr. paige took that off the table himself in his closing. that takes us to 1967. bryan ahrens was not born yet. you will recall what he testified on the stand, he indicated he had no recollection of his father ever smoking kent. he was too young. so that leaves us with mrs. ahrens. she was the only witness who testified about kent. she testified that he smoked kent from the time that she met him, until sometime in the 1980s. and she was very confident about that kent usage. i'm not here to tell you that she 4949 was misleading you. i think we all saw her testimony and can judge that she was sincere. she was sincere in her testimony that she believes he smoked kent. but mr. kaczynski asked her a question about what she remembered regarding the kent filter. he asked that question because he knew what she said in her deposition. her testimony was consistent here in this courtroom. she remembered the kent cigarettes having a brown filter. this was the question: "question: now, when you observed the cigarette he was smoking, i think you told us before it was white and brown at the end; is that right? "answer: yeah. it could be. i remember something brown, but i do not know what the brown was. "question: the front was white and the back was brown? "answer: okay. "question: is that what you remember? "answer: yeah." well, what makes this curious, is kent never had a brown filter. kent was always an 4950 all-white cigarette. plaintiff moved a collection of kent ads into evidence. you will have them with you back in the jury room. take a look at them if you want to. take a look at the cigarettes in those ads. you will see that the kent cigarettes were all white. at all times. you have seen these before. these are some of those ads that are in evidence plaintiff moved in. it is an all-white cigarette. now, again, to be clear, i'm not here saying mr. ahrens never smoked kent. i'm not here to tell you that mrs. ahrens does not have a sincere belief in what she testified to. my only point is this: if mrs. ahrens is correct in describing the cigarette that she remembers, a cigarette with a brown filter, then that could not have been a kent cigarette. so if you get to this question on the verdict form, and, again, because of what i talked about with question 1, i do not think that you should, but if you do, i simply ask you to consider the evidence that you heard regarding mr. ahrens' use of my client's cigarettes. and when you do, i submit that the 4951 answer to the second question is no. ms. arnold will talk about it as it pertains to philip morris, but i believe the evidence with respect to philip morris will be no as well. so that takes us to the final question on the verdict form that i'm going to discuss, and that is the third question. comparative fault. if you get to this point on the verdict form, that means you will have already decided mr. ahrens was addicted, that addiction was a legal cause of his death, that he died from adenocarcinoma caused by smoking. if you get this far, you will then be asked to allocate responsibility between the parties. now, there are a couple of points that i want you to keep in mind. and i think these are very important. comparative fault is not a global comparison of conduct. it is not what did karl ahrens do over the course of his life versus the global conduct of the tobacco companies. it is a comparison of actions that karl ahrens and r.j. reynolds and philip morris took 4952 that were the legal cause of mr. ahrens' death. it is a very narrow inquiry. you may have seen things in this case that the tobacco companies said in public or wrote internally that you did not like. the issue in this case, on this question on the verdict form, is whether they affected mr. ahrens and caused his death. if you find in your view that reynolds did something that was wrong and that you did not like -- mr. paige: your honor, i'm sorry. can we approach? mr. carter: on the question of comparative fault, the defendants cannot be assigned fault for things that were not a legal cause of mr. ahrens' death. remember, plaintiff has the burden of proof and reynolds can only be responsible for conduct that was a legal cause in your determination of mr. ahrens' death. the only person on plaintiff's side who you heard say that mr. ahrens was responsible was mr. paige. he said it in opening statement. he said, "so on two of the claims, for negligence and strict liability, we have admitted partial responsibility." when bryan testified, he did not say that his father bore any responsibility, and plaintiff did not either. in fact, she disavowed it. here is her testimony on this issue. 4961 transcribed as follows:) q. your husband is the kind of person who would accept responsibility for his own decisions. you agree with me on that? a. yes. q. and despite that, you do not believe your husband was at all responsible for any of the injuries that happened to him, right? a. no. q. you were asked some questions about whether you accept any responsibility for what karl did. do you remember that? a. yes. q. based on what you know and what you have heard in this courtroom, do you think he had any responsibility? a. no. q. mrs. ahrens, mr. sales just asked you, after what you have heard in this courtroom, you do not believe your husband bears any responsibility. but that was your position way back in your deposition before you were in this courtroom, right? a. yeah. q. thank you. 4962 (the video clip concluded.) mr. carter: plaintiff did not bring you any evidence that mr. ahrens ever said he thought the tobacco companies should be responsible. they did not try to suggest that that was ever a conversation that anyone had. keep your eye on the ball. keep your eye on mr. ahrens. mr. paige telling you that they accept some responsibility is what in sports is called a ball fake to get you to take your eyes off the ball, to get you to take your eyes off mr. ahrens. you are told this to try to encourage you to split responsibility. it is part of the negotiation. being told -- mr. paige: your honor, i'm sorry, i object. the court: sustained. mr. sales: move to strike. the court: ladies and gentlemen, disregard the mention of your participating in a negotiation. mr. carter: what you have here is counsel accepting a slight portion of responsibility on 4963 behalf of mr. ahrens at the same time that mrs. ahrens denies it. those are opposing positions. how do you reconcile them? what percentage of responsibility should mr. ahrens receive for his own actions, his own decisions? was mr. ahrens the type of man who would only take a slight portion of responsibility for his decisions? i submit to you that the evidence is no. did he take full ownership of his decisions? yes. did he take full responsibility for his decisions? yes. for his career, his family. smoking was no different. he is responsible for his decision to choose to smoke and his decision to keep smoking despite knowledge of the risks. he is responsible for the decision to continue smoking and to not even try to quit in the face of begging and encouragement from his children and from his wife. he is responsible for the decision to keep smoking in the face of knowledge from school, work, and countless sources that it was harmful to his health. as a result, he is responsible 4964 for the injuries that he sustained after his choices. and as mr. paige told you, according to mr. paige, he started to quit in the 19 -- around 1982. as a result of that, no responsibility for his smoking for that first 20-some-odd years can be shared. mr. paige said that reynolds, in his suggestion, was sixty percent responsible because for the 15 years that -- well, the 20-some years that we know about his smoking, 15 of them were reynolds and 10 of them were philip morris, and that is where he came up with that 60/40. but think about that. reynolds smoking stopped in 1982, during the 15 years where mr. paige suggested you give sixty percent responsibility because that was reynolds smoking. mr. paige told you mr. ahrens was not trying to quit. how can reynolds have one hundred percent of the responsibility during a time period when mr. ahrens had a 0 percent effort to quit? when he was diagnosed with cancer, mr. ahrens never placed blame on philip morris or reynolds 4965 for his decision to smoke. mr. paige said do not look at the first ten years, the first ten years before 1967 where there was not any evidence, because plaintiff has not proven what he smoked. that is another ball fake. those ten years are part of his story and those ten years are one hundred percent mr. ahrens. mr. sales: same objection and move to strike. ball fake again. the court: ball what? what did he say? mr. carter: ball fake. the court: ball fake. mr. sales: that is the negotiation. the court: overruled. mr. carter: ask yourselves, if mr. ahrens had to assign responsibility based on the evidence that you saw, would he accept it? and i submit the answer is of course. nobody made mr. ahrens' decisions for him, nobody could decide for him to choose to smoke, and nobody but him, as the experts told you, could make the decision for him to quit. only mr. ahrens could make those choices. he was the only one in position to control 4966 those decisions and he is the only person who bears responsibility for them. you heard what was on dr. koop's website, the website of the famous surgeon general who declared nicotine addictive. on dr. koop's website it says, and i'm going to skip down to the middle of that: no matter how much you smoke or have smoked or how much you like to smoke, the choice to light is always yours. choice. not my words, not reynolds, lorillard, philip morris, here these are the words on dr. koop's website. and it is not qualifying. it does not say the choice is ten percent yours or twenty percent yours or fifty percent yours, it says it is yours. that is one hundred percent. it was mr. ahrens who made the choice to continue smoking despite his family warnings and his family asking him to stop. it was mr. ahrens and no one else who made the choice for him to quit when he had that call from his friend in california. we are not asking you to find that his decisions were right or wrong, just asking you to recognize that they were only mr. ahrens' 4967 decisions to make. i'm going to conclude the same way that i started. the story of that last cigarette, the phone call, the bad news, and a motivated, lasting decision in response. when mr. ahrens decided that he was done smoking, when he was finally and truly motivated to do something about, it he took responsibility with his actions, he publicly declared his decision, and nothing stood in his way, not for one minute. at that moment in time, he exercised one hundred percent control over his smoking. so if you get to this point on the verdict form, you have to give him some percentage of responsibility, and i ask that you give him one hundred percent responsibility for his conduct. i very much enjoyed the opportunity to speak with you, and i hope you understand why we are asking you to enter a verdict on behalf of defendants. but whatever your verdict, know that i appreciate your service and commitment to the process. we cannot do what we do without you. you have been extraordinarily attentive to me 4968 this afternoon, just as you have been attentive to everyone over the three weeks. i thank you for that, and i know that you will give mr. kaczynski and ms. arnold the same attention. closing statement mr. kaczynski: may it please the court, mrs. ahrens, counsel. good afternoon. we have come a long way since january 20th, and one thing you have noticed since january 20th, i have been telling you a couple of times, i do not think people can be thanked enough. so once again, let me join the others in thanking you for your service. you answered the call of pinellas county, you listened to the evidence, you asked decisive questions, you did calisthenics during our sidebars, and we appreciate it. you know, one of the first things judge day said to you, i think it was way back on january 20th, was jury service is second only maybe to military service in fulfilling your 4969 role as a citizen. and i think that analogy is pretty good -- and i know we have got fellow veterans on the jury -- that is pretty good, and here is why. the military, they take people from north dakota and brooklyn and georgia and california, and they subject them to a common experience whether it is, you know, boot camp, basic training, ocs, rotc, and it is a bonding, there is a bonding in that process. and out of that bonding process comes the greatest force to defend freedom on god's green earth. well, jury service is not like that. none of you knew each other before you came into the jury room on january 20th, but you spent a lot of time, your common experience has been this trial, and shortly you are going to have the opportunity to render a verdict in this case. and we appreciate your having served. and whatever you decide, whatever the verdict, go back to your family, to your friends, to your coworkers, and tell them that you helped make the system work because you did. and we all appreciate it. i'm going to talk to you about that part 4970 of the verdict form that we do not think you should ever get to. this part deals with whether mr. ahrens reasonably relied on anything lorillard/reynolds, and i will use those interchangeably, ever said or did not say, meaning what anything -- was anything lorillard or reynolds ever said or did, was it a legal cause of his injuries. i will deal with the part that deals with compensatory damages, the type of damages to make mrs. ahrens and bryan ahrens whole, and the part that deals with whether punitive damages are warranted in this case to punish my client or to deter others. and the reason we do not think you get that far is what mr. carter just told you, and that is, we hope, we think you will find that mr. ahrens is not an engle class member. but if you do get that far, the first thing we need to talk about is whether mr. ahrens reasonably relied to his detriment on anything that reynolds/lorillard did or did not do, whether any smoking decision he ever made was based on reynolds' or lorillard's conduct. was anything that lorillard did or 4971 did not do a legal cause of his injury? and as i start talking about this part of the verdict form, let me start with what i think is a noncontroversial fact: between st. pete and tampa lies tampa bay, not controversial. and until january 1960 when the howard franklin bridge was opened, tampa bay was an obstacle in getting from st. pete to tampa. to overcome that obstacle, they had to build a bridge. and for this half of the verdict form, plaintiff has to build a bridge. on one shore, as you see, is karl ahrens, and on the other shore is lorillard/reynolds. for this half of the verdict form, plaintiff has the burden to show some connection, some nexus, whether it is called reasonable reliance or legal cause, between something that lorillard or reynolds said or did and karl ahrens. they had to build a bridge, and they did not. you say, well, wait a minute, whoa, whoa, whoa. did not lorillard manufacture the cigarettes, kent brand, that mr. ahrens smoked for around 1967 to '81? the answer to that is 4972 yes. but you have already seen the instruction that says that the defendant cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. that does not build a bridge. well, how else can they build a bridge? maybe it was something lorillard said or did that caused mr. ahrens to smoke his first cigarette. but as we know, that did not happen. he was a high school graduate, an adult, over the age of 18, and in the navy. he was on night watch. he was bored. another sailor offered him a cigarette and he took it. no ads were involved. no sampling was involved. dick van dyke did not jump out of one of those cigarette ads and offer him a cigarette. how he started smoking does not build that bridge. we do not know what that brand was. in fact, we do not know what any brand was, as you heard, until roughly 1967 when he met mrs. ahrens, the cigarette with the brown filter she thinks was kent. we do know they never discussed cigarette advertising. we do know mr. ahrens never said 4973 kent was safer. we do not know why he picked kent. we do not know when he picked kent. and when you first walked into the jury room on the first floor on january 20th, you did not know any of this. now three weeks later, you are about to head into another jury room to deliberate and render a verdict, and you still do not. you still do not. none of that builds that bridge. these are huge gaps in proof, and to fill those gaps you are essentially being asked to guess. guess why he chose kent, guess when he chose kent, guess whether he thought kent was safer, and if he thought it was safer, guess why he thought that. but you cannot build a bridge with guesses. guesses are like, you know, pixie dust, and you cannot build a bridge with pixie dust. you build a bridge with iron and steel and mortar and brick. that is called proof. and here for that period of time, those decisions, there is none. well, you say, okay, wait a minute. now, dr. proctor, he was here. he spent a week talking about the tobacco institute, the 4974 council for tobacco research, the tobacco industry research committee. what about those? do not they build a bridge? what about those white papers? what about that photo bomb commercial you saw again this morning? what about the guy with the big hair doing the press conference for the tobacco institute? do they build a bridge? well, only two people who knew mr. ahrens testified in this courtroom, mrs. ahrens and their son bryan. both of them never said mr. ahrens discussed any of those organizations with them. mrs. ahrens, the person closest in the world to mr. ahrens, said: "question: you were never told, heard of, or relied on anything from, for example, the tobacco institute? "answer: no. "question: the tobacco industry research committee? "answer: no. "question: the council for tobacco research? "answer: no." 4975 that does not build a bridge. all that stuff that dr. proctor talked about, pixie dust, not proof. then there are all those irrelevancies you were treated to in dr. proctor's testimony. cigarettes to soldiers in world war i and ii. cigarettes for va hospitals. ads before karl ahrens was born. ads for brands that he never smoked. you saw some of those again this morning. an hour of that video that was played by the lorillard marketing person, the first hour had to do with old gold cigarettes. what did that have to do with anything? you saw internal marketing plans from r.j. reynolds during the period of time it was a separate company and mr. ahrens was smoking a lorillard brand. you saw kent ads from before there was proof that he smoked kent. more pixie dust. none of that builds a bridge. in fact, ladies and gentlemen, this would be a pretty difficult bridge to build. did mr. ahrens make his choices based on what a cigarette company said or did not say? well, 4976 what do we know about mr. ahrens? we know he was an intelligent man, right? he went to a select high school, brooklyn tech, a school with high standards, required an entrance exam. almost an engineer prep school. we know that he got a bs degree from fairleigh dickinson university and he took graduate courses in marketing. and, yeah, there are his grades. we know he worked with computers. and this was a time when computers were new and mysterious things, where one computer filled a room, for a period of time from the 1960s forward. computers have changed the way we lived our lives and ran our businesses. we know that he read the paper and watched the evening news, national and local. and we know that he was growing up -- he grew up in the media capital of the world, new york city, where there were multiple sources of information about many, many events linking smoking with disease. these articles were in reader's digest. and some of them had titles like "nicotine 4977 knockout," 1941. or "cancer by the carton," 1952. now, you saw the slide that the plaintiffs used with dr. proctor that tried to minimized reader's digest, saying, well, there were only a relatively small number of articles compared to all they ran. but let us take a look at a few sources about the impact that those articles have. let us go to, oh, i do not know, how about senator john f. kennedy, who said: "digest stories figured heavily in committee hearings, such as those on postal administration, the cigarette-cancer relationship, the foreign aid program, and many other subjects of national importance." let us see what the american cancer society said about reader's digest. "the american cancer society has termed them," articles in reader's digest, "a 'profound influence' in creating public awareness of the risks involved in smoking." there was coverage of the stories in places like time and newsweek, and, by the way, as judge day told you this morning, all these 4978 are in evidence. you are going to have them back in the jury room, i'm going to encourage you to read them, or at least some of them. because the suggestion's been made there was confusion. that the tobacco industry somehow polluted the information environment and there was a mixed message out there. read them. read them. and i am confident you will not find a mixed message at all. there was coverage in new york city newspapers. there was coverage on television. both in the news and in public service announcements. and we played you some of those. did the message get out? so all this was being sent out there. was anybody listening? let us see what dr. hammond said on see it now. transcribed as follows:) dr. hammond: it is now established in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what 4979 they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (the video clip ended.) mr. kaczynski: people should be warned and they are being warned, this is 1955. go a couple of years later and let us see what the surgeon general and the head of the national cancer institute said in 1957. "our position is we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv." dr. heller, director of national cancer institute: "newspapers, radios, tv and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem, and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." the head of the -- the top doctor of the united states and the director of the national cancer institute, 1957. let us listen to dr. daniel horn, who is the head of the national clearinghouse on smoking and health in 1968. "you could stand on a rooftop and shout, 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already 4980 know." the message got out to the public. the message worked its way into the ahrens' household. you heard, from the time they were dating and throughout their marriage, mrs. ahrens was asking her husband to quit. you heard from bryan, who was a youngster in tears begged his father to quit. and bryan had weekly and even daily discussions with his father about quitting. mr. ahrens' long time employer, xerox, wanted him to quit. they set up that system-wide health management program. those are the materials for the participants, but we also heard that even if you did not participate, you got a newspaper called take charge, sent to the home of all xerox employees. now, bryan ahrens said he did not remember this program, and that is fair, it was 20 years ago. but the news -- but being sent to every home suggests that the xerox program worked its way into the ahrens' household. the public got the message. mr. ahrens got the message. and let us not forget that 4981 every package of cigarettes that you heard testimony about, every kent and every merit ultra light had one of these warning labels. kent would have had the 1966 original warning label, they both would have had the 1970 warning label, and they both have the 1985 current rotating labels. this label was staring mr. ahrens in the face every time he reached into his shirt pocket to light another cigarette. but as i said before, what about this campaign of doubt that dr. proctor was talking about? did not that counteract all this coverage? not hardly. again, read the articles. look what reader's digest said as early as 1962 about the tobacco industry's credibility. "the statement sounded weaker and more pathetic than ever." let us take a look at what it said in 1964. it referred to the tobacco industry's view as "propaganda, aimed at confusing or beguiling the public." this is the most circulated periodical in the united states, not for doctors, but for 4982 every man. remember our source credibility polls? we had three of them. way back in 1959. anybody believe the tobacco industry back then, well 3 percent. the next one, katie. 1968, they blew to 5 percent, but, the next one, 1970, back down to 3 percent. and having heard everything that you heard about karl ahrens, does anybody here really think that he was in that 3 percent or the 5 percent? not hardly. and then let us remember that mrs. ahrens said mr. ahrens never talked about any statement from any tobacco company, not reynolds, not lorillard, not anybody. okay. what about cigarette advertising? it is everywhere. does that build a bridge? not in this case. here mrs. ahrens testified: "question: he never discussed cigarette advertising with you? "answer: no. "question: or that he relied on a statement from the tobacco company? 4983 "answer: no." ladies and gentlemen, they have not built that bridge. they have not built that bridge. there are going to be two questions on the verdict form as to my client, in which they needed to build a bridge by proof, by iron and steel and brick and mortar, not by guesswork and pixie dust. and they are question 4 and question 6. you have seen these already, i will not read them over again. but i suggest to you, because they have not met their burden of proof, because they have not built that bridge, we are asking you to check no as to each of these boxes. and there is just one thing you should know about the consequences of checking yes to these boxes. if you check, yes, then any division of responsibility that you have done earlier on the verdict form will be nullified. and that is, if you check yes to either of these boxes, the plaintiff will get the entire dollar award that you determine appropriate. no division of responsibility. i'm telling you, you should follow the 4984 law, follow the judge's instruction, but that is a consequence you should know about, if you were to check yes to either of these questions. and if you do get to where you are going to award damages, we are going to ask you to be reasonable, to compensate mrs. ahrens and bryan ahrens for their loss of companionship and protection and mental pain and suffering. nothing can replace a lost parent or a lost spouse. i would be a fool to stand up here and suggest that you could. however, you cannot decide the case based on sympathy, but if you get this far on the verdict form, you are going to have to place a dollar amount on a line on the verdict form. and if you are looking for a yardstick, i would suggest using the analogy of a life insurance policy. think about this case as a life insurance policy for mrs. ahrens and bryan. the last question on the verdict form deals with entitlement to punitive damages. if you check, no, the case is over. if you get to that point in the verdict form. if you check, 4993 yes, there will be additional proof for you in our next session. you are going to have to decide this case whether punitive damages are appropriate. and i want to be clear and echo mr. paige from this morning about what punitive damages are. punitive damages are more money for the plaintiffs. more money for the plaintiffs. they do not go to the cancer society. they do not go to stop smoking programs. they do not go to the state of florida. they go to the plaintiffs. and they go to the plaintiffs on top of any dollar amount you already have awarded them to make them whole for their loss. punitive damages, as you heard in the instruction, are designed to punish the defendants and deter others. and for punitive damages to be awarded, you have to find extraordinary misconduct of the nature that you saw in mr. paige's slide earlier. such as reckless disregard for human life, or wanton and reckless conduct. and you have to find it by a higher burden of proof. it is called clear and convincing 4994 evidence. and let us take a look at what that is. "clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter in issue." and i stress, without hesitation. plaintiff tried to make the case for punitive damages through two witnesses, dr. hurt and dr. proctor. and mr. carter talked about dr. hurt, i will talk about dr. proctor. and i will suggest to you that there are many things he said that should cause you great hesitation on the issue of punitive damages. now, you remember dr. proctor was on the witness stand for almost a week. and in that week he said absolutely nothing about karl ahrens. his sole reason for being here was to build a case for punitive damages. but let me suggest to you that he is a fraud messenger. dr. proctor clearly believes that money corrupts. according to dr. proctor, corrupted by money, mentioned at one point or other in 4995 his testimony, the ctr grantees, the green monsters, the american medical association, the authors who reviewed the premier monograph, dr. ernst wynder, dr. dietrich hoffmann, and the american health foundation, all bought off by the tobacco industry. these organizations are people who are corrupted by money but not dr. proctor. but let us take a look at dr. proctor. in just january of 19 -- of, excuse me, 2016, just this year, he testified in the howles case, and with travel time -- mr. paige: your honor, i'm sorry, objection. can we approach? the court: okay. (sidebar discussion held:) mr. paige: your honor, my objection -- the court: state it. mr. paige: i have an objection to the board. of the median household income in florida, i do not think there is any -- mr. kaczynski: dr. proctor. i asked him about dr. proctor, and i think he testified to that. mr. paige: no. 4996 the court: okay. okay. i do not have it up. so -- but -- court reporter: i cannot hear you, i'm sorry. the court: mr. -- mr. sales, will you ask robert to put it up on my -- mr. paige: do you see -- this is what it is, and dr. proctor said, well, if you say so, or is this not something that dr. proctor knew on his own? mr. kaczynski: he has been asked about that before. i think he knew on his own. it is in the record. mr. paige: it is irrelevant anyway, your honor. the court: i think i remember a question about it, although it may be a question that was objected to. i just do not see it is worth holding things up with the jury. you know, i think it is irrelevant, i think if -- you know, can you -- mr. sales: in one month almost double -- average -- the court: i mean, they know what they make. they may be surprised that they are not 4997 making up to what the median income is, you know. i do not know. it is irrelevant in the sense that i do not think it helps you or hurts you significantly anyway. can you take it -- can you show the thing without it? without -- without going back to the drawing board or something? is this in the transcript, mr. carter? for the record, mr. carter is handing me a portion of the transcript at page 1973, which i presume is cross of proctor. proctor, which he is asked: "question: do you know the median income of a home in florida -- of a family in florida? "answer: i'm often reminded of it, and when i testify i think it is around 50-some-thousand. "question: around $50,000? "answer: yes." no objection made. mr. carter: your honor, i had that at the lunch -- the court: based on that, your objection is overruled. (sidebar concluded.) 4998 mr. kaczynski: put it up. okay. where we left off. dr. proctor traveled to the howles case and testified there in january of last month, $30,000. same deal in the ewing case, last month, $24,000. this case, this last month -- this month, i'm sorry, $30,000. january total, $84,000. the median -- annual, annual income in florida, $50,000. so dr. proctor earned almost double the median family income in florida -- median annual income in florida, almost double, in just one month. and that is on top of his day job at stanford. and as you saw, as we saw, he repeatedly skipped class, that day job in stanford that is taught on mondays and wednesdays to testify in court. i counted six classes in january, and he has missed three of them. he has missed half. now, i'm not suggesting that money has caused dr. proctor to make stuff up. i am suggesting as you saw repeatedly, during his testimony, he told half a story on direct that 4999 had to be filled out on cross examination. any of one of these half truths should be enough to cause you hesitation in deciding to award punitive damages. i just want to go through a handful with you. on direct examination, dr. proctor showed you a 1963 telegram that said the results of certain experiments at battelle labs should not be shared with the surgeon general's committee. he suggested it was because they were unfavorable and should be kept secret. on cross examination we showed you the real reason, and there it is. the work was not ready yet. it is too early. and dr. proctor told you the work nonetheless went on, patents were obtained. and as we have heard, patents are publicly available filings with the federal government. anybody who wanted to know what went on with the battelle work can find it in the patents. another example. on dr. proctor's direct, he showed you a document about a meeting at the plaza hotel in 1953. you heard about it this morning. 5000 very secret, very sinister, the formation of the conspiracy. you had to wait until cross examination to learn that the meeting was reported in the new york times, that the assistant attorney general of the united states was informed about the meeting, and most importantly, you learned on cross examination about a memo where the cigarette companies said -- the executives said they sincerely believed that the national cancer institute, the leading u.s. government agency funding cancer research, has rebutted the charges against cigarettes. specifically in a study i showed him, the journal of the national cancer institute in june of 1953. you had to wait until cross to hear that. dr. proctor ridiculed the green monster. the green monster. he called it, and i think i got this right, a denialist treatise. on cross examination, you learned that the 1964 surgeon general's committee found it useful to them. they called it a basic reference source for their putting together the historic 1964 report that found smoking caused lung cancer in men. 5001 on direct examination, dr. proctor showed you a 1938, remember the year, 1938 three stooges episode, and he said it demonstrated that the term "coffin nails" was a joke by that year. on cross examination you saw this. you saw an article in time magazine about a johns hopkins researcher finding that smokers died sooner than nonsmokers, entitled "coffin nails." smokers dying sooner than nonsmokers. that is not a joke. that is not a joke. and then there was the tobacco working group. it was a ten-year cooperative effort between the united states government, the public health community, and the cigarette companies to try to find a less hazardous cigarette. dr. proctor called it, and i quote, "the penetration of the conspiracy into the federal government." that sounds like it is from a spy novel. on cross examination, you learned that the president of r.j. reynolds did not quite see it that way. "in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. 5002 you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts to ultimately gain their cooperation and proper research of the subject. if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out." this is the president of reynolds writing his top scientists at the time the tobacco working group is being formed. it does not sound like much of an infiltration, does it? he also said that the cigarette companies forced the united states government to take the word "hazardous" out of the name of the group. "hazard" was kept out of the name of the collaboration, really? "toward less hazardous cigarettes." this is one of the five reports from the tobacco working group. the other four are titled the same thing. you saw some of this from dr. hurt as well. on direct examination, he showed you a 1972 r.j. reynolds memo that said that nicotine was the sin qua non of smoking. he made it out 5003 like it is a big secret. expect that on cross examination, you learned that reader's digest said pretty much the same thing, only in english, in 1950, to the public 22 years earlier. now, dr. proctor said that it is a job of a historian to get you to walk in the shoes of the past. that is the phrase he used. now, you take away from dr. proctor's testimony easily, it could be that the companies confused the public about smoking and health while concocting ways to keep smokers smoking. monkeying with nicotine or coming up with gimmicks like filters. that was the import of the testimony that he wanted to pass along. but if that was the takeaway, that would not be walking in the shoes of the past. it would be following a false prophet. so let us go back and walk in the shoes of the past. as dr. proctor told you, after world war ii, the united states emerged as the only superpower in the world and it had a deep trust in science. dr. proctor told you this confidence led 5004 to something he called the single factor theory. and this was an optimistic belief that science could solve everything. this confidence infected the scientific community inside and outside the cigarette industry. when the study started coming out linking smoking to disease, the belief was, well, let us find out what is wrong, maybe it is one, maybe it is two, maybe it is three things, and let us take it out. and if you strip away the slant that drs. proctor and hurt put on events, let us look at what the companies really did. the first thing, for example, r.j. reynolds did was to find out the state of the science regarding smoking and tobacco. so as you heard, they assigned a relative new chemist, claude teague, to go to the library and do just that. and you saw his report. and in his report, he cited 78 sources, all in the published literature, none buried in the archives or file cabinets of r.j. reynolds. and once they did this, they needed to find out what was in tobacco smoke. if you are going to pursue this single factor theory, then you have got to see what is bad in tobacco smoke 5005 that may be taken out. so they hired a scientist named alan rodgman, and the other companies did likewise. dr. rodgman did an eight-year study of what was in cigarette smoke. and he used state of the art technology. he used chromatography. mass spectroscopy. he identified compounds of cigarette smoke including carcinogenic ones, and he published on the subject. and he gave speeches on the subject. and you saw one in this trial. this is a speech that dr. rodgman gave. it even had pictures in that speech of what some of the compounds in cigarette smoke looked like. and you learned that r.j. reynolds by itself identified about half of all the compounds in cigarette smoke, and they presented that list to the surgeon general's advisory committee in 1963 as it was working on the landmark 1964 report. okay. so now you know what is in smoke. this is when the single factor theory kicks in. if you think you identify a culprit, let us get rid of it. and you saw some of those efforts by both reynolds and lorillard. reynolds went 5006 after something called polycyclic hydrocarbons. that is a big deal. that is a big name. benzo[a]pyrene is one of them. these are the compounds that are produced by burning, and in certain concentrations they can be carcinogenic. so what did reynolds do? you saw one of these documents. the first thing they did was they confirmed the early work on polycyclic hydrocarbons, and then they started a lengthy research program to try to lessen the amounts of these potentially dangerous components in cigarette smoke. and in this same document, they listed five ways that they have tried to do that. and then they recounted that these experiments were such that over 120 separate experiments were conducted using almost a half a million cigarettes. this is through the 1950s. now, as it turns out, they could not eliminate them, you cannot eliminate the products of burning if you are going to have a tobacco -- a cigarette that is lit. and any scientist also concluded that there was not 5007 enough concentration to account for all the lung cancer. so enormous effort, single factor theory failed as to this compound. lorillard, on the other hand, went after a subject called phenols. you heard in this trial that phenols are a compound that paralyzes the cilia. the cilia, you remember, are the tiny hairlike structures in your throat, in your respiratory system that is designed to push the bad stuff out. phenols it was thought paralyzed these such that the bad stuff was not pushed out. is this a big deal to try to get rid of those compounds? it sure is. remember dr. ruckdeschel, this is the chart dr. ruckdeschel used when he was trying to explain how cancer develops. where it says "normal cells," you see the cilia, we got it circled in red, those are the structures that push the bad stuff out. that is the first step, he said, in a theory of cancer causation. carcinogenesis. so the cilia are very important, and making sure the cilia function is very 5008 important. so if you eliminate the things that are causing that paralysis, that is a good thing. that is a good deed. dr. alex spears at lorillard worked on that. he worked on that with dr. ernst wynder, the mouse skin-painting. in fact, as an aside, you have learned also that lorillard provided dr. wynder with the cigarettes that he used to produce the tar that he used for his mouse skin-painting experiments. lorillard worked with dr. wynder. lorillard worked with dr. dietrich hoffmann who had been at sloan kettering and then the american health foundation. lorillard provided funding for work on reducing or eliminating phenols from cigarette smoke. and dr. spears did that work in-house at lorillard, too, and he published on it for the world to see. you saw these two articles. he got patents on filters that removed phenols from cigarette smoke. and he talked about that work at the national cancer institute. and in 1963, lorillard made two submissions to the surgeon general's advisory 5009 committee, working on that '64 report, about the work they had done on the subject. so they worked with the public health community, they succeeded in coming up with a product, they published their research, and they told the surgeon general's advisory committee about it. lorillard also invented an inhalation machine to do inhalation experiments. and even dr. proctor agreed that that was the most sophisticated machine available. and lorillard made it available to researchers, and dr. spears gave a presentation on it at the national cancer institute. the internal documents show this work was sincere, with a worthy objective, finding out what the bad stuff was, taking it out if possible, and reducing it if not. this is walking in the shoes of the past. this alone should give you hesitation in awarding punitive damages. so let us talk about filters. the filter cigarette at issue in this case from my client is kent. and let us cut to the bottom line. dr. proctor testified about the companies. 5010 they knew from the beginning that filters did not reduce anything. you heard something similar from mr. paige this morning. four times, four times i challenged dr. proctor to put his money where his mouth was. four times i asked dr. proctor -- remember, he is the guy that is reviewed a gazillion documents. he is the guy who has made $3.5 million testifying about them. i asked him whether he was aware of any evidence that lorillard thought that filters did not work or that kent did not filter effectively. surely if such a document, a letter, a report, a memo existed, surely he of all people would know about it. and his repeated answer, his reluctant answer, four times to these questions was no. let us go through them. "question: you are not aware of any documents from lorillard that stated that lorillard did not believe that filters actually reduced the tar and nicotine of cigarettes? "answer: it is a complicated question. i cannot think of something with those exact words in it. 5011 "question: okay. you are not aware of any lorillard document where they thought filters were a gimmick? "answer: i do not recall them using that word exactly." next. "question: and you cannot think of an example from lorillard's files where someone from lorillard said they did not believe that filters reduced tar and nicotine levels? "answer: i do not recall them saying those exact words." next. "question: you showed the jury" -- it is a marketing plan for kent, marketing kent about the time of the surgeon general's report. "question: nowhere in this document does lorillard say, we do not believe that kent is an effective filter? "answer: that is right." and the last one. "question: the question is this: can you show us a document where lorillard thought to itself that cigarettes with filters were not -- not -- did not provide more protection than 5012 cigarettes without filters? "answer: off the top of my head, i cannot think of one exactly like that." it killed him to give that answer, but he gave it four times. and you and i know if such a document existed, it would have been up on the screen, it would have been highlighted, rehighlighted, it would have been a big deal. but instead nothing. and there is several reasons, particularly during mr. ahrens' lifetime, for lorillard to believe that filters lowered the risk of lung cancer. over the years filters were encouraged by prominent researchers like drs. wynder, hoffmann and russell, the national cancer institute, the national cancer society, the federal trade commission, the surgeon general. and you saw this quote from dr. russell, who both plaintiff's experts acknowledged was an authority on, a respected cancer researcher. "it is unlikely that any single measure has saved more lives than filters." people like dr. russell and the others believed this because there were decades, 5013 decades of epidemiological studies that said that smokers of filtered cigarettes had lower death rates from lung cancer than the smokers of nonfilters. dr. proctor said these decades of studies were wrong, but they were considered good science during karl ahrens' lifetime. dr. proctor also said the release of the company documents in 1998 changed the belief about the effectiveness of filters. and i guess there is two answers to that. first, again, he could point to no lorillard document that says lorillard did not believe what it said. and second, as late as 2012, 14 years after the documents are released, 14 years after they could read them the same as you saw them in this trial, the world health organization still thought that filters provided a benefit in reducing the risk of lung cancer. and yes, kent marketed lorillard as having an effective filter, and yes, lorillard bragged that kent had been judged the most effective filter on the market by reader's digest. but does this surprise you? if car and driver gave 5014 a safety award to volvo, do not you think you would see that in volvo ads? but most importantly, there is no evidence that lorillard did not believe what it was saying about kent. none. the fact that lorillard was being encouraged to manufacture filters by the public health community and that it responded with a filter that was judged the most effective, these facts, too, should give you a hesitation in awarding punitive damages. you heard in this trial that the ftc smoking machine, dr. proctor called it a smoking robot, is used -- that is used to generate those tar and nicotine numbers did not mimic human smoking behavior and that the resulting numbers were too low and the companies knew it. well, as to the first, the companies told the ftc in 1966, 1966, that the machine did not mimic human smoking behavior. this was their submission to the federal trade commission on the subject, all the major companies, and this is what they said: the ogg method, the machine, does not measure the volume of smoke 5015 or other that any human being will draw in from smoking in any particular cigarette. they told this to the ftc before they ever adopted the machine. but the government being the government, they went ahead and adopted it anyway, and then double-down on that by later requiring that those numbers be placed in every cigarette ad. well, what about the numbers being too low? well, lorillard thought so, too, and it asked the ftc if it could list higher numbers instead of the ones generated by the machine. and the ftc said, no, no higher numbers. if there is somebody to blame for the inaccurate numbers in lorillard ads, it is not lorillard. filters pose a problem. when you lower tar, you lower nicotine, too. and some smokers might smoke more cigarettes, some might inhale more deeply, some might hold their smoke longer to make up for the lower level of nicotine. some smokers might do that, but you heard no evidence that karl ahrens did that when he switched from kent to merit ultra lights. this is called compensation. and the 5016 suggestion has been made that this was a phenomenon known only to the tobacco industry. not hardly. you saw what dr. proctor called the single best disseminated description of true compensation in that decade. and that decade was 40 years ago, and it was consumer reports. consumer reports laid out the various methods of compensation for the ordinary reader. and this was in 1976. now, during this period, scientists from inside and outside the industry were actively looking at ways to avoid compensation. dr. russell, who we heard a lot about, stated the problem: people smoke for nicotine but they die from the tar. and thought the risk of lung cancer might be reduced if you had a low-tar cigarette, but as he said here, a medium nicotine yield. next up. he said besides having low-tar, the least harmful cigarettes for heavy smokers may be those with a high, rather than a low, nicotine yield. dr. sir richard doll, who you remember was knighted by the queen for smoking and health 5017 work, thought the same. he suggested a low-tar cigarette with an artificially high content of nicotine. this was in the public domain, and the companies knew it, and they answered the call. so, yes, they experimented with different levels of nicotine. yes, they experimented with higher and lower ph levels. yes, they experimented with ammonia. yes, they worked with reconstituted tobacco. and yes, they worked with levulinic acid. those were the documents you saw in this case. they were trying to find the lowest level of nicotine and a less hazardous cigarette where the smoker did not compensate, where the smoker would smoke the cigarette thought to be less hazardous. those documents with the "how low can we go," that is what it is all about. lorillard's program was called, and you saw some documents this morning, the nicotine augmentation project. and it was done in conjunction with the national cancer institute's tobacco working group. you saw this lorillard document about the nicotine augmentation project. and i would 5018 ask you to check the date. and the date is may 4th, 1976. and it talks about recommendations from public health agencies for a low-tar, higher-nicotine cigarette. now, look at these meeting minutes from the tobacco working group. check the title. "smoking and health program, high-nicotine/tar, low-tar cigarettes." check the date. may 5th, 1976. the day after the nicotine augmentation project. coincidence? i think not. let us take -- before we leave the cover, do you remember you heard that the company people could participate, but in a private capacity? murray senkus, r.j. reynolds tobacco company. dr. a.w. spears, lorillard. they are listed as being affiliated with tobacco companies. now look at the subjects that are discussed in the offices of the national cancer institute. this is not in a reynolds' lab, this is not a lorillard lab. they are looking at freebase form of nicotine. next one. they are looking at whether it is a good 5019 idea to increase or decrease the ph. now, as you heard, you do not check your common sense at the metal detector. does anybody believe that the national cancer institute was working with cigarette companies and private health officials to make a more addictive cigarette? of course not. the point of this research, of these investigations, was to try to development a less hazardous cigarette. not a more addictive one. those facts, and the fact that those nicotine documents were -- that you were shown were produced -- were in pursuit of a less hazardous cigarette. that alone ought to give you hesitation to award punitive damages. the effort to develop less hazardous smoking products was neither a sham nor a fraud. you heard about two reynolds products called premier and eclipse. they used technology that heated rather than burn tobacco. do you remember you could not eliminate benzo[a]pyrene if you burned anything. well, they tried to avoid that by heating rather than burning. and all the bad 5020 actors in burning were virtually gone. to create premier, reynolds spent a billion dollars. they built a new factory, they got dozens of patents. they did inhalation testing. they did skin-painting. they did ames, bioassay, and a petri dish. they published a 700-page peer-reviewed book on the results of their testing and presented it to the public. you heard from dr. proctor, benzo[a]pyrene a carcinogen, was virtually gone. arsenic, virtually gone. premier went out into test markets and consumers hated it. it flunked. now, you might have thought that at least the public health officials might have liked it because it eliminated all those carcinogens. they did not. as you heard, the surgeon general, the national institute of drug abuse and the states where it was being test marketed took steps to get it pulled from the market. for both reasons, reynolds did pull it from the market. but reynolds did not give up. and they were encouraged not to give up. as you heard, dr. michael russell, who we have been hearing about, wrote a letter to 5021 reynolds and said: "i've had a longstanding interest in your premier cigarette. basically, i think the premier has tremendous potential for low-risk, long-term nicotine use, and that the response to it in your country was political and irrational. "my motives in writing to you are that as a scientist and as someone with a concern for health. i would be very disappointed if a product with this potential were to be abandoned." and it was not abandoned. 1996 reynolds introduced eclipse. also heat-but-not-burn technology, a little bit better tasting, and it is sold here in florida today, but it has a very small market share. and even dr. proctor, again, grudgingly, grudgingly, acknowledged that premier and eclipse are safer than conventional cigarettes, or, as he had to put it in his own words, less deadly. the fact that reynolds made this billion-dollar effort to develop a safer cigarette alone ought to give you hesitation about awarding punitive damages. 5022 there are some odds and ends that i have come up during the trial that should also give you some hesitation about the need to punish. you heard the cigarette companies have reported all their ingredients to the federal government, the department of health of human services since 1986. so for 30 years the government's known what ingredients go in. you have heard that reynolds and the other companies have websites where a smoker can find the ingredients of their particular brand. you heard that the companies are now regulated by the food and drug administration, the fda. ingredients are also reported to the fda. and the fda can order that any ingredient be taken out of cigarettes. you heard about ph. well, ph -- about ph a reynolds scientist invented a machine to measure it in cigarette smoke. he patented it and he published about it. and speaking of publications, in addition to specific folks you heard about like dr. rodgman and dr. spears, you have heard that many reynolds scientists have been cited in surgeon general's reports. 5023 there have been no ads on tv or radio since 1971, cigarette ads. there have been no cigarette billboards since 1998. there has been no sampling since 1998. you heard about product placement in movies, also very -- lorillard has not done product placement for over 40 years. lorillard has been preclearing its ads with the ftc since 1958. all companies have searchable document websites. dr. proctor told us, together, there are about 14 million documents online. the tobacco institute is gone. ctr is gone. you heard a lot about nicotine research and you heard during the cross examination of dr. hurt that reynolds published a book about the effect of nicotine on the brain. the biology of nicotine. this was published in 1992 based on a conference in 1990. eleven contributing authors to this book are reynolds scientists, including an article in this book, it is in evidence, on how nicotine might be used to treat alzheimer's disease. these are additional reasons that you should have hesitation in awarding punitive damages. 5024 i'm not going to suggest, as i wrap up, that over the last 70 years the industry as a whole or my client in particular has not written or done something stupid. i have and will continue to argue, though, that nothing that lorillard or reynolds has written or said or done was a legal cause of any injury to mr. ahrens. and i will also argue to you that whatever was written or said or done was against the backdrop of the largest health information campaign in the history of this country. do not take it from me, take it from dr. ruckdeschel. he said: "i think for many, many decades now, people have understood a relationship between smoking and cancer." on addiction. do you remember the florida health notes from 1906. "today, 1906, the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. it is so cheap, and it is so generally inhaled." dr. proctor made a point about inhalable cigarettes goes back to 1906. in 1915, we heard the surgeon general called cigarette smoking an addiction, way 5025 before the 1988 report. and do not forget this article from 1942, that was shown to dr. hurt, that likened nicotine and smoking to opium and morphine. folks, the precise definition of "addiction" or "dependence" or "habit" may have changed over the years, but the concept of cigarette smoking could be hard to quit is not. in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, consider that backdrop and consider the dedicated work in research and development by reynolds and lorillard over the years. to sum it up, to identify smoke constituents. to reduce or eliminate smoke constituents. lower tar and nicotine. investigate low-tar medium nicotine. premier and eclipse. cooperating with dr. wynder. cooperating with dr. hoffmann. publications and speeches. the biology of nicotine. and the ingredients list on the website. this is not evidence of reckless and wanton conduct. this is evidence that should give you hesitation, great hesitation, within the meaning of judge day's instruction, such 5026 that you should not award punitive damages in this case. we started on january 20th, this is the only chance that i get to talk to you in this part of the trial. ms. arnold follows me, and she is done, too. as the plaintiff has the burden of proof, mr. paige gets a rebuttal. he is presented his arguments well. i'm sure will do it again. we do not know what will be said, we do not get to respond, he may say something we could have responded to, or something we could have raised -- he could have raised in the first part of the closing, that we could have responded to. if any of that happens, just think about how we would respond if we had the chance. i thank you again for your service and your attention, and i'd ask you to give ms. arnold the same courteous attention you have given me. thank you very much. the court: ms. arnold. closing statement ms. arnold: all right. so good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i find myself 5027 again in the lucky 4:24 p.m. time slot, so i'll ask you to bear with me. we are getting towards the homestretch for real now. and i want to start by reiterating what all the lawyers have said to you throughout the course of the day by thanking you for your time and attention throughout this trial. we have had some long days, and we have had some long sidebars, and we have been together for a long time, three weeks, really, and we recognize that three weeks is a long period of time for all of you to be missing out on your lives; and i really do appreciate your time and attention throughout the trial. so as you have seen throughout the trial, i'm going third, or actually even fourth today, but i'm not going to be the last lawyer to speak with you, as mr. kaczynski just mentioned, mr. paige is going to get a chance to speak with you one more time before we end for the day, but this is my last chance to speak with you during this part of the trial. so let us go ahead and get started. plaintiff's counsel has spent a lot of time today, and throughout the trial, showing you 5028 various statements and ideas from tobacco companies, including philip morris, that have occurred over a long period of time and long ago, sometimes 60 and 70 years ago. and long before mr. ahrens ever picked up a merit ultra lights cigarette. and as i predicted for you in opening, you saw some statements that were inappropriate and that none of us would think or even think of saying today. but you also know now that this is mr. ahrens' case. and when you get the verdict form, when you start deliberating in the case, you are going to see that every one of those questions asks you about mr. ahrens. and it is plaintiff's burden to prove that there is some connection between all of that conduct and something that philip morris says or did not say, and mr. ahrens, himself. they have to prove that something the tobacco companies did, not that they harmed the general public, or smokers in general, but that something they did affected mr. ahrens. now, mr. carter and mr. kaczynski have already covered a lot of the reasons that we 5029 believe plaintiff has failed to prove her case against r.j. reynolds and philip morris and my goal today, as it has been throughout the trial, is to not repeat what they have covered but to really focus on the facts that are important to philip morris in this case. so that is where i want to start today. and i want to start, actually, with five key facts that we believe demonstrate shows that nothing that philip morris said or did had any impact on mr. ahrens. so, katie, if you could pull up the first slide. number 1, mr. ahrens was a responsible adult when he switched to merit ultra lights. as you now know, mr. ahrens did not start smoking a brand manufactured by philip morris until 1981, at the earliest. and you know that is the year that merit ultra lights were first introduced to the national market. and at that time, mr. ahrens was in his 40s, right. he was a grown adult, he was married, he was raising two sons, he was working as a systems analyst at xerox. he was not a child. he was not a teenager. he 5030 was not even in his 20s or his 30s. he was in his 40s. and dr. hurt told you that one of the last things to develop in the brain is judgment. well, there is no question in this case that by the time mr. ahrens got to cigarettes that were manufactured by philip morris, he had all the judgment that he needed to make an informed and rational choice about his behavior and about his health. okay. number 2, mr. ahrens was warned and was receiving warnings about the health risks of smoking for 15 years before he switched to merit ultra lights. you heard mrs. ahrens tell you that from the time they started dating, in 1967, she was encouraging him to quit smoking. and you know that the warnings on those packages of cigarettes that mr. ahrens was smoking had been on there for 15 years before he switched to merit ultra lights. now, plaintiff's counsel in this case has spent a good deal of time during their presentations trying to downplay the importance of those warnings. but you heard dr. proctor 5031 tell you that in the second half of the 1960s, during that time period, after the first warnings came out, that was the greatest period, the highest rate of quitting this country has ever seen. and why is that so important in this case? you have heard hours and hours of testimony from both sides about advertisements for cigarettes and statements by tobacco companies and statements by the public health community about smoking and health and addiction. but you have not heard one witness come in here and tell you mr. ahrens ever saw or read or heard any one of those statements. the only statement we know mr. ahrens saw was that warning on the pack of his cigarettes. and not only did he see them, but you heard mrs. ahrens, she said he carried them around in his front shirt pocket, he carried that warning around in his front shirt pocket and held it in his hand every time he went to smoke. you know what the warnings are, we do have some slides. this is the '66 warning on every package of kent that he smoked from '66 to 1970. here is the next one, 1970 warnings, 5032 you have seen this a few times. and this is the warning that was not only on the packs of kents he smoked from 1970 to 1981, but the warning was exactly the same, you know that now when he switched to merit ultra lights, there was no exceptions, no different language, just because merit ultra lights was a light cigarette, the warning was the same and it was on every pack he smoked until 1985 when the warnings changed again. and then every pack of merit ultra lights he smoked had one of these four rotating warnings until he quit in 1991. so plaintiff's counsel's asking you to do a lot of guessing and a lot of inferring in this case, but there is one thing that does not require any guesswork or speculation on your part. and that is, that mr. ahrens held a warning from the surgeon general in his hand over 160,000 times before he started buying and smoking a product manufactured by philip morris. okay. number 3, mr. ahrens switched to merit ultra lights, not just 15 years after the warnings came out, but 10 years after cigarette 5033 advertisements had been banned from tv and radio. and 10 years after the federal government had required that all print advertisements contain that same surgeon general warning on the ad that was on his pack of cigarettes. you heard a lot of testimony and a lot of evidence in this case with advertisements from julie london singing about marlboro, johnny junior, the flintstones, babe ruth, santa claus. by the time mr. ahrens got to merit ultra lights cigarettes, that was long gone. number 4, mr. ahrens had been smoking for 20 years before he switched to merit ultra lights. and we are going to talk about this in a little bit detail in a bit. but dr. ruckdeschel, that was plaintiff's expert and also mr. ahrens' treating doctor, testified that if mr. ahrens had quit smoking in 1981, instead of switching to merit ultra lights, he probably still would have gotten his lung cancer. so if you believe that mr. ahrens' lung cancer was caused by smoking, his own doctor believed that he had it before he ever got to a 5034 product manufactured by philip morris. we are going to talk about that a little bit more in a minute, as i said. and then number 5, of course, mr. ahrens quit smoking immediately, successfully, and for good once he was motivated to do so. and you know that story by now. you know he was able to quit smoking without the nicotine gum or the nicotine patch. and he was able to quit smoking without the benefit of any of the information that you have seen in the tobacco company documents over the past few weeks. dr. hurt admitted that when i was cross examining him on thursday. the fact is that mr. ahrens, once he was motivated to quit, was able to do so instantly and for good. okay. katie, you can take that down for a few minutes. so i want to now walk through the verdict form, as the other lawyers have done, and focus -- and offer you some additional thoughts and some additional evidence that you might want to consider as you work through the verdict form yourself. 5035 and the first question that, as you know by now, that you are going to be asked about is this class membership question, and it does have a number of parts, but the first part you are going to be asked is whether mr. ahrens was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and mr. carter covered that, but i want to add one additional point to this argument, and it relates to this idea of compensation. and you have heard a lot about compensation during the trial. you heard it from dr. proctor, and you heard it from dr. hurt, and now you know what that means, right? so if someone is smoking a high-tar, high-nicotine cigarette and then they switch to a cigarette that is lower in tar and nicotine, what they can do is change the way they smoke by increasing the number of cigarettes they smoke in a day, or holding their breath in longer, or taking deeper breaths to try to maintain that higher level of nicotine that they had with the higher level of cigarette. so let us look what dr. proctor said about that. "question: so do you know from" -- 5036 this is from his direct examination. "question: so do you know from your review of the documents as a historian why it is that a smoker would wind up smoking more units?" and they were talking about switching from full flavor to light cigarettes. and he said: "answer: yes. yes. because the smokers, if they are addicted, will be nicotine seeking, and they will seek a constant amount of nicotine." and the key phrase here is, "if they are addicted." addiction is the key to compensation. and if someone's not addicted, they do not need to compensate. because they do not need to take in more -- smoke more cigarettes or change the way they smoke to maintain that higher level. so, what about mr. ahrens? is there any evidence that he compensated when he switched from kent cigarettes to merit ultra lights. no. mrs. ahrens and bryan both confirmed that mr. ahrens smoked the same amount of cigarettes 5037 per day throughout the time that they knew him and he was smoking, and there is not a shred of evidence in this case that mr. ahrens ever changed the way he smoked by taking in deeper breaths or holding the smoke in longer. the fact is he was able to go from a high-tar high-nicotine cigarette to a low-tar low-nicotine cigarette without compensating at all. just as he was able to go from smoking merit ultra lights to quitting all together just by using stirrer straws, which plainly do not contain nicotine. this is another reason that we believe you should check no to that question, that first class membership question on the first issue of addiction. okay. another aspect of this, as you know by now, is this question of addiction causation, and the question is whether mr. ahrens' addiction, if any, was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. and you have heard a lot about this already, but let me offer you a different way to think about legal cause. was an addiction for mr. ahrens -- did it 5038 stand in the way of a motivated and committed effort on his part to quit smoking? and the answer is no. before mr. ahrens' final quit, he never threw his cigarettes away, he never gave his cigarettes away, he never threw away his ashtrays or his lighters or his matches. but when he was motivated to quit, not after surviving a heart attack or a medical catastrophe, which is what dr. hurt said it usually takes, but by a call from a friend telling him he was sick. he was able to give his cigarettes away, and never smoked again in his life. now, dr. hurt, plaintiff's expert, told you on direct examination, he said, choice is something that just goes out the window when a person becomes addicted. but that just does not make sense. because even dr. hurt told you that addicted smokers decide to quit smoking every single day in this country, 60 million of them have done so. dr. hurt himself decided to quit smoking in 1975 and was successful in doing so. and when dr. hurt is treating patients in his 5039 clinic and not testifying in front of juries for $700 an hour, what does he tell his patients? well, we know because we saw the pamphlet that he gives then. dr. hurt tells his own patients, "you have many options to help you stop smoking. the decision to quit is yours, and only you can decide when to quit smoking." and he tells his patients that because he believes they can be successful in doing so, just like mr. ahrens. so even if you believe dr. hurt that mr. ahrens was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, the evidence has shown that that addiction was not a legal cause of his injuries. and thus, we would ask you to check "no" on that class membership question. okay. let us say you disagree and you move on to the next question. the next one relates to product use. if we can pull that question up. "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of karl ahrens' lung cancer and death?" you will seen a line for r.j. reynolds and 5040 you will see a line for philip morris. okay. and i want to show you the instruction that you have heard from judge day already, you will get this back in the jury room on this question in particular. and it is long, but bear with me: "smoking a defendant's cigarettes was a legal cause of injury if smoking that defendant's cigarettes" -- in this case merit ultra lights -- "directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such injury so that it can be reasonably said that but for smoking that defendant's cigarettes" -- here merit ultra lights -- "the injury would not have occurred." and i want to focus on that last clause. it is called "but for causation," and in law school we spent two months on that very concept. so ask yourself this question. it is easy to understand. if mr. ahrens had quit smoking in 1981 altogether instead of switching to merit ultra lights, would he have avoided his lung cancer and death? and to figure that out, you only need to 5041 look at the answer to one question from one witness. and that is dr. ruckdeschel. "question: am i correct that your opinion is that if he had quit smoking in 1981, mr. ahrens still probably would have developed his lung cancer? is that correct? "answer: yes." and you may remember that when dr. ruckdeschel got on the stand, i got up and i only asked him one question. at the time you probably sighed a big sigh of relief, but you may have also been wondering why i was asking it. well, now you know, because it provides all the information that you need to answer this product use question in favor of philip morris on that verdict form. now, mr. paige suggested in his opening statement, well, that is all speculation and dr. ruckdeschel was just speculating. well, if you remember, i was not the only one who asked him about that. mr. mayfield, when he was cross examining dr. ruckdeschel, he asked the same question. he said: "question: if mr. ahrens had quit smoking 5042 in 1981, do you believe that he would have gone on -- or do you believe that he would have avoided getting his cancer?" and dr. ruckdeschel was not speculating at all. he said: "answer: absolutely yes. even if he had quit in 1981, he still would have gotten his cancer." that is not speculation at all. and when mr. mayfield asked him, dr. ruckdeschel, explain why that is, he talked about if you are smoking and you quit smoking and you do not have lung cancer, your risk of getting it in the future goes down, right? but if you quit smoking and you already have cancer, sometimes that cancer has already gotten to the point where it is going to grow and grow and grow, and there is nothing you can do about it. and to use dr. proctor's words, game over. unfortunately, according to the plaintiff's expert who they brought to prove their burden on this question, this was the case for mr. ahrens by 1981, before he ever got to our product. 5043 now, in redirect, plaintiff's counsel had dr. ruckdeschel confirm. he said: "question: were merit ultra lights a substantial contributing cause to the injury?" and he said: "answer: yes, every cigarette counts." and he asked a similar question of dr. hurt. he asked: "question: was merit ultra lights a substantial cause of the injury?" and dr. hurt said: "answer: yes." but dr. hurt is an expert on addiction. dr. hurt does not treat patients for lung cancer. dr. ruckdeschel does. and dr. ruckdeschel treated mr. ahrens for his lung cancer. and in dr. ruckdeschel's view, mr. ahrens had it before he got to smoking merit ultra lights. now, as you know, judge day has provided the instructions on this question and the instructions that you are going to follow in this case, and no matter how many people say that merit ultra lights substantially 5044 contributed to mr. ahrens' lung cancer, the law requires plaintiff to prove that but for the use of those cigarettes, his lung cancer and death would not have occurred. as dr. ruckdeschel's testimony demonstrates, the exact opposite is true. so for these reasons we would ask, when you get to that question on the product use, the question if you get that far, that you check "no" for philip morris. if you check "yes," you will skip down to another question relating to the conspiracy, which i will get to in a moment. okay. next question on the verdict form is comparative fault. you have heard a little bit about this. you have three lines for reynolds, one line for -- excuse me, one line for reynolds, one line for philip morris, and one line for mr. ahrens. and we agree -- i agree with what mr. carter said on this question, that in this case, the evidence shows that mr. ahrens bears one hundred percent of the fault. and as i said to you in opening statements, nothing i have said in this 5045 courtroom and nothing i say today is meant to be a criticism of mr. ahrens or the decisions he made, but fact is that he did not make a committed and serious effort to quit until 1991 when he did, and when he did that, he quit for good, instantly. there is no reason that he could not have done so sooner and in time to avoid his injuries. and that is why we believe that we should -- that you should put a one hundred percent next to mr. ahrens' name. but if you do not agree and you believe that philip morris bears any responsibility in this case, i'd ask you to keep in mind a couple of points. one, merit ultra lights did not cause mr. ahrens' lung cancer. we just talked about it. dr. ruckdeschel told us he believes he had it before he ever got to our product. number two, mr. ahrens' use of merit ultra lights did not cause him to become addicted. if you have gotten this far in the verdict form, you believe -- you believe dr. hurt that mr. ahrens was addicted. and dr. hurt said that mr. ahrens was addicted within a couple of 5046 years of him becoming a regular smoker and years before he ever got to merit ultra lights. and dr. hurt also told you that once you quit smoking, you are still addicted. he still considers himself to be addicted, and he said mr. ahrens was addicted even after he quit and until the day he died. so there is nothing about merit ultra lights cigarettes that caused mr. ahrens to become addicted. but for his use of merit ultra lights cigarettes, he still would have been addicted. so we had no impact in that way. you have heard a lot of evidence in this case. and i want you to bear in mind about ammonia and ph and free nicotine. and despite all of that effort and all of that time on that question throughout this trial with dr. hurt, dr. hurt admitted that merit ultra lights are not any more addictive than any other brand of cigarettes, despite the amount of ammonia it might have contained, and that was the brand that mr. ahrens was smoking when he quit for good. by the time mr. ahrens got to merit ultra 5047 lights, as i said, mr. ahrens knew that those cigarettes were dangerous. and as plaintiff's counsel has pointed out repeatedly in opening and throughout the trial, mr. ahrens was trying to quit even after he switched to merit ultra lights. why would he have been trying to quit if he did not know and understand that that product was dangerous and could cause serious diseases like lung cancer? in fact, even today, i believe mr. paige said, you know what, by 1982 mr. ahrens probably knew that smoking could be dangerous to his health. so for these reasons, if you do believe that philip morris bears some percentage of responsibility, we would ask you to put a very small number on that line of the verdict form. okay. i want now to discuss plaintiff's claim for fraudulent concealment. pull up the next slide. and you have seen this question before, i'm not going to read it to you again, but i do want to look at the instruction on this one. again, this has a lot of words, but i want to focus on what is underlined here. plaintiff has to prove that mr. ahrens 5048 reasonably relied to his detriment on something that philip morris said or did not say. there has to be reliance, and as i said in opening, it has to be reasonable, and it has to be detrimental. and i want to address all three aspects of that. plaintiffs tried to meet their burden of proof on this question with two kinds of evidence. one, were statements, public statements by the tobacco companies through advertising or other broadcasts or other videos about the health risks of smoking; and two, internal company documents. internal company documents from philip morris. but they have done so without focusing at all on whether mr. ahrens ever saw or read or heard any of those statements, or whether even if he had seen or read or heard those statements, they would have made any difference to his decision to smoke merit ultra lights in 1981. so let us go through some examples because there is got to be a connection. you saw a bunch of ads from the '50s and '60s when dr. proctor came to talk with us. 5049 you saw julie london singing about marlboro. you saw the i love lucy show. you saw johnny junior with the philip morris brand cigarettes. there is no evidence that mr. ahrens saw or read or heard any of those advertisements, and there is no evidence that he smoked any of those brands. and i want to put a flag there because i'm going to come back to merit ultra lights. you saw statements throughout the trial and during opening statement this morning from mr. cullman on face the nation in 1964. you saw the statements from that 1976 british documentary that remember dr. proctor admitted was never shown florida at a time that mr. ahrens could have ever seen that. and there is no evidence that mr. ahrens saw or heard those video clips, or even if he had, that they would have had some impact on his decision to smoke merit ultra lights in 1981 when he already knew that smoking was dangerous. plaintiff's counsel suggested that philip morris was hiding its ingredients and hiding its list of cigarettes. but you remember on cross examination, i asked dr. proctor, and we 5050 went through a 50-page document that philip morris sent to the surgeon general in 1963 before the report came out with all of those compounds in smoke. and dr. proctor agreed, that was the most complete list and a complete list of compounds in cigarette smoke that philip morris sent to the surgeon general. and remember there are little stars by each of those -- each of those compounds, and they cited to journals like cancer and the british journal of cancer. and dr. proctor said, yep, folks on the surgeon general's committee -- those products were or those elements were carcinogens. so it was no secret that cigarette smoke contained carcinogens, and the fact that smoking could cause cancer was no secret to mr. ahrens when he smoked merit ultra lights starting in 1981. plaintiff's counsel suggests that philip morris was doing internal secret research on nicotine. but remember, philip morris sponsored two conferences that were open to government researchers and academic researchers and also attended by tobacco company scientists 5051 where they discussed the pharmacology of nicotine and the psychology of smoking. and mr. paige showed you a picture in his closing of a front page, a front encryption of this book motives and incentives that we talked about where dr. dunn said it is the nicotine, as if that was some big secret. but this book was in libraries throughout the country, starting in 1973, and in this book there is chapters, each one of them is about nicotine and the pharmacology of nicotine, including one written by the guy who went on to invent the nicotine patch. the fact that nicotine was in cigarette smoke and could be addictive was not a secret, and it was not a secret to mr. ahrens when he switched to merit ultra lights in 1981. and then there is that 1975 memo by barbro goodman, who if anything in this trial, we figured out was a woman and not a man, and dr. hurt said, well, this is a big study that nobody knew about. and when i asked dr. hurt on cross about that study, he did not know much about it either. but now you know. it was a study of 5052 nine smokers, five of whom switched from marlboros to marlboro lights, a brand that mr. ahrens never smoked on a regular basis, and followed them for a period of two weeks with nine cigarettes each. ladies and gentlemen, the public health community knew about compensation for decades before barbro goodman did her nine-person study. and just months after she did that study, that article that mr. kaczynski showed you from consumer reports, we have a slide of it here, this is from consumer reports in the spring of 1976 that, again, dr. proctor said provided the most complete statement of compensation of the decade. compensation was no secret, and it was no secret when mr. ahrens switched to merit ultra lights in 1981. okay. i want to focus on merit ultra lights. plaintiff's counsel has suggested that mr. ahrens was somehow fooled or tricked by philip morris into believing that merit ultra lights were safer or would help him quit. and i want to spend some time talking about that. and i first want to look at what we know and 5053 what we do not know about why mr. ahrens switched to merit ultra lights. now, it is a long time ago, but if you think back to opening statements, mr. paige told you for the first time that story about bryan coming home and crying and telling his dad that smoking could kill him. and in the opening statements, mr. paige said that the first thing mr. ahrens did was switch to merit ultra lights. there is been no evidence of that in this case. mrs. ahrens testified that her husband started smoking merit ultra lights between '79 and '82 when the family was living in connecticut. and now you know that when bryan came home crying, that was when they were living in texas, after he had already switched to merit ultra lights. and i asked mrs. ahrens, i said, you know, did he -- what did he do in response to bryan coming home crying? and she confirmed that the only thing he did was try to cut down on smoking for a few weeks maybe. now, bryan came in and had a slightly different story. and he testified that his 5054 father switched to merit ultra lights one year after he had come home crying. not in response to his message to his dad or not immediately after he came home crying to his dad. but even so, his suggestion that his father switch to merit ultra lights a year after he came home crying does not make any sense because bryan also told you that is the only brand he could ever remember his dad smoking. so mr. paige is now suggesting that, well, mr. ahrens switched to merit ultra lights because of some strategy that philip morris had to make the public think that lights would help you quit or would somehow intercept you from quitting. well, there is no evidence that that applies here either. because when mr. sales asked bryan, when he asked him that question, whether mr. ahrens switched to merit ultra lights to try and quit, bryan said no, that was not the reason. and i asked mrs. ahrens, i said, have you ever -- has your husband ever told you that he switched to merit ultra lights in an effort to help him quit? did he ever do that? he never 5055 told you that, correct? and mr. ahrens said -- or excuse me, mrs. ahrens said, no. the bottom line is that neither mrs. ahrens nor bryan knew why mr. ahrens ever switched to merit ultra lights or smoked merit ultra lights as opposed to any other brand of cigarettes. now, you did hear from bryan, you heard from one witness testify that his father told him a single time that he could remember in a conversation, 30 years ago when he was about 10 years old, that his father told him he smoked light cigarettes because he believed they were safer for him because they were lower in tar and nicotine. now, bryan also said he did not know where his father had gotten that information. and plaintiffs are going to ask you to infer or guess that he got it from the tobacco company somehow. judge day's instructed you, you are not permitted to guess under the law, but i want to go ahead and talk about some of the options. one, as dr. proctor conceded, philip 5056 morris never said that merit or merit ultra light cigarettes were safe or safer than any other brand. never said it in a public statement, never said it in an advertisement. and, in fact, when i asked dr. proctor about the merit ultra lights advertising that was around in 1981, which is when mr. ahrens switched, dr. proctor described it as being on the candid end of the spectrum and straightforward and fact-based. those were dr. proctor words. and he told us that that advertising was not based on the glamour or the sexuality or the athleticism of all those old ads back in the '50s and '60s. and, of course, every pack of merit ultra light contained a surgeon general's warning. now, that being said, were there some people who believed that light cigarettes were safer because they contain less tar and nicotine? yes. was it a secret, absolutely not. did the tobacco companies know that, yes, they did, but did the public also know it? yes, they did. why? because that is what the public health community was recommending to 5057 people. dr. proctor told you that in the '60s and the '70s and '80s and even in the '90s, the public health community was saying, look, you should not smoke at all, but if you are going to smoke, you should choose a low-nicotine and a low-tar cigarette. and that was not just in obscure medical journals. it was in pamphlets. it was in news broadcasts. and we saw one of them during my cross examination of dr. ruckdeschel, which i want to pull up right now. transcribed as follows:) narrator: cancer experts said today that the new low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes are safer than regular cigarettes, although people who smoke these cigarettes still have far higher death rates than people who do not smoke at all. this news comes at time when americans are smoking more cigarettes, more than 600 billion of them last year. brian ross has more on the story. brian ross: low-tar and nicotine 5058 cigarettes now account for 11 percent of all the cigarettes smoked in the country, and sales have grown in the belief such brands are less likely to cause lung cancer and heart disease. the american cancer society says today's report is the first solid proof that low-tar and nicotine cigarettes are safer. mr. hammond: tar and nicotine is being further reduced, and it is far better that people do not smoke, but if they are going to smoke, as many people are just plainly going to do, then they are better off smoking cigarettes with low tar and nicotine than with high tar and nicotine. (the video clip concluded.) ms. arnold: that was 1976. and can i sit here and tell you that this is where mr. ahrens got his information? candidly, as with all of the other evidence that you have seen from mr. paige, no. but it is undisputed that philip morris never said ultra lights were safe or safer, and the public health community did not. now, dr. hurt -- dr. proctor and dr. hurt tried to tell you, well, wait a minute, not so 5059 fast, all of the tobacco companies were fooled because they did not know about compensation. well, as we have discussed, that was public knowledge. and that was published in articles and consumer reports and in medical journals for decades before mr. ahrens smoked merit ultra lights. and despite having that information, the public health community was still telling people, if you must smoke, smoke a cigarette with less tar and less nicotine. now, plaintiff is right that at some point the public health community did change its position on low-tar cigarettes and decided that the best thing to do was to just tell people to quit smoking, and not suggest to them that they smoke light cigarettes. but despite that change in position, in the public health community in the early 2000s, some people, some members of the public health community, including dr. proctor, still believe that ultra light cigarettes, which is what mr. ahrens smoked, were safer. so let us look at what dr. proctor said. this is on my cross of him. 5060 "question: so, therefore, it is believed by some scientists, even today in the public health community, that smoking ultra low-tar cigarettes reduces the risk of smoking, correct?" and dr. proctor said: "answer: yes. some scholars believe that, and they do not think it is a huge difference, but they do think it is..." -- and there he used that term again -- "less deadly." "question: okay. and you agree with that notion, right?" dr. proctor says: "answer: i agree that it is probably true. there are some confounders in that and the difference is small, but it is possible that it is true." so let us see what else he said about that. "question" -- again, this is dr. proctor on my cross. "question: so smokers who switch from a traditional light cigarette to an ultra light cigarette generally do get less tar and nicotine, correct? "answer: generally, yes, that is often the 5061 case. "question: and, of course, the same would go for someone who switched from a full-flavored cigarette like kent to an ultra light cigarette like merit ultra light?" and dr. proctor said: "answer: yes." now, i'm not going to stand here and tell you that merit ultra lights or any other brand of cigarettes is safe or safer than any other brand. philip morris, on its website, you have seen has said there is no safe cigarette. it says that on philip morris' website today. but, given that in 2016 there are still members of the public health community, including dr. proctor, plaintiff's own expert, who believe that ultra light cigarettes reduce the risk of cancer and gives smokers less tar and nicotine, which, according to bryan, is exactly what his father believed, there is no basis in this case to conclude that philip morris fooled or tricked mr. ahrens into believing anything about the ultra lights that he smoked 30 years ago. all right. we talked about reliance. as 5062 i mentioned before, it has to be reasonable. and when you are thinking about the reasonableness of any reliance that mr. ahrens may have done on something that philip morris said or did not say, i'd like you to think about the information that he had available to him in 1981 when he switched to merit ultra lights. at that point he had known for years that smoking was dangerous and would be difficult to quit. it is not reasonable for mr. ahrens to have relied on a false statement that he knew was false, or to rely on the omission of information he already had. the reliance also has to be detrimental. and, again, i talked about this in opening. it has to make a difference. it has to make a difference to the outcome. and plaintiff has to show that if mr. ahrens had not relied on something philip morris said about merit ultra lights and switched to merit ultra lights, he would have avoided getting his cancer. but as we have discussed, there was nothing about merit ultra lights that somehow prevented him from quitting, and there is no evidence that 5063 he even wanted to quit when he switched to merit ultra lights. we have talked about that. and remember, once again, you heard from dr. ruckdeschel. even if he had quit in 1981, he probably was still going to get his cancer. for these reasons philip morris -- plaintiff has not met her burden of proof on her fraud claim against philip morris and you should check no to that question. okay. the next question you are going to get to on the verdict form is the conspiracy question. and to prove her claim on conspiracy, plaintiff still has to show that any reliance was reasonable and detrimental and many of the same arguments and many of the same facts and much of the same evidence that we have been discussing and that mr. kaczynski has discussed show that plaintiff has not met her burden of proof on this question either. the evidence is clear, mr. ahrens made his own decisions about smoking and was not waiting for the tobacco companies to tell him anything to quit. he quit when he made up his own mind to do so and when he was ready to do it. if you get to the question of damages on 5064 the verdict form, and i would respectfully suggest that you should not even get that far, i want to just touch on that briefly. compensatory damages are meant to compensate mrs. ahrens and bryan for the loss of their husband and their father, not to punish defendants. and i agree with mr. kaczynski's comments about mr. paige's request for compensatory damages. that request, that amount of money, does not square with judge day's instructions that the number should be just and reasonable and based on the evidence. under the law that request cannot be based on sympathy. and with every other question on this verdict form, plaintiff has the burden to prove damages by a preponderance of the evidence, and plaintiff has the burden to prove every dollar of damages that they are seeking in this case by a preponderance of the evidence. if you get this far on the verdict form, i trust that, as with all of the other ones, you will base your award on the evidence and the law that judge day instructs you on. 5065 and then the final question, of course, is on punitive damages. and for all the reasons that we have discussed already, i do not believe that this is a case where punitive damages are warranted. but i want to point to just a couple of instructions for you to keep in mind if you get this far on the verdict form. mr. kaczynski talked about this, i'm not going to spend a lot of time on it, but this instruction, punitive damages it is a higher burden of proof, the evidence has to be clear and convincing, and you have to be able to warrant them without hesitation. that applies to r.j. reynolds and that instruction applies to philip morris as well. you are also going to be instructed that you cannot award punitive damages against philip morris or r.j. reynolds for harm to other parties. this is from the instructions. you may not punish defendants directly on account of harms caused to those other parties. and mr. paige has mentioned, i do not know how many times during trial, how many thousands of people die from smoking-related diseases, and he is probably going to do it again in 5066 rebuttal. but the law is that you cannot punish the defendants in this case for harm to those individuals. if those people believe that they have been harmed by the conduct of the defendants they can bring their own lawsuits and this is not the one for you to award them damages. all that being said, in a case like this, where the smoker, mr. ahrens, was able to quit instantly, and for good, after getting a phone call from a friend, this is not a case where punitive damages are warranted against either one of the defendants. now, i'm going to sit down in a moment, and mr. paige is going to have another opportunity to speak with you, as you know, because plaintiff bears the burden of proof on each of the claims. and when you listen to what he is saying, ask yourself, where is the connection? where is that bridge between the evidence and mr. ahrens? there is no connection. because as you now know, mr. ahrens was a man who made his own decision and he was private about his smoking. he did not want to listen to what 5067 anyone else had to say about his smoking, including his wife and his son and the surgeon general and his employer. he did not want to hear what any of them had to say. but when he was ready, he made up his own mind to quit. there is simply no evidence in this case that philip morris or reynolds had anything to do with mr. ahrens' smoking decisions. for all of these reasons, and for all of the evidence that you have heard during this case, i believe that a verdict -- that you -- excuse me, i believe that the evidence supports a verdict in favor of philip morris and that is what i would ask you to do when you go back to deliberate. i want to thank you all again for your time and attention throughout the trial and today. i know that it is been a very long day, so i really do appreciate it.