21 mr. kaczynski: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, ms. alexander, ladies and gentlemen. finally winding down. i want to join my colleagues here in thanking you for your service, thanking you for your attention. i said it before and, again, i know it sounds trite, but the system could not survive without you. we could not do this without you. in terms of ways that you can serve your country, there is a whole range. i mean, it starts with something as simple and as easy as paying your taxes, and ranges all the way to those who lie in state in arlington and other places like that around the country. and your service is on the upper end of that scale and whatever you decide, whatever the verdict, you will be able to go back to friends, family, co-workers and tell them that you helped make the system work because you did. and we appreciate that. just about two weeks ago i told you this case was about john paul alexander and the choices he made, and two weeks later it still is. two weeks ago i told you you would see a picture of a strong man who stood in between addiction and injury. a man who never complained about his smoking. a man who never said he wanted to quit. a man who was in control of where he smoked and where he did not. a man who never tried to quit before he was diagnosed. and when he was diagnosed with copd he quit when he tried the first time. two weeks later almost, with the proof in, you still saw a picture of a strong man who never complained about his smoking, who never said he wanted to quit, who was in control of where he smoked and where he did not, who never tried to quit before he was diagnosed. now, from pretrial to trial, testimony about how -- whether he actually quit changed a little bit. in front of you under oath in that chair mrs. alexander said her husband never quit. before trial under oath she said he did. she said he had no withdrawal symptoms. said he was the same man before and after he quit. and you heard that pretrial deposition testimony under oath yesterday when ms. brower was playing the part of ms. alexander in the jury box. now, you are the judge of facts and you will have to decide what the true facts are. but, you know, we can take a look at the medical records. the medical records say he quit. they say he quit back in -- the 1998 record says he quit. the 1997 record says he quit. says, smoking, no. and if you look up in the corner, i was going to come back to this later, it is the reporter, the person who reported that information was his daughter clara. in court here under oath jeanette said he quit -- i'm sorry, one more medical record, stopped smoking two years ago. smoking, and the one on the right, smoking, no. and by the way, if you look down at the lower right-hand corner, able to read, yes. and then his daughter jeanette under oath here in that chair said that there was a time she remembered that she did not see him smoking anymore. under oath here his daughter clara said that he never quit but, of course, clara, as i pointed out a moment ago on the medical record, was the reporter to the doctor -- or the nurse who filled out the form saying that he quit a month and a half ago back in 1997. so you are the judge of facts. you will have to figure out where the truth lies. two weeks ago i told you you would be inundated with company documents and testimony had everything to do with the companies and nothing to do with mr. alexander. two weeks later with the proof in, the plaintiffs have made a valiant attempt to retry the first engle case. to re-prove generic company conduct, to prove the case of some anonymous plaintiff, a generic smoker -- not mr. alexander -- a generic smoker who, unlike mr. alexander, cared about and followed the activities of the tobacco industry research committee and council for tobacco research and tobacco institute. a generic smoker who, unlike mr. alexander, like a lemming to the sea, looked at cigarette ads, studied them like a marketing student and then ran off as he was programmed to do by the product. and two weeks later, and you heard it again this afternoon, two weeks later they proved a thoroughly unremarkable marketing proposition that manufacturers segment their markets and compete with each other for brand share within those market segments. one of those market segments is now, and as we saw in ebony, has been since at least the '60s, the african american market. the evidence, of course, was -- and you saw from the surgeon general, tobacco companies did not create that market. the 1950s marked the introduction of menthol cigarettes, although a greater proportion of african americans now smoke mentholated cigarettes compared with members of other racial/ethnic groups. no evidence exists that the menthol market was initially conceived as having any special appeal to african americans or other racial/ethnic groups. and they have not shown you one illegal or improper activity, marketing activity, in connection with marketing to that market segment. and dr. kyriakoudes told you that on the witness stand. for the period of time you were running through, it was lawful to run print advertising for the tobacco companies, right? oh, yes. lawful to sponsor concerts, correct? yes. lawful to sponsor racing events, correct? yes. lawful to use billboard advertising, correct? yes. lawful to use point of sale advertising, correct? yes. lawful to do transit advertising, correct? yes. we heard -- we saw a document here that says they got advertising in liquor store. that is lawful, too. so all you heard was that the cigarette companies, like companies all across the country, segment their market, compete in the market segment using lawful means of advertising. and that is true, it is marketing 101, even if the product is cigarettes and even if the market is african americans. you heard back in the testimony of dr. kyriakoudes that kools attempt to upgrade its brand, was somehow made to sound sinister. well, again, marketing 101. remember when k-mart was trying to upgrade its image by introducing a jacqueline smith role -- excuse me, line of clothing? so what. so what if they used concerts, coupons, or smiling models, or billboards. that is not wrongful conduct. that is marketing 101. and even dr. kyriakoudes, plaintiff's expert, admitted it. so two weeks after we started, what have they not done? well, they have not done what their expert witnesses said that they were not going to do, and that was to try the case of john paul alexander, to try the gainesville, florida portion of the trial. dr. burns, of course, was the first witness. he was on generic videotape. he had nothing to say about mr. alexander or any other individual. but the folks that did appear, we had dr. proctor, and right off the bat, dr. proctor said he is not here to be the biographer of mr. alexander. he done no research into his life and he is not here to tell you the, the jury, what he read or did not read, what he saw or did not see, anything specific to him. so dr. proctor disclaimed wanting to talk about the case of john paul alexander. dr. kyriakoudes, same thing. he often testifies that he is not the historian of the individual smoker. he says, i'm not any particular plaintiff's biographer. he is been asked basically to render a judgment on individuals at a particular point in time and he does not do it, and he did not do it here. he was not the biographer of mr. alexander. he was not here to tell us what he saw, what he saw or did not see, things of that nature. he said no, i'm not here, and i have not in the course of my testimony. so the experts did not make out their case of john paul alexander. and no family or friends stepped in to fill the void. no family member or friend says that mr. alexander ever heard of the tobacco research -- industry research committee. no family or friend ever said he heard of the council for tobacco research. no family or friend said that he heard of the frank statement. no family or friend said that he argued with them when they told him to quit because it was bad for his health or that it might kill him. no family or friend said that he was the kind of individual who would be influenced by advertising. in fact, right here in court right in front of you his daughter jeanette said the exact opposite. was your father the type of person who was generally influenced by advertising? i could not say that. you would say no to that question? i would say no to that. and dr. werner who reviewed all the depositions taken in this case came to the same conclusion. did you see any evidence in the depositions that he was, in fact, influenced by advertising and marketing with respect to why he started smoking? there was no evidence of that. then she said nobody testified to that, that it influenced his decision to smoke or to not quit sooner. when your experts do not make out your case and your fact witnesses do not make out your case, you have no case. you cannot meet your burden of proof without proof. you cannot meet the greater weight of the evidence without evidence. you cannot tip the scales of justice with nothing and you cannot replace evidence and proof and trying to tip the scales of justice with things like the frank statement that never ran in gainesville. mr. alexander could not have seen it. pamphlets sent out to doctors and politicians, when mr. alexander was neither. you cannot replace evidence and proof with press releases that never appeared in the gainesville sun or with ads for kool that were run while he was smoking pall mall or with the flintstones ads for winston which ran when he was 30 years old and he was smoking salems. none of that has anything to do with him. and you cannot replace proof and evidence by rhetoric that is just solely designed to get you mad at my client, or by showing you -- you saw one here -- those forecasting documents from the '70s and '80s and suggesting, as has been done, they were used to market the teens. but even dr. kyriakoudes had to admit that there were legitimate purposes to things like that, legitimate purposes to know why 14 do 17 year olds were smoking. so the ability to forecast future usage is important to a product manufacturer? yes, i mean, they are in the business of selling their product and if they predict what they are going to sell, it helps efficiency. well, it also helps predict the size of the work force, right? yes. how much manufacturing capacity they are going to need? yes. the allocation of the manufacturing plant of different products -- different products that they manufacture? yes. so knowing future trends is very important? yes. i told you you would see some stupid documents and company files, and you did. and a lot of them, even dr. proctor had to admit that they went nowhere. in opening i told you, remember we talked about the suggestion box, you would see some noble ideas, the low-tar and medium/nicotine cigarette, even things like that, documents like that, there was some stupid language, and you saw it. but stupid ideas and stupid language do not substitute for the greater weight of the evidence. and all of that, the frank statement, the pamphlets, the press releases, the internal memos from reynolds, the internal memos from philip morris. and by the way, you will hear an instruction from the judge, or you heard it, it is actually in your packet, that tells you the circumstances under which you could consider evidence that is introduced by companies -- about companies other than reynolds. it has to be in furtherance of the conspiracy. when philip morris was trying to figure out how to better market philip morris products, i would argue to you that is not in furtherance of any conspiracy. it is in furtherance of the special interest of philip morris. but you saw a lot of those. and i raised this question two weeks ago for the frank statement, the press releases, the pamphlets, all that stuff. what has this got to do with john paul alexander? because that is why we are here. that is why we are here. this is not a generic class action like the first engle trial. this is not a congressional hearing where you are making judgments in a vacuum. this case is about john paul alexander. and neither their experts nor their fact witnesses have connected anything that reynolds did to him. we talked about those railroad tracks back in the opening and the railroad that runs from jacksonville to miami. when it passes through this place that used to be called hogtown, the tracks do not meet. they have not proven that anything r.j. reynolds did affected mr. alexander. they have not proven that anything r.j. reynolds did was a legal cause as to finding in the instructions of his injury. now, the first question you are going to have to answer on the verdict form when you retire to deliberate is whether mr. alexander was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if he was, whether addiction caused his injury or whether his injury was caused by his choice to smoke and to continue to smoke. the issue is not whether smoking caused copd. it did. that is resolved, as you heard. the issue is whether addiction caused his injury. now, as the proof came in, you learned a little bit about the concept of addiction. you learned that the notion that quitting smoking could be difficult has been around for a long, long time. you learned from the plaintiff's first witness, dr. burns, that it is been known for over 100 years that smoking could be difficult to quit. the terms like nicotine fiend, nicotine fit have been a part of our culture for a long, long time. you heard that the state of florida first called smoking -- cigarette smoking an addiction back in 1906. and the instruction that you were read about concealment, as you will see in the instructions you were given to take back to the jury room, the information concealed has to be something that was not otherwise available. was the fact that cigarette smoking was addictive otherwise available? here it is. from florida in 1906. in the 1930s and 1940s we showed you reader's digest articles that talked about quitting and addiction and nicotine. and when in 1988 the surgeon general officially labeled smoking addictive was above the full coverage right here in gainesville. you saw the clip, you saw it many times during this case, of the waxman committee hearings in 1994. and the then ceo of r.j. reynolds, james johnston, was asked the question whether smoking was addictive. and he was cut off in his answer, and that is so important. you will have that in evidence. you can play back. listen to what he was starting to say. he was starting to say cigarettes are not intoxicating. cigarettes -- you do not develop a level of tolerance. what he was trying to do was to disagree with the '88 surgeon general's report to be sure, but he was embracing the '64 surgeon general's report; the report that called it a habit. the report that set out criteria under which smoking was not addictive. it is one thing to call him old-fashioned or maybe not adopting the principles or the standards that the surgeon general changed in order to call smoking addictive, but you cannot call him a liar because he was adhering to the '64 report standard. and that is what he was cut off trying to say. the newspaper articles, and you saw a bunch of them, and magazine articles began to pop up about smoking and disease in the '40s and the '50s and the '60s, '70s and '80s, there would be articles about smoking cessation clinics. articles right here in gainesville. in the '80s and the '90s you saw the articles about publicity for the great american smokeout and the activities around town for the great american smokeout. why are these important? doctors have quoted it. even if you assume that mr. alexander could not read or had minimal reading ability, all this is going on around him, all this is going on around him in a town he is lived in for decades. you could not help but know this. you also heard in this case that addiction does not provide an excuse or a reason to avoid personal responsibility. and you heard it, from no less of an authority, dr. burns who said, and even if they are addicted the smokers are still responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? that is correct. the fact that someone is addicted is a barrier to behavioral change, but it does not free them from responsibility for their own behavior. and dr. werner told you that she would never tell any patient that that patient did not have the ability to stop smoking. and that is because, as you heard, from the very first days of this case, that the word choice, as much as people would like to say that it is a word of the tobacco industry or mine, is the word of the surgeon general, 1977. cigarette smoking represents a category of health problems that can be called personal choice health behavior. a few years later he said it again. a personal choice behavior. was that a mistake, too? take a look again. even while calling smoking an addictive behavior, the surgeon general said the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. the words of the surgeon general. not mine. personal choice and personal responsibility. it is a concept as old as the garden of eden. a concept exercised every day mr. alexander reached for a pack and took out a cigarette; he exercised when he lit the cigarette. it is a choice he exercised when he inhaled the cigarette. and it is a choice that he had for every time he looked at that pack, for like 30 years, and saw a warning label that told him it was a choice. but it was not a choice without consequence. personal choice did not come with that risk. now, when deciding whether mr. alexander's a class member, you have to decide whether addiction caused his injury or whether his choice to smoke caused his injury. and you may remember from opening statement, i had a little diagram to sort of illustrate this. we have got addiction on the left. we have got his copd or emphysema on the right and we have got mr. alexander standing between them. now, the plaintiffs in this case would take the middle box out, and it would be that simple. addiction, copd. in their regime addiction ends free choice. addiction makes you a non-factor in basic decisions about your own life. addiction makes you a victim of forces beyond your control. nicotine. injury's inevitable. it is just a matter of time and injury absolves you of responsibility for your choices. but that formulation overlooked the fact that addiction does not directly cause injury. and i want you, again, when you get back in the jury room, read the definition of legal cause. addiction does not directly cause injury. it is not a virus. it is not like hiv, aids or hpv or the flu. in between addiction and injury is a person. a "you", a "me". in this case a "john paul alexander". and that person does have free will. and that person does have the ability to make choices. even in this age of victimhood that person bears responsibility for their actions. not ten percent or twenty percent, but one hundred percent, because as i told you in injury selection, the party to this lawsuit best position to prevent harm to mr. alexander was mr. alexander. the party to this lawsuit best position to stand between addiction and injury is mr. alexander. we learned a great deal about mr. alexander in this trial. and we learned that notwithstanding his limited education, he was an intelligent man, a bright man, a man who learned a trade and got very good at it. he could read well enough to get a driver's license. he could read well enough to do bills at the service station. mrs. alexander said he was a full-grown man who knew right from wrong and who could and did decide to smoke. and we learned that he could and did control his smoking. she told us that he would not smoke at pta meetings when he went with her. he sat through them, did not need a cigarette. and went to school plays, he sat through them. did not need a cigarette. at her request he drove her to church and did not smoke in the car because she did not want to smell like tobacco smoke when she got to church. whatever reason, he did decide to smoke around his daughter clara who was asthmatic even when she was having asthma attacks. he never tried to quit. dr. werner for the plaintiffs reviewed the record and concluded that he did not try to quit. nobody at trial ever contradicted that. dr. werner found that he actually did quit in 1997. no evidence he tried before and the medical records reflect the fact that in '97 he did. and let us take a look, again, at those medical records. first one, quit. family reports he quit. stopped two years ago. quit smoking, no. able to read, yes. and you heard the deposition testimony read yesterday where ms. brower played mrs. alexander said that he quit. he was a strong man who kept up on current events. you heard yesterday from the deposition testimony that he would watch walter cronkite and the evening news at least from the 1960s on with his wife beside him. so what we have is a man who controlled his smoking, who never wanted to quit before 1996, who never tried to quit before 1996, and was successful when he did, and suffered no withdrawal symptoms whatsoever. and he never complained about his smoking because it was just a part of his life. it was just a part of his life. it was a part of his life that he resisted being told to change. when people told him that they wanted him to quit smoking, like his wife, for example, he told them to mind their own business. he told his daughter, i'm grown. i mean, i do not have to do what i do not want to do. and whether or not you agree with dr. werner that he was addicted or with dr. myers that he was not, the end result is the same. mr. alexander made a choice to smoke every day. it was a choice. surgeon general's word, not mine. that he could have changed every day, but he chose not to. it is a choice for which even today nobody wants to seem to take responsibility for anything. even today he should be held responsible for that choice. nothing and nobody controlled mr. alexander's choices except mr. alexander. nobody and nothing could stand between addiction and injury except mr. alexander. do not let them take him out of that equation because this case is -- and was and is about john paul alexander and the choices that he made. we go through the verdict form, that first box whether his injury was caused by an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, you should check no. now, there was an issue -- at the beginning of the case i told you there was an issue of statute of limitations. and you are going to have to decide, one of the questions -- and it is true the defense bears the burden of proof on this one -- you are going to have to decide whether mr. alexander could, by the exercise of due diligence, have discovered his smoking related copd before 1990? mr. smith: objection, your honor. may we approach? (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. smith: that is a misstatement of the law. it does not say "could". it says "should" and that -- i let him go on opening because they had not been instructed. they have been instructed now and that is a misstatement of the law. the instruction is that he "should" not "could". there is a huge difference and they have been instructed and that is misleading. mr. kaczynski: i'll repeat it, judge. the court: just correct it. mr. kaczynski: okay. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) mr. kaczynski: the issue you are going to be asked to decide on the statute of limitations is whether, in the exercise of due diligence, mr. alexander should have discovered is smoking -- copd smoking related before 1990. this is a little bit tough to piece together because we have been giving you pieces of evidence. a lot of pieces came in yesterday. pieces of evidence that have to -- that form like a puzzle and as judges of the facts you are going to have to decide whether that puzzle fits together. and the puzzle pieces come from different sources. they come from -- and these are essentially the three questions: did he have copd before may 5th, 1990? did he know, or should he have known, that he had an injury? did he know his symptoms were related to his smoking? let us take those one at a time. did he have copd before may 5th, 1990? this is easy. everybody says he did. everybody says he did. you heard from dr. feingold that copd goes from mild to moderate to severe over a period of decades. it does not happen over night. he showed up in his sixth decade of life in his 50s with clinically significant emphysema. and if dr. feingold had examined mr. alexander back in the '80s he would have diagnosed him with copd. dr. truncale says all of the above, and he had symptoms that he should have known about back in the 1980s. now, these are decades prior to 1990, the decades that we do not have medical records. nobody's fault. they are just not around. but when we do start to have medical records, what do we see? well, we see that he showed up and was diagnosed with severe copd in 1996. again, it does not happen overnight. dr. feingold admits he had copd in the '80s. he would have diagnosed him in the '80s as far back as 1986. he agrees he would have diagnosed him using pulmonary function tests and radiology and these tools, these diagnostic tools were available at the time. 41, please. also, this is the right age to develop copd. the fifth -- the sixth decade of life, which mr. alexander was in the 1980s. dr. truncale said it was symptomatic. and here's an interesting record where he spells out clearly that he had a medical history, a past medical history of emphysema. past medical history of emphysema, according to his family and reported by his daughter. and we know that daughter was jeanette. now, in this courtroom, she said her father never had any medical problems prior to his stroke in 1996. on this medical record from 1996 she said he had a history of hypertension, a history of emphysema and if you look in the lower right-hand corner, the highlighted sob, shortness of breath, back in 1996. family members knew he had a history of copd and he must have as well. now, should he have known he had copd? this is an important question and, again, there are three pieces -- there are three sources to the pieces of the puzzle: medical records, testimony of the family, and testimony of the friends in this trial. let us take a look. well, let us check one, okay. let us take a look. now the issue is not, by the way, whether mr. alexander could diagnose himself with a stethoscope to his chest. whether -- the question is whether his condition was severe enough for him to see a doctor. now, here's where the puzzle pieces begin to fit. you heard of the deposition testimony yesterday, where ms. brower played mrs. alexander, that mr. alexander stopped working at his service station, she said, when he took sick and was told that he had emphysema. everybody's memory, of course, controls, but she sat on the stand and said those three things. he stopped work at a service station when he took sick, when he was diagnosed with emphysema. put that puzzle piece together with his social security records and what do they show? well, first of all, what you do not see, by the way, is any work at all in 1988. but then you see the last work he did at the service station is 1989, and there are no social security records after that. so if you put mrs. alexander's testimony together with the social security records, you have him leaving the service station in 1999 -- or excuse me, 1989 and then mrs. alexander follows in, because he was diagnosed with emphysema. the whole puzzle begins to fit. after that he worked at home. you heard testimony -- you were shown deposition testimony from some of his friends, and i have no doubt that every one of his friends was sincere in telling -- giving the testimony that they gave. they remember these things as happening in the 1990s. we have seen what memories can do. but the social security record cannot be wrong. it cannot be wrong. it is not subject to lapse of memory. it is not fallible. it says the last time he worked for an 3079 employer was 1989. and it jives with the testimony of mrs. alexander. so, again, why would he work at home? dr. truncale filled that in. by this point he likely had moderate copd, moderate emphysema and he just could not take the work at the service station, but continued to work on cars but at a slower rate and at home. that is -- those are a couple of puzzle pieces and they are both consistent with what the addiction expert said, because both addiction experts, dr. werner and dr. myers, agreed that mr. alexander met the dsm number 7 criteria, which i'm going to show you in a minute, from the 1980s. they said that in the 1980s he had a cough, he had shortness of breath, and he had hoarseness. and that these things were significant enough that he would have known he had them and would have known they were related to cigarette smoking. just take a look at what the dsm actually says. dsm 7, which both addiction experts, plaintiff's and defendant's, said that mr. alexander met, said that substance use, if you are smoking, is continued, despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance. in other words, whatever he had was pretty significant. whatever he had was pretty significant, and he continued to smoke in spite of it. and dwell on that for a minute. independently, the expert in gainesville and the expert in providence, rhode island working for different sides with diametrically opposed interests in the lawsuit, looking though at the same materials, came to the same conclusion; that based upon the symptoms they saw reported in the medical records and the depositions, he had knowledge of a persistent physical problem caused by smoking in the 1980s which jives with the social security record that says that is when he stopped working, which jives with mrs. alexander's testimony that said he stopped working because he was sick and was diagnosed with emphysema. now, given all this, should mr. alexander have gone to a doctor? drs. myers and werner, medical doctors, both thought so. and what would have happened if he did? well, this is what dr. feingold said. dr. feingold said back in the '80s, if a person goes to see a family practitioner in the 1980s they would have been told to stop smoking by most family practitioners. that was his practice and that was the standard of care for florida physicians. so under any test, any test, mr. alexander would have known, would have had severe symptoms that would have been diagnosed as emphysema and he would have been told had he gone to a doctor they were caused by smoking. but he would not have to go to a doctor to know they were caused by smoking. look at what was being played all across the country. ("smoker's cough? see a doctor" video played for the injury.) mr. kaczynski: did he know he had an injury back in the 1980s? check, yes. and the final piece of the puzzle, did he know they were related to his smoking? well, first of all, the warning label on the pack said it would have been. second of all, he was told by various members of his family and friends, all throughout the entire time he smoked, that smoking was not good for him because it was making him cough, just killing him. but, again, looking at the evidence, dr. myers and dr. werner says that he met the dsm criteria; that is, these things: cough, shortness of breath and hoarseness were significant and should have had knowledge of those problems caused by smoking. dr. myers testified that these required -- this dsm-iv, criteria 7, does not require a doctor to tell you that you have got them. it is just that you know you have got them. and with all this, the evidence fits together. the evidence fits together. the testimony of mrs. alexander, the social security record, the expert's testimony, it all fits together. and common sense tells you it fits together. so in the end, check all three boxes. and when you get to the verdict form, the question number 6, check yes. mr. alexander should have known that he had emphysema caused by smoking. now, if you find him to be a class member, we get past the statute of limitations and if we get past the addiction issue, you are going to have to find that something wrong that r.j. reynolds did affected his choices. you are going to have to find legal cause. in other words, but for r.j. reynolds' conduct, mr. alexander would not have been injured. now, because they made a run at re-trying the engle case, the plaintiffs really kind of ignored trying the alexander case and they did not make out a case of legal case. in fact, most of the so-called evidence that you saw, and you saw, again, some of it this afternoon, falls into one of three categories: untrue, unproven or unrelated to mr. alexander. but before we review the evidence, i want to take a little detour and talk about the people who provided it. and that brings us to dr. proctor. dr. proctor was the plaintiff's main witness who testified for almost two days. you recall that he told us proudly that he is not a dispassionate scholar relating events to the jury. he told us he was rooting for the plaintiff to win. of course he was rooting for the plaintiff to win. dr. proctor's the expert you recall who routinely trashes people who disagrees with him and it does not matter who they are, whether it was a historic figure like dr. wynder. dr. wynder favored filters. dr. proctor said -- we will talk about this in a minute -- they were gimmicks so he trashed him. he said he was taking tobacco money. dr. russell, the scientist of the addiction expert from great brittain, who wrote in the british medical journal, lancet, and wanted to advocate a low-tar and medium/nicotine cigarette. dr. proctor said he was taking cigarette money. he was corrupt. not just wrong, but corrupt. the american medical association for saying they did not think a warning label was necessary because everybody knew the risks of smoking way back in 1964. he trashed the ama and said they took tobacco money. not just wrong, but corrupt. and he never offered any evidence to prove it. he never proved dr. wynder took money. he never proved dr. russell took money, and he did not exactly explain to you what the ama situation was all about. not just wrong, but corrupt. and if you are a historian for the defense, like dr. stueck, not only do you get smeared, you get smeared in print. he charged people like dr. stueck of engaging in historical malpractice, being a black mark on the profession, and being easily seduced by money. in one article he smeared 40 distinguished historians without a second thought. and, in fact, in his article and in this courtroom one of those historians was dr. steven ambrose. who is he? he was a bit of a giant in the historical profession. we heard that he was personally selected by president eisenhower to be his biographer. this is the man who founded the d-day museum in new orleans to honor our soldiers. he is the author of the book band of brothers which led to the mini series, was advisor to the mini series. was advisor to tom hanks on saving private ryan. this man was not beyond the reach of dr. proctor. if you disagree with dr. robert neal proctor at stanford, look out. it is kind of ironic that the man who sat there and talked about how the tobacco industry had plans to smear researchers which, by the way, you never saw any evidence of, to smear researchers engaged in exactly that same behavior in print, repeatedly, and in this courtroom under oath. and finally, you heard about his little adventure regarding the university of florida. and no matter how self-righteous he defended that conduct, in fact, he was proud of it, what he really tried to do was to intimidate four graduate students trying to work their way through college. what were they doing that was so horrible? they were researching newspapers for historians for the defense in one of these cases. collecting newspaper articles. so he finds out that they are doing it. he gets their names from dr. kyriakoudes. he gets on the internet, looks up their faculty advisor, finds someone he met at a conference who was from the university of florida, and e-mails them and says, hey, you know this is going on, and by the way, to my e-mail, let me attach these two articles in which he smears all the historians who work for the tobacco industry. when nothing happened after he let the florida professor know about it, he told her to bring it up at a faculty meeting. when he was told that there was a florida sunshine law that might govern his e-mails with the florida professor, he deleted them, which, again, is kind of ironic, a man covering his tracks deleting e-mails. ironic behavior for a man who came to you to talk about concealment. now, as it turns out, the university of florida history department did not need any help running their own department. they did not need any help from dr. proctor invading the students' privacy, researching the name of that faculty advisor or telling the faculty how to run the department because they had it under control all the time. one of the faculty advisors knew, was fully informed, and did not care, correct? i think that is right. picking on colleges students working their way through college. real profile and encouraging. so why was this a big deal? why did they make a big deal out of this? because dr. proctor, on so many issues, so many things in this case, asks you to take a lot on faith, on his word. he often makes statements unsupported by the evidence. he often makes statements that were contradicted by the evidence. i'm going to take a look at a few. too often they gave -- we gave you proof, they gave you proctor. and i'm suggesting that anything this man said should be taken with a grain of salt. what am i talking about? you even saw this one this afternoon. dr. chin lee of r.j. reynolds wanted to do ames testing back in 1978. he is told legal says, no. and then dr. proctor moved on. what he wanted you to think was the testing was not done and the legal department is running the r&d department. they are running the science, and no mutagenicity testing, which is what he was asking to do, was done. what dr. proctor knew all along but did not want to tell you was that it was done. legal was overruled. and if you take a look at the dates, this is a 1983 memo from the same dr. chin lee to dr. rodgman who originally told them what legal had said -- go to the next one -- the r&d department of r.j. reynolds has been engaged in mutagenicity testing of cigarette smoke condensate and tobacco additives by the ames salmonella microsome method since 1978. since the date of the first memo that dr. proctor showed you, they were doing ames testing in '78, '79, '80, '80, '80, '82, '83. every year. and you saw evidence that they were going to do it in the future. so the ames testing was done. dr. proctor would not want you to know that. again, ironic that a man came here to talk about concealment concealed this fact from you. under what kind of evidence did he provide here? it would be classified as untrue. now, dr. proctor called filters a gimmick, a myth. here's his testimony. a gimmick. and if you look down at the bottom, he calls it a myth. well, did you see a single scientific study offered in support of that? did you see a surgeon general's report that said filters did not work? did you see a surgeon general's report that said filters do not lower lung cancer rates? he did not show you anything. he wanted you to take it on faith; take it on the word of dr. robert neal proctor. well, what did we show you? we showed you surgeon general reports from 1975 to 1990 that do not say that filters were a gimmick. they all say filter tipped cigarettes lower lung cancer rates. filter cigarettes work. that is not what you heard from dr. proctor. you saw one staff report from a congressional committee written by politicians in 1957. you saw that over and over again. whatever the case was in 1957, by the time we were all around to the '70s the surgeon general is consistent, consistent in saying filters were a benefit. and remember dr. russell? what did he say? he said it is unlikely that any single measure has saved more lives or done more to reduce smoking related disease than to switch from plane to filter tipped cigarettes which began in the late 1950s and continued throughout the 1960s. we gave you proof. they gave you proctor. dr. proctor called ctr research distraction research. conceded it was good research by good scientists published in good journals, but unrelated to smoking and health. we showed you otherwise. articles dealing with addiction. articles dealing with coronary artery disease. articles dealing with bronchogenic carcinoma, pulmonary, which is lung cancer, pulmonary cancer, clearly related to smoking and health. and do not take my word for it, because -- next one -- this is just one, we showed you a bunch, cited by the surgeon general of the united states, ctr supported research. and as you heard in the testimony, this happened about 600 times. clearly related to smoking and health. not distraction research. we gave you proof. they gave you proctor. dr. proctor told you that the cigarette industry had a huge information campaign, that got its messages from newspapers all around the country. and the best you got from him is this: plaintiff's exhibit 26, which if you look real carefully, consists of five new york newspapers and one boston newspaper. he did not show you -- in fact, no plaintiff's witness showed you a single issue of the gainesville sun. not one. and there is a reason for that. they did not show you a single issue of the gainesville sun with an article slanted towards the industry. we put 44 issues of the gainesville sun into evidence. read them. look at them and see what they say about the power and effect of this information. the message that came through from those articles is that smoking causes disease, smoking could be hard to quit, and help is available if you want to quit. when you look at the instruction on concealment, it says that the information concealed must not be otherwise available to mr. alexander; otherwise available in the gainesville sun. smoking causes disease, smoking could be hard to quit, and it is addictive above the full front page, and of all ads for clinics and the great american smoke out, this information was clearly otherwise available. but more to the point, the massive information campaign, apparently never made it to alachua county. dr. proctor said that r.j. reynolds concealed this internal work on the chemistry of tobacco, but he did not show you anything that should have been disclosed that was not. we showed you sites -- and this is just one surgeon general's report. we showed you sites of all these articles written by reynolds' scientists that appeared in print. these are all that are just in one surgeon general's report. he showed you some memos that suggested reynolds was designed to ad campaigns to appeal to 14 year olds. you saw those documents again this afternoon. but the plaintiffs never showed you the ads. we did. take a look at this one. the first memo you were shown at one of the hilton head presentations, these are the ads that ran after t it. which ad do you think is going to drive the 14 year old to the candy store to get a pack of cigarettes and smoke until he stops being sick to become a regular smoker? the guy in the middle who looks like an undertaker or the guy with the -- holding his chest in the upper left-hand corner? this is what supposedly was going to appeal to 14 year olds. look at the next one. these are the ones that ran after the document in the 1980s. you could use your own judgment whether or not these appeal to 14 year olds. we showed you the ads. we gave you the proof. they just gave you dr. proctor's opinion. now, i told you in opening finally that you would see ideas that were a little bit like suggestions in a suggestion box, ideas that never went anywhere but made trial exhibits or going to be trial exhibits forever. you saw some of them here. you saw some of them this afternoon. there was a proposal for a -- you saw the specially filter -- treated filtertip that would change color. one of claude teague's earliest memos. it went nowhere. dr. proctor admitted it went nowhere. the proposal for a youth brand with tar levels going back to the levels of the 1950s. never went anywhere. even the idea of the low-tar, medium/nicotine cigarette that dr. proctor had to admit was actually motivated by the ideas of people like the national cancer institute, the surgeon general, dr. russell and the tobacco working group. and by the way, lest you forget that that project had a noble goal, not one to addict people. look at dr. russell's article in the british medical journal. besides having low-tar and co yield, the least harmful cigarettes for heavy smokers may be those with a high, rather than low nicotine yield. remember, the reason was people smoke for the nicotine but it is the tar that gives them disease. and if you bring the nicotine down -- if you bring the tar down, you bring the nicotine down, too. the idea was to maintain the nicotine but lower the tar so you would get less of the harmful ingredients of smoke. that was the goal behind them. not to addict people, but in the end this idea went nowhere. it could not produce a commercially acceptable cigarette. but it was the defense that had to point that out. in so many cases with the stupid ideas, dr. proctor was content to lay out the document and move on, leaving it for you to assume that happened. again, it did not happen. the man liked to use the word misleading. he did a fair amount of misleading. and he told you things that were unproven. in the end he would present a case that was unrelated to mr. alexander. as i said earlier, the plaintiff has to establish legal cause. they must prove that r.j. reynolds did something wrong that affected mr. alexander's choices. in other words, but for r.j. reynolds conduct mr. alexander would not have been injured. now, i've got a diagram for this as well. the conduct -- call it negligence, call it concealment, call it product defect -- must have caused, must have affected mr. alexander's choices and that leads to copd. but for the conduct, but for those things, mr. alexander would have made different choices. the conduct has to be why he started or continued to smoke. and like addiction, he is in the middle. he is in the middle. the man with the choices is in the middle. so you have to ask yourself, is the reason he started to smoke any conduct of r.j. reynolds? is the reason he started to smoke -- continued to smoke due to any conduct of r.j. reynolds? and if r.j. reynolds had not done things, would he have started to smoke, would he have continued to smoke? well, we know r.j. reynolds had nothing to do with him starting to smoke, because we know his first encounter with tobacco, we know from his sister rosa lee, that his first encounter with tobacco came when his father gave him tobacco to chew when they were very, very young. did r.j. reynolds do anything wrong to cause mr. alexander to continue to smoke? again, there is no evidence of that. there is no evidence he saw the frank statement or heard of ctr. there is no evidence he ever saw a pamphlet or a statement from the tobacco institute or ctr. there is no evidence he showed any interest whatsoever in anything any tobacco company, including r.j. reynolds tobacco company, said. everything that dr. proctor said on the witness stand and talked about has nothing to do, nothing to do with mr. alexander. i posed this question in the beginning and it is true today: dr. proctor's testimony, all of it, what has this got to do with john paul alexander? the answer is, nothing. so exit dr. proctor and dr. kyriakoudes, the historian turned advertising experts, and even here they come up empty. what you heard this afternoon was mr. alexander happened to be an african american smoker which at some point switched to menthol. that is the fact. that is the proof. there is no evidence of exactly when he did and there is no evidence at all of why he did. for that reason alone, they cannot meet the burden of proof without proof. and you should reject any argument based on marketing. but what you are being asked to do -- what the judge's instructions tell you you cannot do is to substitute speculation for proof. the plaintiff's best case here is that mr. alexander was smoking a non-menthol product, he saw an ad for menthol and he switched. now, that is built on argument. that is not built on proof. he could have switched because a friend switched. he could have switched because he tried one and he liked it. there is no evidence he switched because of ads. none. dozens of possibilities. but even if it was true, it results in a defense verdict, and here's why. you already saw the surgeon general said that tobacco companies did not create the menthol market. and it is true. the companies could plead guilty to having pursued and competed in the african american segment of the market. but as we saw in our scroll from ebony, so did the navy, so did mcdonalds, so did burger king, so did liquor, so did cars, so did beer, so did life insurance. everybody was competing for a segment of that market. and it is true that the companies used a variety of ways to market there. well, things like the kool jazz festival. but as that whole litany i went through with dr. kyriakoudes says, there is nothing wrong with that; that is not wrongful conduct. it is legitimate marketing tools. so if mr. alexander saw an ad on the tv or in a magazine laying around the service station or on a billboard on the road or on a poster in a liquor store -- and bear in mind, there is no evidence that any of that happened, but if it did, and he switched to a menthol cigarette as a result, your response should be, so what; so what. the conduct that affects his choices must be wrongful and there is nothing wrongful about lawfully marketing. and dr. kyriakoudes told you everything that you heard about was lawful. it is not wrongful to try to improve your brand image. it is not wrongful to try to take market share from a competitor. it is not wrongful to market to ethnic media -- in ethnic media like ebony. as a matter of fact, you saw the 1988 surgeon general's report that it was ebony that was pursuing the companies to advertise in it. not the other way around. this is marketing 101, and it bears repeating. marketing 101 does not become unlawfully just because the product is cigarettes and just because the market is african americans. so if we go back to our diagram, the chains busted. they have identified no wrongful conduct that caused mr. alexander to start smoking or to continue to smoke. they have identified no wrongful conduct that was the legal cause of his injury. you have the instructions with you. you can read it, but that chain is busted and the plaintiff cannot bridge the gap. now, if everything i've said thus far is un persuasive, we are going to get to the issue of damages. we will get to the issue of damages. and you have -- if you decide to return a verdict in favor of mrs. alexander, you will have to decide on an amount of damages. this is hard. it is hard to put a value on life. human life is precious from the wound to the grave. mr. avera asked for $2 million pain and suffering and $1 million for the future. $3 million is a lot of money even today. now, you have got a jury instruction there that says whatever award you make is supposed to be fair and just in light of the evidence that you have heard in this case regarding mrs. alexander's loss of mr. alexander. you heard some talk about how much sports figures make or what expert billing rates are. that is not in the jury instructions. the jury instruction is what is fair and just according to the evidence in this case. so my question is what evidence did you hear in this case? and the answer is you heard precious little. did you hear what kind of a father mr. alexander was? if we heard that testimony, i missed it. apart from being a provider and a driver, did we hear what kind of husband mr. alexander was? if the testimony was there, i missed that, too. did we hear what he did to his family? we did not hear that testimony. he had three daughters but we only heard from two. in fact, we called one of the two. what did you hear? you heard the life expectancy, the joint life expectancy, i believe this is correct, is eight years. you saw his social security earning records. those -- that is evidence in the case, and that may be the only evidence you have to help you with this issue. and i would suggest that the evidence suggests an award in the thousands, not in the millions, if you should feel necessary to make an award in this case. if you make an award, compensate mrs. alexander, not the lawyers. compensate her based on the evidence you heard. not the arguments you hear. and finally, and it really is finally for me because i do not get to speak again, if you go all the way through the verdict form to the last question, and you have found against my client on either the conspiracy or concealment, you have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. and if we get that far, if we get to punitive damages, you will have already completely compensated mrs. alexander for her loss with whatever figure you arrive at. punitive damages are not about compensation or making someone whole. punitive damages are about more money. punitive damage is designed to punish and deter, punish for conduct tantamount to being a reckless disregard for human life, and as you heard, the plaintiff must meet a higher level of proof; clear and convincing evidence. and i'm obviously here to argue that they have proven no such thing. punish r.j. reynolds? you heard testimony in the 1950s. you saw a document from the 1950s that r.j. reynolds tried to take the harmful substances out of cigarettes. as you see, the very last paragraph there, 120 separate experiments using half a million cigarettes. they were trying to get benzo{a}pyrene and that family of chemicals out of their cigarettes. now, you heard from mr. avera, well, they told people keep smoking, we are working on it. well, they were working on it. you got to understand, you heard that when we were talking about claude teague about how he started at reynolds as a bench chemist, never became a vice president, but when we were talking about dr. proctor, we heard that dr. teague came to r.j. reynolds after serving in europe in world war ii. this was the greatest generation. this was the world war ii generation. they had just let nazi germany imperil japan. presented with a problem like this, is it unremarkable that they decided if there is something wrong with cigarettes, we are capable of fixing it? and this is one of the efforts they made to fix it. in the 1950s. in the 1960s, we had r.j. reynolds trying to cooperate with the federal government. now, you have heard about these documents that these documents were all written, they were never expected to see the light of date and this is what people were really thinking. well, this one is too. as you heard, it is from the head of r&d, from the president of the company, and what does he say? in cooperation with others you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts ultimately to gain their cooperation and proper research of the subject. 2. again, written while nobody's looking. if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts on this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. this document was prepared, as you can see, on the top in 1968. this was at the outset of the tobacco working group. let us go to the next one. tobacco working group is something dr. proctor was asked about. again about '68, nine or ten years. it was under the aegis of the national cancer institute. members of the public health community were members, the tobacco institute, the federal government and the national cancer institute. this was a joint effort that went on for nine years trying to develop a less hazardous cigarette. r.j. reynolds fully participated in that. and one of those efforts -- the next one, please -- one of those efforts, this is the minutes of one of the meetings, one of those efforts was to come up with a high -- low-tar medium/nicotine cigarette. and there is the document where the group says this is something that we should go after. this is something that is promising. r.j. reynolds cooperated in trying to reduce the risk of smoking for those who would not quit. you saw some recites in the surgeon general's report of r.j. reynolds' scientists. there were others. r.j. reynolds' scientists published articles in the science of tobacco, and as we saw, they wound up being cited sometimes by the surgeon general. in the 1980s r.j. reynolds made a revolutionary break through with something called premiere. i asked dr. proctor about it. it was a prototype cigarette that would heat rather than burn tobacco. if you do not burn tobacco you do not produce benzo{a}pyrene. test marketed. consumers did not like it and it went nowhere. but it lowered many of the constituents in cigarettes that were associated with various diseases and carcinogenesis. effort in the 1980s. now, the purpose of punitive damages is to deter future misconduct. you have heard that r.j. reynolds admits that smoking causes disease, including one in this case. you have heard that r.j. reynolds admits that smoking is addictive. you saw the reynolds website as it currently exists. and the days that dr. proctor talked about, but never showed us, examples of sliming, he said, public health authorities. here you have the tobacco company with links on its website telling and telling its customers that they should rely on the conclusions of the u.s. surgeon general, the centers for disease control and other public health and medical officials when making decisions regarding smoking. and if they need to know what that advice is, there are links on its website to all those -- all those sources you see there, including several surgeon general's report, the national cancer institute, the american cancer society and the american heart association. and you heard that reynolds has a database, a document database of all the litigation; documents such as you saw in this case. when this case is over and you are freed from the obligation that judge hulslander pulled on you not to do outside research, when this case is over, you can log on, anybody with the internet, anybody with a computer, and you could read all about anything you want to read about. claude teague, alan rodgman, philip morris, anybody. it is all publicly available on the r.j. reynolds website. no secrets. rjr.com. is this a reckless disregard for human life? is this clear and convincing evidence? i'd argue to you that this record is not one that warrants money damages above and beyond compensatory. punitive damages, i would suggest to you, should not be available in this case. mr. alexander was, by all accounts, a smart man; a smart man who made choices throughout his life. some of those choices were related to smoking. the choice to smoke was made in another era and a time and a place lost to history. he started with chewing tobacco given to him by his parents and he continued to smoke, and made a decision to continue to smoke every time he lit up a cigarette. and he made that decision for 30 years while a warning label cautioned him against the risks of what he was about to do. we should respect those choices. mr. alexander was not a victim during his life. i'd ask you not to make him a victim after his death. now, this is only chance i get to speak to you. the plaintiff has the burden of proof so they get a chance at rebuttal. i have no idea what mr. smith's going to say. but because i cannot respond to him, i would ask one of you to be my advocate in the jury room and respond as i might so we can have everything on the table, everything aired as you decide to make your very important decisions as the finders of fact in this case. once again, thank you for your service. thank you in advance for your work and deliberation in arriving at a verdict. and i guess once we get done here, it is going to be lunch time. thanks a lot.