mr. paige: may it please the court, counsel. good afternoon. i'm going to follow-up on what alex was speaking to you all about, and i'm not going to talk about class membership or the finding anymore. what i'm going to talk about has to do with really the evidence on -- some of the evidence that we put on that has to do with comparative fault, what our client did and how you compare it to what the tobacco companies and lorillard did, but also entitlement to punitive damages. when you award punitive damages in this case, you cannot rely on findings. you have to rely upon the evidence that we submitted to you. that is why i'm going to show you, talk to you about the evidence. but punitive damages is very important in this case. and as you know, it is an important case for lorillard. it is a very important case for dorothy alexander and for you all. you have been here for, you know, a long time. and this is the type of case -- a lot of cases, you know, you serve on a jury, you leave and you go home and you probably forget about it. but hopefully, this case is something that you remember hopefully. there was a lot of important stuff that you all learned, certainly stuff that you learned that coleman alexander could never have known when he was alive. so punitive damages in this case are really important, and they have to do with punishment. that is what they are for, to punish a corporation for doing something that we all know they should not do. when a corporation does something that is wrong, it is egregious, it is horrible, you cannot just pat them on the back and say, it is okay, it is a misunderstanding. they knew what they were doing. they had all the power, they had all the opportunity to do what was right, and they did not care. they did not care about anybody. they did not care about coleman. they did not care about their customers -mr. woods: objection. the court: stick to coleman and this case. go ahead. mr. paige: the other part of the punitive damages has to do with deterrent. it is to punish lorillard. another thing you will hear in the jury instructions is it has to do with deterring. and so corporations -- not just lorillard, but other corporations need to know that it is -mr. woods: objection. the court: overruled. mr. paige: they need to know as a society whether this conduct is acceptable or not acceptable. and you will let lorillard and other corporations know by your verdict that this type of conduct that they engaged in for 50 years is really acceptable, whether we will give them a pat on the back and a free pass and say this is okay or is this the type of conduct that we want to deter and punish and say we do not tolerate this. you do not take advantage of children. you do not take advantage of addicted smokers with a disease and you do not take advantage of the american public just to make money. mr. woods: objection. the court: sustained as it relates to the conduct of lorillard. continue, counsel. mr. paige: so i'm going to talk about that. i'm going to talk about coleman, and i want to say one thing early on, in the case or at some point in the case there was a mention that coleman did not say to dorothy that he wanted to pursue this lawsuit, as he was fighting his cancer. the topic never came up. and i would submit to you that you have an opportunity to see dorothy and to also hear about coleman alexander. and to bring a type of lawsuit like this is not easy. it is not what dorothy is doing. i'm proud of her for bringing this lawsuit. mr. woods: objection. the court: sustained. counsel, move on, please. mr. paige: coleman did not know what we know now. so let us talk about comparative fault first, his conduct, and what percentage of responsibility he bears for what happened here. we have said since day one since, our very first pleading, we have always said that coleman alexander bears some fault. and we have never hid from that, we never ran from that. and that is, you know, that is just a fact and that is the truth and there is nothing we can do to escape that and that is a fact of reality and nobody made him admit that. you know, his faults, his responsibilities were things he did as a kid. there were things he did out of addiction, out of a weakness. and for that, he is willing to or she is willing to accept some responsibility for him. what they did, they do not want to accept any responsibility -mr. woods: objection. the court: sustained. mr. paige: or they have not accepted any responsibility in this case. mr. woods: objection. the court: overruled on that. go ahead. mr. paige: they have not admitted any responsibility. they are going to come up here and tell you coleman alexander bears all responsibility for what happened here. i submit to you that the evidence has been overwhelming that they have to be held accountable for what they did. so -- so this is the standard for negligence. so when you are deciding what did coleman do, how do we assess responsibility for coleman, this is what you look at. what is reasonable care? what would a reasonably careful person do under like circumstances. and the reason i underline under like circumstances is that you have to understand it is not the same. you know, coleman was coleman, and you have to understand what would a kid have done at that time in the '50s and '60s. what would have any addict have done in his 20s, in his 30s when he was being lied to. when you are assessing his responsibilities, how do you compare his fault, the fault of a kid, the fault of an addict, to a corporation, one of the most -- you know, lorillard was the first -- the oldest tobacco company in our country. they are part of the most powerful -mr. woods: objection. the court: overruled go ahead. mr. paige: -- industry in the world. so you have to compare the fault of the two, coleman alexander under like circumstances with what they did. so when you go back in time and you think about when he started smoking in the '50s what did he really do wrong? what was he doing wrong? you know, he did not know anything about what was in cigarettes. you know, they brought in dr. riddel to talk about people had heard that smoking was harmful. we have never denied that. that is not a dispute in this case. i will tell you, i think i told you in opening statement, people have heard that smoking is not good for you. the poll that we put in evidence that dr. riddel did not tell you about, it was like three percent of the people thinking lung cancer, it is not the same as it is now. his friends all said in their depositions they were not making informed decisions back then. they did not know what they know now. so was coleman alexander, when he started smoking as a 14 year old kid, was he really doing anything wrong? did he do anything wrong that he should be held to be accountable, or is this corporation lorillard that had all the power, all the money, all the responsibility -mr. woods: objection. the court: overruled. mr. paige: you know, they talked about a legal product. and it is a legal product, do you know what? but when you have a right to sell a legal product that is as dangerous as what they are selling, is as addictive as what they are selling, that comes with responsibilities. and with rights come responsibilities, and that is not fulfilling your responsibilities with what they did, and that should not be excused. this is the ftc, the federal government, who is an independent party, who is part of the government, is looking at what the cigarette companies were doing. and they know that many youngsters just like coleman alexander, you know, was he acting reasonably under like circumstances. well, many of the youngsters back then considered smoking to be acceptable. many teenagers were taking up that habit, and they did not know, nobody was telling them that they could never stop, that they may never be able to stop. they were not being educated. you are going to see a clip later from the head of the tirc, oh, we never set up any clinics or anything to help smokers quit or anything to educate smokers. now we have that, you know. they have been forced to do that. but when coleman was alive, they did not have any of that. these are all lorillard ads as portraying smoking as fun and glamorous and healthy and a good thing to do. you know, alex told you that 95 percent of teens start at -- 95 percent of addicted smokers start as teenagers, you know, and that is what they want, because if you think about it, if 95 percent -- it really comes down to education mr. alvarez: good morning. the jury: (collectively.) good morning. mr. alvarez: first of all, on behalf of robert philipson, jordan chaikin, gary paige and, most importantly, dorothy alexander, we want to thank you. four weeks is a long time to give up of your lives for this case, and we appreciate that. and one of the things that makes it especially honoring and humbling to me as a lawyer is that the system works because of people like you. this is what makes this country and this civil justice system great. because when i look around and i see people sick -- because i think all of you during the course of the trial, you all, if not everyone, most of you were all sick, but you hung in there for us. it did not go unnoticed and it did not go unappreciated. dorothy alexander has waited 17 years for this day, and she appreciates the manner and the attentiveness in which this jury has afforded her in this case, because all that justice needs is an opportunity. it does not mean a result. justice does not mean a result. justice means a fair opportunity and that is all we wanted. and i think i told you that at the beginning. i said all she wanted was justice, and all that justice means is give me an opportunity to come to court and tell you what my grievances are. and that is what we got and we are happy with that. so let me tell you how we are going to proceed. i'm going to speak first and then mr. paige is going to finish up. then we are going to take a break, mr. cheffy is going to have an opportunity to address you and then i come back at the very end. i have the last word, but it will be very short at the end. so, let me talk to you a little bit about the first part of the case, which is very important. we talked about it, which is addiction. mr. philipson, if you go put on the -- class membership. that is the most key because that is a threshold because if we do not prove that we are a class member, that coleman alexander was a class member, then the case is over and we all go home. okay. but let me tell you what class membership is not about. it is not about fault. it is not about whether he could have, should have or would have quit. that is no at the issue. the question is about whether he was addicted and whether that addiction is the legal cause of his lung cancer and death. it is not about whether it is his fault. that is another question in the verdict form. you are going to have eight questions in the verdict form, okay. and i will suggest to you now we are going to go through them. i'm going to talk about some of them. mr. paige is going to talk about some of them. we suggest that the answer to every single one of them is yes. let us talk about the first one, the class membership is not about fault. it is to determine whether he was addicted and a whether that addiction was the legal cause of his death, and that is what it is. now, we talked about the definition early but i'm going to give it to you again, addiction is a legal cause if directly produces or contributes substantially such loss that but for the addiction the loss would not have occurred. i highlighted the most important things to make it come out for you. so that is the question. now contribute substantially, what does that mean? it means did the addiction play an important role. that is all it means, did it play an important role? but for the addiction, the but for part means but for; if he was not addicted to nicotine would he have smoked one to two packs of cigarettes for 45 years and developed lung cancer? i mean, but for the addiction, would he have done that? so let us apply the facts to the law. okay. and this is the kind of the flow chart that i did initially for you. addiction to nicotine caused him to smoke, causing him to smoke caused the lung cancer, and the lung cancer caused the death. you see, it directly produces or contributes substantially to the loss. i'm putting them together for you so that you see how they flow in a normal order. that is what the legal cause instruction means, okay. now, this is the 2004 surgeon general report. it is in evidence, and this chart kind of mimics the same chart that i just did. look at it. the first chart is nicotine addiction causes you to smoke, there is carcinogens in the smoke which activates the dna adducts and damages then and if they persist they mutate and those mutations cause the cancer. do you see how it is all linked in there and it starts with nicotine addiction, okay. that is what we are talking about. so i'm trying to lay out for you the legal cause argument of why addiction caused his lung cancer and why it causes disease, because they are all linked together. now, there is another thing called concurring cause, and the judge just read it to you, and that means legal cause may not be the only cause. a legal cause even if it operates in combination with the acts of another or some natural cause or some other cause, if such other cause at the same time as the addiction and if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury or damage. so it does not have to be the only cause, okay. it is an important cause, but there could be other causes to that addiction that could cause all these things. and that is the concurring cause, okay. now, this is important because you are going to say, okay, so how do i decide this case, i mean, what is the -- how do i measure something? how do i measure the evidence, you know, because in a criminal case it is beyond a reasonable doubt. i mean, it is a higher standard. it is a different standard, beyond a reasonable doubt. in a civil case the standard is the greater weight of the evidence and that means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case, and just think of it as the scales of justice. everybody's seen the scales of justice. all we have to do is it tilts to one side more than the other and whatever side it tilted to, that is the side that wins, okay. so it has to be 50.0001 percent whoever has proven it that means they have proved it by the greater weight of the evidence. so i do not have to prove that he was addicted and that that addiction was the legal cause of his death beyond a reasonable doubt. we only have to tilt the scale to you every so slightly. but i will tell you by the time i'm done you are going to realize all the evidence that you have heard -- by the way, let me tell you something about all the evidence that you heard through some of the expert testimony that you heard in this case. i just wish you could get college credits for it because sitting here for four weeks and listening to some really, really good experts and getting a great education like i did listening to it was just a terrific experience. it was very, very interesting, and so you got to hear something that very few people get to hear from world-class experts, okay. so, the tobacco industry knew that nicotine was an addictive drug. you know, these documents are in evidence. this document right here happens to be a lorillard document. undoubtedly, nicotine serves as the primary role in cigarette smoking. these are many of these documents from the industry. i believe that for the typical smoker nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire. the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. we cannot defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted, you know. deliver nicotine, a potent drug. we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. this is what they were saying amongst themselves, okay, quietly, they were not telling the public any of this stuff, okay. and this is the surgeon general's conclusion, cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. that was in 1988. nicotine is a drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacological and behavioral process that determined tobacco addiction are similar to those that determined addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. why am i saying this? this is very important because nicotine is the fuel that makes you want to do something in cigarettes. it makes you want to smoke and they knew it, okay. and they downplayed it and they hid it so that people could continue to smoke, okay. now, dr. drobes, we are going to talk about him a little bit but he kind of gave you the scientific explanation was very interesting. within eight seconds of taking a puff it goes into your blood system, goes right to your brain and goes right to your nicotinic or receptors, right, and what does the nicotinic receptors do? it releases dopamine, the happy enzyme, right. you get happy, so you want them. and the more you smoke the more nicotinic receptors you start to build and especially when you are a little kid. when you are a little kid, your brain is starting to develop and when you start to develop more of these nicotinic receptors the harder it is going to be later to quit for you, much, much harder. that is what the science tells us. in fact, when they took an mri of a nonsmoker, and this is the prefrontal cortex between a -- and this is where a lot of nicotinic receptors are. look how it lights up, look at the smokers in the mri lights up showing it is high. you know, this is scientifically valid proven. this is the science. this is state-of-the-art. this is how we know it works, you know. now, we are going to talk about dr. drobes in a minute but let us talk about facts because facts is what drives your decisions. i want you to decide this case on the facts, okay, not on anything i said but on everything you heard from that witness stand and everything you have read, that is what i want you to do, okay. you took an oath, decide this case fairly. that is all we wanted. we gave you the facts. decide the case on the facts. let us talk about those facts. number one, he started smoking at 14 years of age. ninety-five percent of the smokers start as teens. that is not an issue in dispute in this case. the younger you start the more likely you will become a heavy smoker. that is a scientific proven fact, okay. he smoked one to two packs per day for over 40 years. it is in the medical records. it is undisputed testimony. no one's disputing that, okay. he gets 400 hits of nicotine to the brain each day, okay. we know that. he smoked first thing in the morning. after sleeping, you wake up, your body craves the nicotine, okay. what does he do, the first thing, he grabs -- you heard from ms. alexander, he grabs a cigarette pack that is on the night table, walks to the bedroom -- bathroom and he starts to smoke. every day he took two packs -- every day he took two packs of cigarettes with him to work, okay. you know, and this -- this is -- you know we brought you photographs -- and by the way, these photographs were taken, you know, 40 years ago, 30 years ago, 20 years ago, you know, a long, long, long time ago before he even got cancer so no one was staging these photographs, okay. and talk about addiction, talk about someone who changes the way they wear their clothes to adapt to an addiction, okay. the guy would only wear a shirt with a pocket so he could put the pack of cigarettes in there. that is the only thing he wore. if dorothy bought him a nice shirt and it did not have a pocket in it, he would not wear it. here's the other thing, just in case, just in -- he put in another two packs of cigarettes in the car as spares because he did not want something to happen with his cigarettes and he did not have an opportunity to get some, he wanted them. he smoked everywhere. he smoked in the house, in the car at work. long ceremonies and events. let me tell you why this is important. because when he would go to -- when he went to church or he went to ceremony or his daughter's high school graduation, you have got to sit in for a couple hours. i remember my daughter's piano recitals, they were just, you know, three hours long and i was not a smoker but after the first hour and a half i was ready to shoot myself. you know, i'd feel bad because i had two boys and they played baseball and she said, well, you are always at the baseball games watching my brothers play but you never come to my recital. so, you know, i always made it a point to go to the recital to show support for my daughter, you know. so i could imagine -- you could imagine, coleman alexander, proud day in his life, his daughter is graduating from high school and what is the first thing he does as soon as he gets out? he takes a picture with his daughter, right and his son, and what is he holding -- it is in evidence -- what is he holding in his hand? a cigarette. a cigarette. smoke is the last thing before he went -you know, the last thing he did before he went to bed was he smoked. now the cdc, which is the center of disease control, and nida, which is the national institute of drug abuse they say that most regular smokers are addicted. i mean, that is in their literature. it is in there. it is in evidence, you could read it. you know, that is there. the dsm-iv, which is the manual that we are going to talk about in a little while that even their expert, dr. dorce, uses, in there it says -- she disagrees with it and we will talk about that in a little bit -- it says in the manual 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers are addicted. okay. the dsm says african american males are much more susceptible to nicotine addiction than others, and i think this one here is the most telling of all because when this man was in bed, too weak to get up dying of cancer he was saying please give me a cigarette, i want to smoke and he would cry. if that is not addiction, then they should rewrite every single manual in the world because that is addiction. so let us talk about dr. drobes. now, dr. drobes, who is made it his life's work to study this, okay, he is one of the most well respected experts in this area in the world. okay. he ran clinic cessation clinics for thousands of patients, conducted research related to nicotine addiction for the national institute of health. that is huge. the national institute of health, that is the government body. you know, these are the people that help discover, made very important discoveries over the course of history, that is big. nida, the national institute of drug abuse, and the american cancer society, they are asking him to do research on nicotine addiction. he is done peer review author and he is been an editor. he is a professor at the moffitt cancer center. that is in the university of south florida. that is in tampa. he lectures to healthcare professionals on how to diagnose addiction and how to properly use the dsm. he is the guy that teaches the doctors how to use the dsm. he is the guy that teaches them, world class. i mean, look at his demeanor. the first -- listen, the first time this guy's ever stepped foot in a courthouse we have had the honor to see that, okay. this guy's not one of these -- he is not a stable of experts that, you know, we pick up the phone and say, hey, we got ms. alexander's trial, who are we going to call? this guy is a real expert, world renowned. so let me tell you, there is three things he did for us. he defined it. he used the dsm criteria, and once he uses the criteria to say the person's addicted, how bad is his addiction and then he used the fagerstrom to tell you how bad he is. so, he did all three things for us, one, two, three. here's the definition, addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite the harmful consequences. that is the definition by nida, right? mr. -- dr. drobes said he meets this definition. okay. so when we walked him through the criteria -- there is seven, right. those seven, the manual says you only have to meet three. okay. you only have to meet three. he says he probably meets all seven but for sure he meets six out of the seven. the first one is tolerance and withdrawal, not a problem, he meets it. substance is used more or longer than intended. well, he did not intend at 14 that he would be using it for the rest of his life. okay. persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to quit or cut down and stop. he did that. it is in the records. it is in the testimony. great deal of time obtaining using or recovering from the use. listen we are going to do the math in a little while for you guys and we are going to tell you what one and half to two packs a day of smoking how long that takes, okay. this one was a maybe, number six. it says important activities given up or reduced due to substance use, you know, whether he went to, you know, events or church or things that required him to be in a confined place for a very long time, he said well maybe he is not sure about that one, but number seven he was absolutely sure about, substance use continues despite knowledge of the problems. well, look the guy was in bed dying. he knew that smoking caused this and he continued to use it. classic definition. he met the criteria, okay. now, this is the fagerstrom. once you -said, okay, listen maybe this guy is like slightly addictive, right, so let us find out. he used the fagerstrom test. he used the fagerstrom, right. he said he came out between seven and ten so he is either highly dependent or very highly dependent according to the fagerstrom. we did all three, defined it, the criteria and how bad is it. we just did not rely on one. we did all three. okay. interesting fact, okay, it takes ten minutes to smoke cigarettes. there is 20 cigarettes in a pack. coleman smoked between one and a half to two packs per day. that is 300 to 400 minutes a day, that is five to six hours a day smoking. that is a long time. that is a long time addicted. surgeon general of the united states in 1988, he says after careful examination of the available evidence, this report concludes that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. i think we already read this. but it is important to know that this was not until 1988 and you heard from dr. proctor, who is another world-class expert, who made it his professional career to study this area. he was a professor at stanford university. stanford university is like the harvard of the west, okay. it is an ivy league school. actually, he was a professor -- he actually went to harvard and he taught at harvard. this is a world-class expert. he said that the reason it was -- you know, they should have said this earlier and the reason it did not happen until 1988 is because tobacco, the tobacco industry put guys in the committee for the surgeon general report to subdue that information from coming out. so it was not until 1998 (sic) until it finally came out. can you play this for me? (video clip played as follows:) voice: i would say it is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine. our nation has mobilized enormous resources to wage a war on drugs, illicit drugs. we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: addiction is killing more than 300,000 americans a year. that was in 1988 so we know now it is closer to 450,000. and we know that more illnesses are caused by smoking. but listen to what he said. he said: cigarette addiction which is causing more preventable deaths. causing deaths, the surgeon general. they are disputing addiction. they come in here and say he was not addicted, okay. so, all right, so let us go through that evidence because i'm interested in something that is kind of contrary to the facts. so let us take a look what that he said. mr. woods: objection. the court: argument, counsel. overruled. mr. alvarez: dr. dorce, very nice lady, she is a very qualified psychiatrist in certain areas, in certain areas but nicotine addiction does not happen to be one of them. okay. if one of my kids was not feeling -- has problems, i would probably go, seek her help, you know, with adolescent and child psychiatry but nicotine addiction that is -- this is not her area. she is never worked in a smoking cessation clinic. she is never conducted any nicotine research. she is never written anything on nicotine addiction. she is never taught any classes on nicotine addiction, only has a handful of patients she sees primarily for nicotine addiction. before working for the tobacco lawyers, she had very limited knowledge or interest in nicotine addiction. she started doing this because they hired her to do this, not because she was studying this and was a scholar and they said why do not we go to this person who is researched all this information out here and she knows what she is talking about, let us hire her. no, they went and hired her and then got her to say, come in here. so, it is the other way around. that is not what we did. we got the best guys in the world and they came in here and educated you and we are going to talk about what she had to say. it is interesting because every case she has testified for the tobacco company she says that the smoker's illness is not caused by addiction. every single one of the cases that she is testified the opinion is always the same, always the same, no, no no, no, no. so what are her opinions? you know, i listened very carefully because what she says is she does not know if coleman was or was not addicted. i do not know. i cannot tell you one way or another. i do not know, there is not enough information. well, you are an expert, you are supposed to know. is it? i mean, get off the fence, say yes or no, you know. disagrees -- here's the other thing, you know, so when mr. paige, who cross-examined her, says, listen, you know, surgeon general makes some important statements in here, she disagrees with the surgeon general who is a government agency, disagrees with nida, the national institute of drug abuse, another government agency. she disagreed with the center for disease control, another government agency. she disagreed with the american society of addiction medicine, where she is a member. she disagrees with them as well. she disagrees with the american psychiatric association, which she is a member. all these people who are experts in nicotine addiction, okay, who have the world's best scientists who are publishing in this area who knew more about it than her but she disagrees with them. she disagreed -- and the very manual that she uses the dsm-iv that she relies on says, look, i went through this and i do not think -- i do not know, i cannot tell you one way or the other if he meets it or not but she disagrees with the conclusions of the dsm. that is their experts. okay. so, but then she makes some pretty far fetched -- she takes extreme positions because basically when mr. paige said, okay, if i understand you correctly, if someone, if someone smokes five packs a day, works, does not fight with his wife and is able to go on vacation, that person's not addicted. and she says, correct. i mean... then, after awhile, i think she started -- well, this is part of her transcript. this comes from her trial testimony. it says, well, you know, this is mr. paige asking her, you know there is 450,000 people dying a year from nicotine addiction, right? answer: correct. so she finally got an answer from her on this issue, okay. here's the other interesting thing because we have -- remember the legal cause argument, the but for; but for the smoking, he would not have gotten lung cancer and died. look at this. look what she says, okay. this is the question, had there been no nicotine in cigarettes that coleman alexander smoked, do you really think that he would have smoked a pack to two packs a day for 40 years and gone on to get lung cancer and die anyway? answer: i think -- i do not think he would have smoked cigarettes if there were not any nicotine. but for. but for the cigarettes. but for the nicotine. now, here's the other thing she says, which is an extreme position. she says, addiction does not cause a disease, okay. this is a question. i just want to know, it seems like a yes or no answer, in every case that you have given a deposition you came to the same conclusion that an addiction does not cause a disease, right. answer: correct, because i do not believe addiction causes disease. that is an extreme position, and let me tell you why that is an extreme position. that is an extreme position because that is inconsistent with the surgeon general. the surgeon general goes, this is from the 2004 linking, this gives you the link, right, what is the first part of it, nicotine addiction, because without this none of this happens because no one's going to smoke for 40 years two packs of cigarettes a day because there is no -if there is no nicotine in it. if you are not addicted to it, you are not going to smoke, so it does not make sense. so her testimony does not make sense that addiction does not cause a disease. addiction does cause a disease because addiction causes you to smoke and the smoking causes you to have those diseases. okay. and here's the verdict form. okay. this is the first question, was coleman alexander addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death? well, if she is right -- if she is right that addiction does not cause a disease then this is inconsistent. this could never be right. that is why her position is extreme, because if she is right, and addiction can never cause a disease, then that would always be no to everything. that is why it does not make sense. now, i do not want to spend a lot of time on the disease part of it because i think, you know, you all understand -- i do not think there is much dispute that he had small cell lung cancer, and it was biopsied. this is his medical record. he had biopsy proven, small cell carcinoma of the lung. there is the death certificate. it is in evidence. there was metastatic small cell lung cancer to the lung, bilateral, meaning both, and bones, it went to the bones. i do not think there is any dispute. we brought another world-class expert, dr. villa. dr. villa has like six board certifications. he is an oncologist and a pathologist. he is only one of the guys that can look at a slide tell you what kind of cancer it is and treat it. here's a guy who decides, hey, you know what i've done enough. i'm going to work part-time and guess what i'm going to do. i'm going to become president of the liga contra el cancer which is the organization whose sole purpose is to get people who cannot afford -mr. woods: objection. the court: go ahead. overruled. mr. alvarez: -- who cannot afford cancer treatment, free cancer treatment. what is the bias of this gentleman? none. none. okay. he says absolutely this person had small cell lung cancer and that is what caused his death. so very important question because without this question we cannot go forward, okay. so the question is, was coleman alexander addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death? please, we implore you to answer yes to that. and if you do not, that means the verdict is for them on all their claims and, you know, we go home. misleading statements, okay. well, listen, now we are going to get into -- we have four claims. the claims are that they were careless, they were negligent. number two is that the product was defective. number three is that they concealed information. and number four is that they agreed to conceal information. those are the four counts. i'm going to talk about these four counts, i'm going to go through them. mr. paige is going to talk about conspiracy and how that whole -- i'm going to walk you there parts of the verdict form because this is important. look at what is on the tobacco institute. it is april '68. our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding -- i mean, this guy must have been, you know, clairvoyant, you know -subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. i mean, their own documents, you know, they know it. i mean, they know it. and the tobacco institute, you know, lorillard some of their directors and officers, they were board members of that. they were part of that, they knew that. now, this is why it is important, because once you find that he is a class member, these engle findings come into play, okay, and these are important because the engle findings say that lorillard agreed with other tobacco companies, the council for tobacco research -which is the ctr -- and the tobacco institute -the ti -- to conceal or omit information concerning the health effects or addictive natures with the intention, the intention that the smoker and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. that was the whole purpose of doing this -this was the whole purpose in 1953 and going on until 2000, that is what they wanted. they wanted coleman alexander. they wanted people just like coleman alexander to believe their information, for lack of a better word. lorillard concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both, okay. this is the concealment. they concealed. you know, coleman alexander would have loved to have known that filters did not work, okay. coleman alexander would have loved to know that low tar cigarettes were not any healthier for you, right. coleman would have loved to have known every time they came out in the press and newspapers and tv where they said it has not been proven and there was a controversy that they know it is just a lie, coleman alexander would like to have known those facts which are material, okay, and he relied on that. and you heard that from his wife. we are going to talk about that later. the other finding, which is very important which is lorillard was careless. they were negligent. that is like running a stop sign. running a stop sign is careless. you did not mean that. you know, you kind of do something. you know, everybody can be careless, you make a mistake. we are going to talk when that. that is the minimum they were, okay, because these other ones where they concealed, omitted knowing that is worse. that is worse, okay. the fourth one, which is lorillard manufactured cigarettes that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, that is where i told you about that strict liability. if you put a product on the market and you know, you know that it is defective then if somebody's harmed by that product, your responsible for it. that is the law. you do not have to do anything. you have to accept these. you guys took an oath, all of you, to follow the law. this is the law. okay. strict liability. defendant's cigarettes have already been determined as a matter of law to be defective and unreasonably dangerous. let us move past that, okay. the only question is was the defective product the kent cigarettes the legal cause of mr. alexander's lung cancer and death. for that strict claim, which is the most straightforward claim, that is all we have to prove, was he smoking kent and did the smoking of kents cause his lung cancer. that is it, and we win on that claim. and that is the definition, legal cause, it is the same whether it is for addiction. all they do is change the word addiction and put defect or they will put negligence or they will put -you know, legal cause is a basic concept that is constant with all four claims, okay. legal cause if directly produces or contributes substantially such loss -- that said but for the defect, but for the kents, but for him smoking the kents would he have gotten lung cancer and died. okay. contribute substantially, did the defect play an important role, we talked about that. okay. so let us apply the facts to the law. smoking directly produced the lung cancer, villa's testimony, no one disputed that, caused the lung cancer, caused his death. if he had not smoked two packs of cigarettes a day for 37 years, which is 1958 when he started smoking kents, he would not have gotten his lung cancer which resulted in his death and that is what dr. villa said. now, lorillard tobacco company and tobacco manufacturers misled the public about the filters, safety and kent cigarettes. well, this is important because look how they -- you know, there is a reason this guy smoked kent for 37 years. there is a reason he did that. okay. the reason he did that is because lorillard told them it was a safer cigarette. it makes sense -- this is their -- it makes good sense to smoke kent. kent has reduced tar and nicotine to the lowest levels among all leading brands. kent's filters are the best. okay. the corporate representative, their research and development guy says you cannot say that low yielding cigarettes are any safer than regular or high yield cigarettes. okay. you know, now that we talked about mr. robinson, i want to go back to him because i wrote some notes while i was listening to him. let me tell you some of the interesting things he said. i found his testimony of all the things that i heard in this trial the most interesting. look what this guy said. he said that when they did their own internal mice painting studies, okay, that the filtered cigarettes like winston and unfiltered cigarettes like pall mall, the same amount of tumors were being grown on the mice. so there is no difference from the filters. that is why they are defective and that is an illusion because the filters did nothing. in fact, he said that the kents were not less carcinogenic, meaning producing cancer, than the winston or the pall malls. in fact, he said, he said, he said, more formations of tumors with the lorillard brands, the kents were seventy percent got more tumors. okay. the other thing that they said was interesting is they did not disclose the ingredients to the u.s. government until 1986, all right, and it was not in the public until