1 mr. smith: good afternoon. first of all, let me say on behalf of everybody, ms. earline alexander, everyone else who is participated in this case, thank you for your jury service. second of all, i want to tell you that i've been doing this a long time and this is the first time in which i can say a jury has literally lived climactically through an entire year in four days. monday was summer and today is winter. between them we had spring and fall. it has been cold in here and you have hot in here and in between, and you have been attentive and you have listened carefully, and everyone on both sides appreciates it dramatically. a little over a week ago i stood before you and i told you what this case would be about, that we would really be turning the light on some things that all of you have learned in the last few weeks that most americans do not know, and that is what really went on in the tobacco industry for the last 50 years. but before i go to that, i want to go back and kind of go to where we started, and that is to explain, as the court has just instructed you, this is what is known as an engle progeny case. and by now you all know that term in a way you never knew when you came into this courtroom. and an engle progeny case means that, as it relates to mrs. alexander, we have to determine, the first thing, whether or not her husband, john paul alexander, is a member of the engle class. and if he is a member of the engle class, as you have been instructed and we will go over again, then certain things cover him and apply to his case and answer a great number of questions in this case. the court: mr. smith, let me ask you -- can you see past the -- a juror: no, your honor. the court: they cannot see you. mr. smith: they cannot? the court: if you want them to see that, you go to move that. mr. smith: yeah. i'll move this this way, then. i was trying to keep it on the other side. all right. how is that? better? okay. thank you. the court: go ahead. mr. smith: so what do we have to do to establish the engle class? well, there are several things we told you in the beginning that you would have to decide, and they are really not going to have to be decided now. first of all, it is been stipulated that he was a resident and citizen. it has also been stipulated that r.j. reynolds is -- produces the only product that harmed him in this case. cigarettes contain nicotine. you remember that stipulation. and that brown & williamson, american tobacco, all the brands that you have heard about, the brands that caused his death, or the brands that caused harm, if harm was caused, as the stipulation would be, were all r.j. reynolds'. so that is not before you. and, finally, that he died of copd caused by smoking. that is not in question. their expert and our expert and the stipulation has been that that is all been taken care of. so we really are down to just one additional qualification to put him in to the protections and to give him the benefit of that class that was established by the florida supreme court based on a trial that was conducted many years ago, and that is was he addicted to cigarettes. because if he was addicted, we do not have to prove that nicotine is addictive. because if he was addicted, we know that nicotine is addictive because it is stipulated to and it is been ruled upon. so what do we have to prove? that he was addicted. and how do we do that? well, first of all, i told you and the court has already instructed you that your greatest tool is your common sense and experience. this is a man who the evidence shows in this case, pretty much uncontroverted evidence, that sometime before he was 13, when we know he was smoking, and as early as eight, that we know when he was talking to his daughter in the later months, the last years of his life, he said, i've been smoking since i was eight years old. but we know that between eight and 13 years old in raiford, florida, this was a man who started smoking cigarettes. we know that by the time he was 14 years old he was a regular smoker, and we know that from the testimony of mattie davis, who was then his -- when he was 16 and she was 16 they got married in raiford. we know that he smoked without ever ceasing smoking from what would have been 1941 or '42 until sometime after 1996. those facts are not in controversy. we know from medical records and we know from the testimony of the witnesses who put it together that he smoked an average of -- i think one of the -- one of them says one-and-a-half to three packs; one of them says two packs. he is got testimony of people saying he smoked one-and-a-half packs. we know that he was, quote, a heavy smoker. we know that not because of the evidence we have contended; we know that their expert, their doctor, when asked by mr. avera, was he a heavy smoker, said, yes, he was a heavy smoker. we know that. we know that he had a habit of smoking and it pretty well followed. he smoked when he first got up in the morning. there was testimony from his daughter jeanette that when he would get up and go to the bathroom in the morning, he would get a cigarette. we know that he smoked at his breakfast table. we know that he smoked when he went to work because we have people who have known him and worked with him in the past. we know that he smoked all day, and we know that he smoked when he came home at night. we know from the evidence in this case that he oftentimes lit one cigarette from the cigarette he was just finishing smoking. we know that when he got home at night he smoked. we know the ashtrays in the house remained full. we know that he smoked until he went to bed now. we know he smoked in the house; we know he smoked in the car. we know he smoked at breakfast; we know he smoked at night. we know that, in fact, and it is uncontroverted, that he got up during the night and would smoke a cigarette. that is how much this man smoked. i submit to you that we will probably never see -- the medical records show that he had a 60-plus pack year of smoking, pack years meaning that is a measure that they give for smokers. that is an incredible number. but the truth of the case -- of the matter is that he actually probably had something more like a 90- to 100-pack year smoking history in his life, a number we probably will never see again. we know that he was, in fact, in 1996 -- had a stroke. in 1996 when he went to the hospital he saw two doctors, first in -- i think the first was one at the end of december; he later sees one in early january, dr. connor and dr. melvin. and you remember what was put up on the board before you. and i want you to remember this, folks. at that time there was not any litigation, there was not any class being discussed, there was not any membership being discussed. this were -- these were two doctors who were analyzing and diagnosing their patient. and they diagnosed their patient under the international code 305.1, which both sides have agreed was nicotine dependence. so before anybody had a lawyer and started talking about a lawsuit, the medical treatment and medical history -- your common sense would show you a man smoked that long was nicotine-dependent. but, more importantly, the doctors who treated him at the time said he was nicotine-dependent. we know that we produced expert testimony from dr. tonia werner. and dr. werner opined to you that, yes, he was cigarette-addicted; yes, it does not mean he loses all control; but it is -- as dr. burns said in the first testimony that was played to you, it is, in fact, something that makes it untrue to say that someone is now smoking of their own free will. that is untrue according to dr. burns and untrue according to tonia werner, in the sense that you can stop, but it is a barrier to that ever happening. we know that even after he was treated and told by a doctor, according to his daughter, that, if you do not quit smoking, it is going to kill you. he went home and he took his doral cigarettes and put them up, and we know that even after he had been on a respirator she caught him smoking, because he continued to smoke even when facing death. we know all that. that is the case for addiction. and what is their response to that? they bring in one expert who says, i do not believe he is addicted. this is an expert, dr. myers -- i want you to remember the following. this is an expert who, 22 years after the surgeon general of the united states defined for this nation what addiction was, he still does not agree with it. this is an expert who gave an opinion that is inconsistent with the position taken by his current hospital group that he works for and inconsistent with the prior university that he worked for. this is a man who said -- and i -- i want you to know i'm going to give the facts as i remember them, but you remember them yourselves, but i know you will remember this. this is a man who said he did not consider a chain smoker or a heavy smoker somebody who smoked, you know, two packs a day. he was not even willing to say that a person would be addicted, when he was asked by mr. avera, well, what if they smoked six packs a day? well, they could be. not necessarily. ladies and gentlemen, the weight of the evidence, based on your common sense, the medical history of the patient, what you have observed and what you have heard from the witnesses, is that this was a man who is been smoking for more than 60 years at the time he became ill and even then could not stop. that is an addiction. under the dsm criteria he was addicted. that is the finding. that is the finding, we submit, you must make. now, if that happens and when that happens, we then go the engle criteria. the engle criteria, which has been explained to you, but i want to go over a couple of them -- blow them up, just, please. the first one you know, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. that is all he had. that is what killed him. nobody questions it. that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, we know that. even without that instruction, you have heard evidence of that and nobody controverts it today. although that is today. we will show in a few minutes that for 50 years they knew it was addictive and they denied it, even under oath to the united states congress as late as 1994, that r.j. reynolds and the other tobacco conspirators denied what they knew was the truth. number 3, that the defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. now, for us to prevail, what we have to show is that the fact that they put a cigarette on the market that was defective -- defective? we do not know the manner, as someone's suggested. yes, what we do know is it is been found it was defective and unreasonably dangerous. because of engle, we do not have to prove the defect, but you heard from dr. proctor early that there were thousands of carcinogens that have been identified. there have been -- there is rayfield activity that is been identified. there is tar that is been known about in levels which we know cause cancer and other lung-related diseases, and we know that they have never -- really never effectively been removed. we know that filters were a fraud. we know that light cigarettes were actually a boon because you got the benefit of selling the light cigarette with the nicotine so that people would actually consume more nicotine -- more cigarettes to get more nicotine. and we know that low-tar cigarettes have not proven to be more safe as it relates especially to copd. those facts are known. now, someone said, well, what do you mean by defective and unreasonably dangerous? what about -- well, let me give you an example. if you are driving down the road and the brakes do not work, your car has got a defect. it is unreasonably dangerous. and nobody would question if somebody put the brake in or if they knew that the brake was put in wrong or that they knew the brake did not work or they knew the speedometer -- excuse me, the accelerator stuck, it would be defective and dangerous. the defective and dangerous cigarette killed him. and how do we know that? because their own expert says he died of copd caused by smoking. it is what was in the smoke that caused the copd that killed him. that the -- that the defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or made -- or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature. we will get to those. i'll remind you of some of the false and misleading things they have done. but remember this. you have heard the instruction. they are going to get up and say, but you have got to show that that is what -- what you have to show is that if he had knowledge, it was less than they had. and if their concealment of information was less than what he -- what was concealed and what he knew was less than what they concealed and what they knew, if he did not know of the material information and they did, then that is causation. that the defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. the supreme court has found that if he is a member of this class, you may now apply the law that says they did it and they intended to do it for the purpose of making sure that people would rely on the information to their detriment, that they misled the public and they intended for the public to be misled, and that people just like john paul alexander, and we will show you john paul alexander, were victims of that concealment. and, again, the question you will read and was read to you is: did he have less information than they had? and of course he did. that all of the defendants sold and supplied cigarettes that were defective. in this case it is only rjr that matters. and that all of the defendants were negligent. they were negligent in how they produced the cigarette. they were negligent in what they did not disclose. it has been determined they were negligent. and if you find that that negligence, failing to disclose information, failing to improve the cigarette, failing -- whatever that negligence was, if that negligence was a cause of a defective cigarette, was a cause of the danger, was a cause of misleading, then that is a cause of his injury. ladies and gentlemen, i want to go very briefly back and remind you of some of the things that i think are important. but before i go there, very quickly, we have an issue in this case called the statute of limitations. now, the difference on the statute of limitations is, they are saying, okay. smoking killed him, and -- smoking killed him, our cigarettes killed him and caused copd, but he knew or he should have known that -- and, by the way, it is not going to be -- read the instruction given. it says that he knew he had copd or he reasonably should have known -- not could have known, should have known -- he had copd caused by smoking. now, that is an interesting argument for them to make, because, remember, in 1990 r.j. reynolds was still denying publicly that copd was caused by cigarette smoking. but they want you to think that this man, who their own expert says -- their own expert yesterday says did not know about copd or emphysema or chronic bronchitis till sometime in '96, because how would he have otherwise known it? we are talking about a man who maybe had a fifth-grade education, maybe read at a third-grade level, who was diagnosed as unable to read, at least on one of his times being put in the hospital. they say that that man should have known that he had copd, even though they -- there is nothing to suggest that he knew what copd or emphysema or chronic bronchitis even was. they say, yeah, but he had a cough. well, according to the witnesses he is had a cough on and off throughout his life for some -- from the 1950s, and according to the expert testimony that you heard in the beginning about "of all people who have a cough, only twenty percent ever develop a lung disease." so, consequently, that would not have told him that there was any change in his life. but let us go to what the facts are that we know as to the condition he was in according to the evidence in this case. go to fayson, please. you heard from mr. fayson. this is mr. fayson's testimony. "how often did you work -- how often did you work with him, fix cars, in the '90s?" "about three days a week sometimes. sometimes he just came to pick me up at home." "and, once again, how did you get transportation to the job?" "down to the job?" "yeah." "mr. paul took me." "and earlier than the '90s had you at times worked with him?" "earlier -- early in the '90s?" "earlier than the 1990s." "he taught me how to fix cars. that is it. you know, something wrong with my car, i could ask him." "did you observe him smoke cigarettes?" "yes." "did you happen to know the brand?" "salem." "okay. do you know how much he smoked?" go to the next section, please, and then cut down to here. "now, was he able to do the work fixing cars in the '90s?" "well, until he got sick about '95, as i know of." "before that did you ever notice him not being able to do his job?" "no." "did he ever complain to you that he was sick?" "no." "did he ever say anything about being sick?" "no." go to mr. hines, please. you heard from jack hines. now, these are not people are not family. they are not -- these are people that were his friends a long time ago or his co-workers. "did he ever complain to you" -- you know, mr. hines is the one they say, well, he noticed he was short of breath one time at the back fence. that is their evidence. "did he ever complain to you about being short of breath?" "no, sir." "when he would work, how would you describe the kind of work he was doing?" "he was working on sometimes engines and tune-ups, a timing change. he kept working tirelessly. he always worked." "and do you recall visiting him, seeing him working on cars, after 1990?" "yes, sir." 19 "how would you describe his energy level?" go to the next section. "were you able to watch him do work from time to time?" "yes." "and were you able to talk with him and watch him walk and talk from time to time?" "yes, sir." "even in the early '90s, how would you describe that he appeared in terms of his energy?" answer: "he had high energy." go to mr. carnegie, please. "when you saw him after you had returned from the military, other than adjusting for age, how did his health appear to you?" "i'd say he was very ill -- very well, but he had slowed down a little bit. he was not moving as fast. he slowed down." "it had been 20-something years by then, right?" "yes." go on. "did you ever observe -- do you remember observing him at any time you saw him coughing?" "somewhere -- it was back during the time when i got back. he was with duncan back there in the house. he had a cough and his voice had changed a little bit." "did you notice him in any other way being ill?" "no." "did you notice it affected his ability to do work?" "no, it did not." "did he ever comment to you that he was not feeling well?" "no." now, since that is the evidence you have in front of you, that in the 1990s he was working, but we have their expert, who if you remember yesterday when i read his testimony, their expert, dr. stueck -- depo, please. dr. stueck, when he was preparing his testimony, he called him -- this is his -- what he said. "in the past i think you have" -- question -- "actually have" -- well, before i do that, sorry. i left a thought. "on mr. carnegie, the fact that he -- 'he' meaning john alexander -- was quite successful as a mechanic, what importance was that to you?" "by quite successful i mean successful in the expectations we would have for someone doing that" -- go on. -- "kind of work. well, he was a person of some intelligence, some -- he was put in somewhat of a managerial position. he was a person of some responsibility." i'll go down. "he essen- -- yeah, i think that if you combine what carnegie says to the fact that after he left his last job with the service station he essentially opened up his own business in his yard, which was auto mechanic, it shows considerable well-skilled, initiative, you know, entrepreneurial, i suppose, ambition. "part of my reaction to the carnegie deposition was in combination with the other information about his, in effect, having his own business there in, what was it, the late '80s or the early '90s about his home." we know that he worked for -- one of the last gas stations he worked for in the late '80s was napoleon filer. we asked mr. filer, "did he ever complain about being sick?" "no." "how did he work?" "energetic, high energy." "did you ever know him to be sick and unable to do a job?" "no." what did mr. filer say about him? mr. filer said, "i did not know he was sick until i learned he was sick after i went by to see him. i never knew he was sick." that is the evidence in this case. and on that, when no one was around him -- you know, think about it. r.j. reynolds has taken everybody's deposition they could find, every family member they could find, anything they could find. and you know what? they never got the silver bullet. not one person has ever said that man, before 1996 said, i do not feel well. we know we have the records in 1996. you will note they want you to speculate, well, yeah, but there is some -- some history of copd. nothing that we know of. we never found it. we do know this, that no one has ever said, certainly before 1990, that this man was sick, looked sick, acted sick or said he was sick. it is a false issue. and it is their burden of proof on that issue. i want to go very quickly to some other issues in the case. first of all, i want to talk about -- we talked about, and you heard dr. proctor and you saw dr. proctor and you heard dr. kyriakoudes. you have heard it at length about 1953, tobacco was in a panic, they had a meeting in new york, and here's what they said. 37, please. they got with the research directors -- go to the next page, please. they got to the research directors, and what is the first thing the first research directors -- of the four research directors they interviewed for hill & knowlton, the top pr firm, they said -- one of the men said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." that is the first thing said after they got together. what do we know happened next? well, we know that they started coming up with reasons -- go to the next highlighted section, please. go to the next -- next document, i think 39, please. video tech operator: 39? mr. smith: 39. we know this. we know that in february of 1953 -- go to the highlighted section. in february of 1953 claude teague -- and, by the way, he was not a man, as it was suggested, with a typewriter and a file and an idea. he was a man that, if you remember the documents, he rose to some level towards vice president. we know this, that he was with the company for some 30 years, because we have got documentation of him -- of his communications and research over a 30-year period of time. and we know that -- even before they met in 1953, we know that they knew there was an etiological likelihood of lung cancer caused by cigarettes. that is before they got together. that is before the wynder report really had hit the news. go to the next document, please, number... oh, i want to switch gears for just one second. i want to go back and talk about something else about the tobacco companies. we know that their strategy was, from 1953 on, to create a false controversy, to create a sense of doubt. and we know from the experts, dr. stueck, and we even know from the expert dr. truncale that they had people in the 1980s, they had people in the 1990s saying things that they were not -- that were not true. now, what do we know they were about? well, let us talk a little bit about the issue of -- go to number 40, please. number 40. this is one of the first things they came up with. this is literally a couple days after the meeting. this is just an example of many, many that we put in and many that were heard in engle. this is an example. claude teague, in one of his first jobs, ideas is, well, i've got an idea. have you noticed when people look at cigarette filter tips, if it turns colors they tend to think it filters out things? "while the use of such color change material would probably have little or no effect on the actual efficiency of the filter tip material, the advertising and sales advantages are obvious." that is what their thinking was right away. and how do we know that the filter tip was false? because we know that in 1957 there were hearings in front of the united states congress resulting in the 1958 false advertising document that you have in here in which the united states congress said they have been making false health claims for years, and on the filter tip they are -- americans are buying into this and it is a false claim. and they actually criticized the ftc for not being more aggressive. 3007 i asked dr. stueck, do not they -- did not they even have, before 1957, a long history of false and misleading advertising? and their expert said, yes, based on what he had observed, they did have a long history of making false health claims about their product. go to the next document, which is number 92, please. and it worked. what happened? 1957 -- 1956, sales went up. they went up all the way through 1964 without a bleep. they increased at record levels. and why? because they advertised and they targeted their advertising. and what were the companies back then? lucky strike, camel, pall mall. those were the three that were the most advertised. those were the three that led in sales. and those were the three that were smoked by mr. alexander. but we know some other things that came out during that time period. we know that they lied about addiction. go to document number 136, please. 1959, a study, 1959, by philip morris, internal -- one of the co-conspirators in this case, as you know. next page, please. study on the reasons people smoke. addiction. their words. then jumped up and said, well, what -- let us go to a philip morris document, 1959, document number 138. go to the highlighted section, please. what did mr. rodgman for r.j. reynolds say, 1959? "the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco." 163, please. next highlighted section, please. this is tobacco. this is a brown & williamson document. this is in 1961. "smoking demonstrably is a habit based on a combination of psychological and physiological pleasure, and it also has strong indications of being an addiction. it differs in important features from addiction to other alkaloid drugs, but yet there are sufficient similarities to justify stating that smokers are nicotine addicts." next -- and go to 4- -- to 489, please. years later, a study for rjr, "realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market." and guess what? they wanted to tailor a cigarette to the youth market. next highlighted section. "in contrast, once that learning period is over, the physical effects become of overriding importance and desirability to the confirmed smoker and the psychological effects, except the tension-relieving effects, largely wane." in other words, they start smoking for the psychology of it, but we get them hooked on the physiology of it and then we have them. and what did they say? all of these years they know -- go to -- i think it is 538, please. 538. this is a document much later. question comes up. man writes a letter, said, i'm particularly interested in knowing if nicotine has any habit-forming properties. and what is the answer? go to the next section, please. next section, please. alan rodman, rjr. "the two questions" -- this is about nicotine addiction -- "are answerable, but briefly, i doubt whether we at rjr want to be on the record with the answers." that is what the american people were getting from tobacco companies. and how long did they keep it up? go to 976, please. how long, after all they knew? 1994, united states congress. after all the addiction materials that you have seen in the internal documents that they never released to the public, this is what they still said: (videotape was played:) representative wyden: "let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. "do you believe nicotine is not addictive." mr. campbell: "i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes." representative wyden: "mr. johnston?" mr. j. johnston: "mr. congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication." representative wyden: "we will take that as a 'no.' and, again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe is nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have" -- (videotape was stopped.) mr. smith: and every one of them said it. you heard it. no. after all the documents going back at least to 1959, they still could not tell the truth to the american public about the addiction to their product. and you know we know -- we know that the tirc was a public relations gesture -- 215, please. we know that the tirc was a public relations gesture because, well, this strictly private and confidential document -- go to the next page, please. "the tirc cannot, in my opinion, provide the vehicle for such research. it was conceived as a public relations gesture, however undefiled the scientific advisory board and its grants may be." this is a year before the '64 surgeon general's report. "it has functioned as a public relations operation. however -- moreover, its organization, certainly in its present form, does not allow the breadth of research -- cancer, emphysema, et cetera -- essential to the protection of" -- not the american public -- "the tobacco industry." go to the next section, please. next section, please. and then -- back. right there. and then they say, you know, good things, bad things. there is a problem. moreover, nicotine is addictive. then they say, then there are some side problems, and i think they have certain unattractive side effects. they may true -- well be truly causative in emphysema, et cetera. what they know, they knew it in 1963, before the first surgeon general's report. they knew it may truly well be a cause of emphysema. in 1984 the surgeon general issued a copd surgeon general's report. it said absolutely copd was caused by smoking. and what did the industry say? well, their -- their president got on and said, and the industry said through their documents, which we had dr. stueck read -- we had dr. stueck read it, and he said it is misleading when they said that copd had not yet been confirmed. it had long been confirmed, but they continued to deny it. the only time they did not want to deny the link would be, well, now, when they want to say, we were denying it in the '80s, but mr. alexander should have known. we know that they targeted kids. go to 474, please. top of the page, please. we know they targeted children. we know that they let -- that they -- 518, please. 1975. "our paramount objective in '75 is to reestablish our share of the marketing growth." you saw the documents when they were worried about marlboro taking their share of the 14-to-20-year-old market. that was in '75, '76 and '77. we know that they let their legal department override their scientists. 611, please. you remember this. doctor -- they wanted to do research. legal said, no, we cannot do research. we asked what is mutagenicity? mutagenicity's the study of cancer. go to 612, please. so the doctor, he -- he, frankly, wanted to do the research. what happened? "in accordance with legal's wishes -- wishes and reasons, permission to examine the mutagenicity of smoke condensate fractions and denicotinized tobacco smoke condensate is refused." legal ran the research department. go to 1322, please. and this is my favorite. this is their -- their in-house counsel writing to their general counsel about their new head of research. now, you remember they said, but we did the mutagenicity studies. well, wait a second. in 1982 dr. demarco had a meeting with the in-house counsel, who is writing his boss, the general counsel, mr. witt. drop down, please. "during his law department orientation he said that he thinks it is essential for r&d to work on the development of a less mutagenic cigarette." but they come back and they say, we cannot do that, because that would mean we were admitting -- by saying that we were working on a less mutagenic, we would be admitting that there was a mutagen, and we cannot do that. "he seemed to" -- "he seemed to understand our concern, but refused it -- to accept it as a rationale for not doing what he felt we had an obligation to do as a responsible manufacturer." next section, please. "during his orientation he stated he wanted to spend more time talking to us about the state of the art on cancer. he said that in his view the state of the art has developed over the past 20 years to the point where he thought our legal defense was or near perilously close to obsolete." that means that he knew as early as -- certainly since '62, but by '82 they knew that their position on the harmfulness of their cigarettes was obsolete. but did it change? no. next section, please. and then my favorite. and i want you to remember this as tobacco talks about experts they have presented again. "he also said, though i cannot recall exact words, that our medical scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lack credibility and integrity." that is one lawyer to another lawyer in a memo they thought we would never see. we know that they also targeted african american smokers. we know that they targeted them for menthol cigarettes. we know they targeted them for menthol cigarettes in the following way. 599, please. go to the highlighted section, please. salem was in competition with kool. and what were they in competition for? they were about the menthol brand. next highlight, please. black market, market importance. "the black market comprises 9.6 percent of total volume." they were talking about targeting the black market. go to the next section, please. they are talking about salem and kool fighting for market share. 18 next section, please. and then they were talking -- go on to the next section, please. and how did that battle go forward? 644, please. video tech operator: there is no 644. mr. smith: i'm sorry. 1349, please. the black menthol cigarette market. "kool's success in the black market started in the mid-'60s, was responsible for the brand, eventually catching up with then passing salem in volume share in 1972." you heard the testimony. menthol cigarettes were aimed at black smokers. they marketed to black smokers who did not read well. they did it by going into grocery stores, gas stations, liquor stores. go to the next section, please. that is where they saw the growth. "of particular significance is the fact that salem's black market growth between '76 and '78 came largely from its lights spin-off." next section, please. next section, please. they identified the market they were after, functionally illiterate african americans. next section, please. they function -- they said, we know that they buy in small groceries, service stations, liquor stores and vending machines, and they devised a strategy -- next section, please -- to go after that market, and they said, we know menthol cigarettes are more popular with blacks than the general smoking public. next section, please. more than a fifth of all -- of all black adults, fifty percent of black smokers, smoke menthol cigarettes. next section, please. and why did they -- did they sell black -- and what was part of their message? "before the introduction of lights, black menthol smokers to a greater degree than their white counterparts believed menthol cigarettes were less hazardous, irritating, than other cigarettes." as a matter of fact, that is why they thought they were doing so well. and they marketed to them, and guess what? j.p. alexander switched in the mid- to late '60s to what? menthol cigarettes. he continued to smoke menthol cigarettes during the entire period in which they targeted people who absolutely met his demographic. and they targeted them knowing that part of the belief was that they assumed that they were less hazardous or irritating. but, in fact, the real effect was, as we know -- and this we have heard from the evidence -- that they caused significant health problems. you know, very quickly, i'd like to go to 697. this is one of my favorite documents. i hope you will remember it. next section, please. this is a -- one of the tobacco institute people talking to another guy in the tobacco institute, and he realized he missed a meeting where they started talking about how addictive -- the addictive nature of their product. and he said, "but i do not think the questions i now raise are academic." shook hardy. that was the law firm representing tobacco in those days. "i am told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon of a prosecuting -- a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." that is what is the tobacco institute was saying to the tobacco institute. but today they will stand here, a challenge. they will stand here today and say, it is free choice, free will -- mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. mr. smith: -- addiction does not matter. mr. kaczynski: may we approach? (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. kaczynski: your honor, i object to any inference, and it was more than an inference, to my client's defense of these cases as part of something continuing toward us saying it is free choice at this point. my argument is that this is just a continuation of what those documents show. it is improper. mr. smith: i do not think it is improper. mr. kaczynski: it is grossly improper. and i'm not moving for a mistrial now, but if it continues i will. mr. smith: it is not improper. all i'm saying -- the court: i understand your contention is it is improper because of what? mr. kaczynski: because what he is saying that in defense of this case it was mr. alexander's choice to smoke is part and parcel of some conspiracy that takes them back into these documents that the defense of this case is somehow tortious. mr. smith: i disagree with that. the court: defense of the case is somehow tortious? mr. smith: i have not charged that, but i have said that is what they knew back then and that is what they will say now, even now. mr. kaczynski: then i rest my case. mr. smith: it is not inappropriate. the court: i do not think it is inappropriate, mr. kaczynski. mr. kaczynski: okay, your honor. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:) the court: mr. smith, you have consumed 40 minutes. i do not know if you want -- mr. smith: i've got five more minutes of my part, and then i'll be turning it over to my partner. i want to go to -- well, i'm going to leave out the verdict form part, because time passes so fast. you know, i want to tell you that perhaps the best measure of how truthful r.j. reynolds has been with the american people -- now, we know this. we know that -- anne browder got on and said, we do not pay for movie placement. you saw the contracts for -- we just picked one, sylvester stallone. we know that they came off of television in 1971 because they did not like the access problem they had because of the fairness doctrine. we know that they doubled their advertising and promotion budget after they went on television, that they became the greatest point of purchaser -- marketer in the history of the world. we know that. we know, and it is uncontroverted, that, actually, it even affected john paul alexander in one way. do you remember mr. carnegie saying, you know, i do remember something. they used to bring these posters by. and i put a poster up and this guy had this hat and he had this cigarette, and i used to say, that is why you smoke, because you look like that guy, and he thought that guy looked cool. remember that? that is the testimony of mr. carnegie. that is what happened everywhere. you do not have to read well to see an image and for that image to work with you. go to 8- -- 688, please. we know under 688 in 1980 the then president, mr. horrigan, was getting a memo. he was real worried because they were losing their market share of those critical 14-to-17-year-olds. marlboro man was beating them. but when he was asked on television, on nightline -- 820, please. when he was asked about whether or not they supported cigarette smoking by minors, this is what he says: (videotape was played:) ted koppel: "joining us live now from station wfmy in winston-salem, north carolina, is edward horrigan, jr., chairman of the board of the r.j. reynolds tobacco company. "cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?" mr. horrigan: "it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer." ted koppel: "all right, sir." mr. horrigan: "it has not been causally established." ted koppel: "cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?" mr. horrigan: "despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established." ted koppel: "well, i admire your honesty for telling me that you do not smoke, but what i'm asking, though, i guess, is let us give your position the benefit of the doubt for a moment and say that there is still some doubt. and i must say that successive surgeons general for the past 20 years would disagree with that, but let us do that. if there is doubt, should we not be leading our children in the direction of not smoking?" mr. horrigan: "yes. in fact, as far as we -- when i say yes, the cigarette industry's position is that young people should not smoke. and" -- (videotape was stopped.) mr. smith: stop. but they were worried about that 14-to-17-year-old market share they were losing. that is how honest they have been with the american people. and by the way, did you hear him say in 1984 on national tv it is not been linked to emphysema? but they charge that this man should have known in the 1980s. ladies and gentlemen, my time runs short. i'm going to turn this over to my partner. but i want you to remember this, that they have spent 50 years lying about addiction, lying about the hazardousness of smoking, lying about every disease. they have opposed every surgeon general's report, every one. you have heard them. you watched them. every time the ftc would come out with a report, including a report that said -- and remember the ftc report. that is document 758. how many tens of millions of people in the '80s still did not know how dangerous cigarette smoking was? how many tens of millions of people into the '80s did not understand that chronic bronchitis and emphysema were caused almost exclusively by cigarette smoking? and 34 to 39 percent of the people had no idea that they would cause any cases of chronic bronchitis or emphysema. ladies and gentlemen, this is a conspiracy. it was done intentionally. they had the knowledge. they could have done other things. they could have made a safer product, but it would not give them the profit they wanted. they could have stopped the production and come up with something that would have worked for them, but it would have cost them profit. they could have told the truth to the american people, but it would have cost them profit. so they lied. and this man was in that class of people that was hurt because of what they did, the way they created the cigarette, how they marketed the cigarette, how they pushed their cigarette, and what it did to him in a horrible death that he suffered. my partner will talk about the damages that have been suffered in this case. thank you, your honor. mr. avera: earline alexander was born in the beginning of the great depression. she is 82 years old today. she has no education. she has never seen the inside of a classroom her entire life and has never seen the inside of a courthouse, much less a courtroom, since stepping into this building last week. she is worked her entire life. she has very little but her worth and her integrity. 10 she has not lied to american families about the dangers of smoking. she has not, on the one hand, spent hundreds of millions of dollars marketing and advertising to american families to smoke a cigarette the tobacco industry knew would kill its customers, all at the same time they were whispering out the other side of their mouth, just keep smoking. just keep smoking, folks. if there is anything harmful in it, we will take it out. trust us on that. we will take it out. she has not smeared or belittled reputable scientists and medical doctors in their field of specialty whose only endeavor was to seek out the truth and the relationship between smoking and diseases, emphysema, copd, lung cancer, many others. she has never sought to create a controversy where really none existed. she has only tried to do what is right in her life, work hard, pay her bills, doing what is right, knowing the difference between right and wrong. doing what is right is a claim that r.j. reynolds corporation will never be able to utter, think or place on a piece of paper because of its conduct during the last half of the 20th century. earline alexander has only worked hard and was there to be the caring wife for paul alexander during those last three years when he so desperately needed comfort and attention, when copd slowly robbed him of his breath and took his life, during those three years when he needed her for better or for worse, the words have meant something to earline alexander. paul alexander was simply a customer of r.j. reynolds. he was taken from earline by copd, a horrible disease, practically unheard of at the beginning of the 20th century, a disease which r.j. reynolds denied was the cause -- was caused by cigarette smoking until the end of the 20th century, notwithstanding everything mr. smith just showed you on that board. she watched her husband recover from a stroke in 1996 and slowly over time decline, dying from a disease that neither of them had ever heard of before 1996 and had certainly never heard of in the 1980s. what should move us to action in matters like this is human dignity. we, as a society, ladies and gentlemen, lose dignity if we are willing to tolerate the intolerable. manufacturing a nicotine delivery system in an unreasonable, dangerous and defective manner and giving it to american families, to adolescents, and denying that there is any relationship between that product and diseases that rob those customers, those victims, of their dignity is evil and morally corrupt. mrs. alexander was there when john paul alexander took sick in 1996. when he slowly could not breathe, she was there for him when she would come home from work. other family was there when she was not. she gave him her best to give him comfort when he could not breathe. during his last months she cleaned him when he soiled himself, he could not toilet himself; fed him when he could not feed himself; and watched his ability to breathe ebb slowly away. paul was one, just one, of almost half a million -- half a million -- try to get that out -- half a million americans each year that die from smoking-related diseases. smoking-related diseases are the number-one -- is the number-one killer of americans today and has been for decades. paul is gone. earline is left. she is never really asked much -- for much in her life. maybe there has not been much justice in a life that does not have an education. but hopefully, hopefully, mrs. alexander will learn a lesson during these two weeks, and that lesson is, is that a jury will come together, citizens from her community, and decide the conduct that cannot be tolerated, will not be tolerated, in this community. she will learn that a jury will come together and hear the evidence and decide that they will not tolerate an industry that makes a product such as the one that r.j. reynolds makes, bring experts to trial and look you in the eye and deny the obvious. and she will watch you measure her loss. and how should you do that? our system, ladies and gentlemen, can only allow for money damages. we abandoned an eye for an eye a long, long time ago. one measure may be what r.j. reynolds is willing to pay an expert witness, 4-, $500 an hour, not an atypical amount. there were other experts in this case for the plaintiff as well who were paid that much or more. but experts that looked you in the eye and said such things as, i do not really know what you mean when you use the phrase "heavy smoker." i do not agree with the statistics in the dsm, the same manual that i'm using to determine that john paul alexander was not addicted. experts who would look you in the eye and tell you that their own employer was wrong about the addictive qualities of nicotine. an expert that would disagree with the surgeon general, c. everett koop, of the united states; disagree with his own employer, jane proffer at brown university; disagree with the university of south florida, its training materials that are used to train children about tobacco prevention; look you in the eye and tell you that just because somebody smokes two to three packs a day does not mean they are a chain smoker, it is going to take something more than that, four or five packs a day, and even then somebody who smokes four or five packs a day is not necessarily addicted to nicotine. a measure could be the price we place on inanimate objects. might be very simple to hear experts testify about the value of a painting or of a gem. one expert says it is worth this many million dollars; another expert says, no, it is this many million dollars. but that is an inanimate object. a measure might be the millions we will pay to a professional athlete whose really only skill is to be able to bounce, hit or dribble a ball, and, yet, we are willing to pay them millions of dollars a year to do that. a measure may be the hundreds of millions that r.j. reynolds and the tobacco industry spent over the years to market to american families and to advertise, all the while whispering to them, just keep smoking. if there is anything bad in it, we will take it out for you. ladies and gentlemen, in measuring those damages, it is only -- for whatever reason, we, as a society, do not blink at the values of those inanimate objects and we do not blink at the values of professional athletes who make millions of dollars in one year, and we do not blink at the hundreds of millions that a corporation like r.j. reynolds makes while marketing and advertising something that was not the truth. but we throw our hands up in shock and surprise when we suggest that what earline alexander saw in those last three years of her husband's life is worth a couple million dollars. human suffering has value, and all we can do in this case is to apply money damages. compensatory damages are to fix those things that can be fixed, pay for harm that is been caused, make up for those things that cannot be fixed. and 50 years of lies cannot be fixed. losing paul cannot be fixed. mr. kaczynski told you something in his opening statement, that this case was about really one thing, and that was giving mrs. alexander money. true compensatory damages, her suffering and watching her husband go through what he went through and her being there with him are a significant part of this case. but as the evidence was laid out before you over the last two weeks and you saw that which almost all americans have not seen, it may have occurred to some of you that it was more about their money, the money they were going to make over 50 years by not being honest with american families, by creating controversy where there was none, by whispering to american families and adolescents, just keep smoking. just keep smoking. and if there is something bad in it, we will take it out. i know that r.j. reynolds wants to decide this case on choices. i'm going to talk to you for just a couple of minutes about choices. i want to get to the choices part of the verdict form. this is the verdict form which you will see and these are the questions. before i talk about fault and choices, i want to catch us up on the verdict form. the first question has to do with addiction. and this is the question that determines whether mr. alexander is a member of the engle class or not. folks, everybody, you will recall, was agreeable and we all started out even on that scale and whoever tipped the scales in their favor would prevail. and everybody agreed that was acceptable, and everyone agreed that they did not require any greater burden of proof than that. this one. that is our burden. we take that. mr. smith has gone through the evidence somewhat. you were here. you listened to the defendant's expert, dr. myers. you listened to the plaintiff's expert, dr. werner. i'm just going to ask you folks to apply your common sense in what you heard from those two experts, because you, as the trier of facts, are free to believe or disbelieve anything an expert tells you. i'm going to submit to you we are going to tip those scales. i'm going to submit to you after the cross-examination of dr. myers was done we had slammed those scales up in our favor on the issue of addiction. you should answer yes, because i suggest it requires that, on question number 1. mr. smith has gone over the causation issues, and these, 2, 3, 4, 5, they all have to do with john paul alexander doing exactly what the tobacco industry wanted him to do during the decades that he smoked. they wanted him to smoke. they did not want him to quit. they wanted him to keep going to those stores and buying those cigarettes over all those decades, all the while whispering, by creating that controversy, now, folks, there is no direct relationship here. there is no proof here. just keep smoking them. we will take it out, the bad stuff, if we ever find out what it is. on 2, 3, those questions should be answered yes. 4, was r.j. reynolds tobacco company's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of john paul alexander's death? the answer to that question must be yes. you have seen the evidence for yourselves. many of you may have come to this courthouse questioning whether the tobacco companies had really been completely up front with the american public over all those decades. but now you know more. now you know more than the folks who have not sat through the evidence in a case such as this and have heard what they did from the 1950s until the end of the century. number 5, was r.j. reynolds tobacco company's agreement with others to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of john paul alexander's death? the answer to that question, ladies and gentlemen, in weighing those scales, is clearly yes. how could it not be? you have just seen the internal documents where they absolutely refuse to admit that which they should have been admitting to american families. no one from the tobacco industry, and certainly not from r.j. reynolds, ever stepped up and said, folks, we want you to use our product, but there are a couple things you have got to know. first, i want you to know they are addictive. they are addictive. we have known they were addictive from the 1950s. we want you to know that. two, they can kill you. but, no. they created controversy. they belittled and besmirched respected scientists who were only seeking the truth. and they found it and had found it by the late 1950s. as dr. proctor told you, there was no longer any controversy. 6, mr. smith has addressed that question. i'm not going to rehash that. but 6 is the statute of limitations defense. that one should be answered no. you cannot find from this evidence that john paul alexander knew or should have known before may 5, 1990, that he had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and that there was a reasonable possibility that his smoking caused copd when -- when he had never heard of the disease, when he would never heard of emphysema, and it was at the same time that the tobacco industry was telling americans that there was no correlation, no proof that smoking caused copd. that argument should shock the conscience, that at the same time they expected a gentleman who went to school in the segregated schools of union county in the 1930s, perhaps through the fifth grade, probably could not read, but if he could, very little, should have known that which r.j. reynolds was denying in may of 1990. that is a no. if it is yes, the case is over. earline leaves this courtroom. answering yes would not be justice. number 7, that is going to be a question you folks will debate. the total has to be a hundred percent. that has to do with choices that i told you that i was going to talk about. it has always been argument that it is the plaintiff's choice to smoke. it is not really a free choice when a child in the 1930s, late 1930s, early 1940s, decided to smoke. that was the culture then. most people, most adults, by far, did smoke during that period of time. there is no information there for a child to make that judgment. over subsequent decades r.j. reynolds will tell you that it was mr. alexander's decision to continue to smoke during those same decades when they denied that nicotine was addictive. no one on behalf of the plaintiff has ever looked any of you folks in the eye and said that mr. paul alexander had absolutely no control over his behavior. it would not make any common sense to say that. he did. at the same time that dr. myers was telling you that he had complete control of his smoking behavior, the very next thing that was on that screen was the surgeon general's statement that we know that addictive drugs, including nicotine, they do affect one's control. that is what happened in paul alexander's case and in millions of other americans' cases. when they tell you the statistic 55 percent of americans -- 45 percent of americans quit long-term, that means that 55 percent are never able to quit after repeated quit attempts, and those that do quit long-term, typically six to seven quit attempts, many of them using help, patches, gum and the like. the easiest way to address fault here, ladies and gentlemen, is what is the information that the two sides had available to them? did r.j. reynolds have five times more information than paul alexander about cigarettes, about nicotine addiction? did they have ten times more information, 50 times more information? and did r.j. reynolds not tell the truth to american families about all those issues? the tobacco industry and r.j. reynolds are very uncomfortable with having to deal with their choices. they would like it to be completely the smoker's choice. and you will have to consider those choices by paul alexander. when an 82-year-old woman comes into court courageously and says, folks, using my common sense, i'm going to tell you that my husband shared some of the fault here, but only partially, then it is time for the folks that made their choices in the corporate board rooms to step up and take responsibility, as well. i'm going to suggest to you that because paul alexander's choices came about as a result of human frailty, his decision to smoke, his inability to stop, no quit attempts until there at the very end, that is human frailty, ladies and gentlemen. their decisions? you just saw the documents. they did not care about american families. they cared about the tobacco industry. that is avarice. that is greed. that is evil. that is a completely different kind of choice. and for making those choices, you should place eighty percent of the responsibility with r.j. reynolds. they had at least four times the amount of information that john paul alexander did. place a challenge to the company, because they will step up and they will say this is a hundred percent mr. alexander's fault. they will not acknowledge one percent of fault. they will place a hundred percent of the fault in the lap of earline alexander and at the foot of the grave of paul alexander and take no responsibility for their choices and their decisions. as to damages, ladies and gentlemen, mrs. alexander's life has been rich in some ways and not in others. you cannot bring paul back. we know that. this is one of those things where there is been a harm and they must pay for the harms that they have caused. there is nothing that the money damages will fix. you are to be guided by your own life experiences in what is fair and just in light of the evidence and what rings true with respect to your common sense. i'm going to suggest to you the sum of $2 million in past pain and suffering suffered by earline alexander and $1 million in future, for a total of $3 million. you are, of course, free to award more or less based on your evaluation, your life experience, your common sense and what is fair and just. if you answer questions -- either question 4 or 5 yes, then you answer question 9: under the circumstances of this case, state whether punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company. his honor, judge hulslander, read to you the instructions. the standard here, as you know, is a little bit higher than the compensatory damages. it is clear and convincing evidence. what must you find to award punitive damages in these circumstances? let us find out. one, the conduct causing damage to mr. alexander was so grossly flagrant as to show a reckless disregard for human life or the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. can anyone seriously argue that what they did over five decades was not in reckless disregard of human life? two, the conduct showed an entire lack of care, that r.j. reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences. folks, just so we are clear, if we are not already, during the entire time that they are whispering out the side of their mouth, folks, just keep smoking, and creating controversy, and attacking scientists and calling the american cancer society and the federal government, accusing them of misleading the american public, they knew. they knew they were killing americans with their product. this has been a corporate conspiracy unheard of in american history, and hopefully it will never have been heard of again. and now accountability is being sought out in rooms such as this. this is where folks like you get to say enough is enough. this is where you, ladies and gentlemen, can find that punitive damages are warranted. 4, the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of these rights. folks, to say that what this corporation did was permissible, was okay, would be to condone their conduct. and punitive damages are to punish them but also to deter others who may be inclined to act similarly. the evidence, not just by clear and convincing evidence, but beyond and to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt, that criminal law standard, the highest we have, clearly shows that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds. saying anything other than that would be to condone their conduct. and we know this in our society. we know we want there to be more accountability, number two -- number one, and number two, that if folks do what they did and there is no accountability, there is no incentive for them to stop it. do the right thing. confirm that in our society this conduct will not be tolerated. show earline alexander that by her life of working hard that even she can come into this courtroom and be on evil -- even footing with a corporation. tell them they did not do the right thing. tell them they did not know right from wrong, or, if they did, they intentionally harmed american families. tell them by your verdict enough is enough. thank you. mr. smith: thank you. i think sometimes the best response to everything is pretty quick anyway, so i'm going to be pretty quick about this. number one, they have the burden of proof on the statute of limitations and they have not proven the smoking gun. not once in a lifetime did anybody, all the people they talked to, ever say -- hear him say, i do not feel well, i'm sick, i cannot do my work. they did not produce a day he ever missed work. now, what they did produce is a 1989 that he quit working for the gas station. actually by then he was driving, if you remember, he was actually driving a wrecker truck the last year that he got social security. he did not get social security when he was working for cash. their own expert acknowledged, he showed them, entrepreneurial ambition. we have three, if not four eye witnesses to him working on cars in the 1990s. that is the end of that issue. they recognize, their own person, that with that kind of physical exertion he could not do if he was suffering from copd. he had no idea what copd was. and then they go to mrs. alexander and they say, well, she said that he got emphysema. mrs. alexander said she learned that at the doctor's office. her daughter told you that she never went to the doctor's office except with him when he went after he had his stroke. now, mrs. alexander is 82, almost 83 years old. and you have seen the instruction on memory. mrs. alexander did not remember her birthday. mrs. alexander does get confused. she has not had an easy life. that does not mean she is not entitled to justice. and the fact that after three days and 500 pages of depositions they got her confused in select passages. you be the judge of that. please go to 883, please. this ought to say it all. they say we told the truth. this is what they said in the '80s. (plaintiff's exhibit 883, video played for the jury.) mr. smith: he was wrong. and a half a million people a year are dead. now, this is not any evidence that either side did not know about. this is what was being said during the life, this was the position of the tobacco company's. you know, go to 941, please. i like what dr. kyriakoudes said and i hope you will abide by it. you do not have to believe this. believe their documents. go to the first highlighted section, please. 1964. chronic bronchitis, what do they do? they deny it. go to the next section. they say everybody knew. this is 1989. despite the growing level of public knowledge, a substantial number of americans are still uninformed about and do not believe the health risks of smoking. these gaps in knowledge or beliefs are more evident when one considers the proportion of adults who do not acknowledge certain health risks rather than the portion who do. 9 go to the next section, please. although empirical evidence is sparse, tobacco industry activities in the form of advertising and promotion, public relations and lobbying may interfere with public beliefs and personalized acceptance of the health risks of smoking. next section, please. and what do we know? african americans particularly were slow to respond to the drop in smoking. next section, please. go down and what does this show? right here. the least educated were 12 times more likely to be reticent in stopping smoking. and why? because they were more exposed to advertising and less exposed to the ability to get better information. and they say, well, he is never shown that he relied on a single ad. you heard mr. carnegie say we used to joke about the ad that he taught me how to put up. there were lots of them. i put them up, and one of them he talked about how it impressed him. go to 248 please. 248. this is it. this is what the whole case is really about. 1964. they are really glad. you know why? the propaganda blast was tremendous and the penetration was widespread. but i have the feeling that the public reaction was not as severe nor did it have the emotional depth i might have feared. go down to the bottom, please. and this is what it was all about for them in 1964 and every day after that. we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. that is why we have the controversy and the debate when their own experts say by the 1970s, the 1980s, the science was settled, but not with edward horrigan, president of r.j. reynolds, in 1984 when they started a new white paper campaign about can we have an honest debate. they have got a lot of nerve to come in here and talk about who knew right from wrong. they knew in '59 it was addictive. they knew in the '80s it was addictive and they never agreed with it. you know, they say, well, he has not shown the addiction. well, let us get it straight. we know that he smoked for 60 years. we know he smoked every day. we know he smoked literally, according to napoleon filer, i never knew him to go an hour without smoking. we know that about him. we know he got up in the night. we know it was the first thing in the morning. we know that about him. and they want you to believe that he smoked two, three, up to three-and-a-half packs a day for 60 years and he was not nicotine dependent. well, let us say, okay, both experts have their agenda, set them aside. it is their burden of proof. go back to the doctors who treated him in the hospital, both drs. toner and bellman, and what did they say? he is nicotine dependent, and you are common sense tells you that. they say, well, that is not what led to his injury. wait a minute. let us go back. you know, they have wonderful scripts. i congratulate them on this. as a matter of fact, when i say script, i mean the word because when they brought in their expert, dr. stueck, you realize literally it was just a rescripting of things that i put on the board that he had used before the last time they had a historian. you remember that. but their script up here with the chains and all this. let me tell you about the chain. addiction kept him smoking. and that is all i have to do in this case is because smoking led to copd and it killed him, and that is not in debate. they say we did not tell you about the family. well, we brought jeanette in. we brought mrs. alexander before you and, you know, you are right, she is not learned. she is easily confused. she is had a tough life. but there is an awful lot to be said in very few words when shy tried to describe what she went through with her husband there at the end. i want you to remember that because that is evidence of the kind of pain she feels and felt for what she saw and what she watched. and there are some evidence -- there is some evidence that is been brought in, mostly through their own depositions that they brought up. they say, well, they did not tell us what kind of father he was. well, i think they elicited he kept a roof over his kids' head. they said, well, they did not tell you about that. they brought that up. he went to school plays. they brought that up. he went to church programs. they brought that up. they brought up that what happened when he was at home -- when you would get home late, mrs. alexander? well, usually he was in there playing with the kids. they brought that up. mrs. alexander does not come in here asking you for sympathy. she comes in here asking you for justice because she sits without ever having gone to school, with age advanced in this courtroom, she sits with the same dignity in this system that r.j. reynolds. but i go back to what my partner said, when you want to talk about comparative fault, i'll tell you what to use as a measure. comparative knowledge. go to that. who knew and who knew when and who knew why? how long did they know it was addictive? how long did they know it was carcinogenic? and they come back and have the nerve to say, well, yeah, we tried to fix it. wait a minute. remember the letter that we put in evidence when the guy said do not we have a little horns of a dilemma here? because we are saying at one point that we are looking to get rid of the bad stuff but on the other hand we are telling there is nothing bad in it. that was always their dilemma because they could not say it was less mutagenic because then they would have to admit that it is mutagenic. that is the dilemma for them, so they never came clean. they never told the truth. and i do not know how much. nobody does. that will be up to you. but i know this: you watched and you heard about the description of what copd does to someone. the description was you start off like you have a snorkel and then you have a straw and then someone's pinching the straw. first you start walking less. then you cannot walk at all. then you start talking less and then you cannot talk at all. then you live on a hose stretched to your nose and you try to stay at home until they bring in hospice. that is the facts of this case. the court: you are out of time, mr. smith. mr. smith: ladies and gentlemen, i thank you on behalf of ms. alexander. i appreciate your justice.