mr. mitnik: i would like -- we have been in this room together a lot, but i do not want to get right up on you and crowd you. we have spent a long time together. y'all have put in a lot of time. you made an extraordinary sacrifice for this duty, and i would like to start my closing the way i started my opening and, on behalf of everyone, thank you. and now i have an opportunity to talk to you about why the sacrifice of your time was worthwhile in a very significant way. 4267 it goes beyond just, just a lawsuit of compensation, but it involves deterrence at a higher level. may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. mitnik: i'm going to go through the law. we have put the evidence out. and i was very tempted to put document after document back up, but we did it in opening. i probably did too much in opening. it was way too long. i apologize that my opening took so long. and then we turned around and showed you a bunch of them during the trial, which was substantial and necessary to prove up the things i'm about to talk about. so i'm not going to run through this. i have some little summary boards. if i have time, i may put them up just to remind you, but y'all were here, y'all took notes, and you have been extraordinarily attentive. so i really would rather talk to you about how we have proven our case, and then go through some of this law the judge gave you and talk to you about how the evidence fits into that law, so i can give you the comfort that we have proven the necessary things to reach this point that i am 4268 suggesting to you is of such importance. but we do not just jump there. we have got to prove some things. and i want to walk through it and show you why the evidence shows we have met those burdens. and remember this, though, before i start talking about the evidence and the law and how they come together in this case, that the judge just gave you the instruction that i talked to you about during jury selection, where i explained this is not a criminal case where you have creating doubt creates it out. that is not the burden here. the burden here is by the greater weight of the evidence, the more persuasive, more convincing. what persuades me more, what convinces me more, what makes more sense. often said, what is more right than wrong, but the literal definition is the one the judge gave you. so as we go through this, i ask you to keep -- and i'm going to, at the end, talk to you about a bit of a higher burden on the punitive damages being awarded. that is clear and convincing evidence. i'm going to talk about that, because when i read the instruction to you, i'm going to explain under the evidence, would suggest strongly to you, that we have 4269 blown past that burden. but i want to point the burden out on issues like class membership because it is so important that the question not be things like this, can you quit? did you hear things? did you have some notice? were you powerless completely? you have now heard the instructions. i believe the judge will ultimately give them to you. none of that is found anywhere. the judge tells you what the parameters of the class membership and everything else on the law. and the parameters are -- one thing we do not have to deal with, because the judge told you he found as a matter of law, that the smoking caused her copd and death. so the judge has decided that part. then what is left for class membership? because this is a process. we prove class membership, and then those engle findings from that jury that sat for a year, that went to the supreme court and landed in this courtroom, they suddenly have authority when we have proven class membership. they are binding. and you have seen the length of -- to put on the documents, and you have heard the extraordinary number 4270 of documents. you have heard about them. you saw how many you saw here in our three weeks. so we are not going to replow all the old ground, but we are going to bring those findings into this courtroom from that jury, and you are an extension of that when we prove class membership. and then here's the next step, just to kind of put it all in a simpler perspective, once we have proven class membership -- i'm going to tell you in a minute what it is -- is that on the facts of this case, that part is nearly a given. we have to prove it, but i'm going to, in a few minutes, i think, show you how that one is pretty straightforward. once the class membership is there, and those findings come into this courtroom, then here's what we have to prove. we are not back to square one proving was there a conspiracy, did they get together and agree amongst themselves in the industry to zip their lips because loose lips sink ships. we do not have to prove that. that is a given once we are a class member. we do not have to prove they committed a fraud on the american people through concealment. that is a given in this case once we prove class membership. we do not have to prove that this was a 4271 defective product. once we are class members, that is a given. we do not even have to prove they were negligent, failure to use reasonable care. once we prove class membership, that is a given. here's what is left to prove on that. those are the givens. what do we have to prove? that those chunks that i've told you about, they are called causes of action, those things were a legal cause of dawn's death, copd and death. that they contributed -- again, not the only reason, and i'm going to say that over and over, and i'm going to get a chance in rebuttal, and i bet you i'm going to say it a bunch more times, because it is not was it the cause, as if it was an all or nothing, either/or. either you had choice, or you were addicted. either you heard something, or you were completely uninfluenced by all we were doing to be a stumbling block in something that might as well have been called operation stumbling block. it is not either/or. it is was it a contributing cause. and it cannot be some insubstantial cause, it is got to be substantial. it cannot be insignificant, some meaningful cause. in other words, in simple layman's terms, did 4272 what they do have a meaningful influence on the outcome in this lady's life? and if we prove that, then we have proven everything in that part of the case. and what is left is we are going to talk about the impact on the loss of this woman, who was the gravitational pull in that family, that held it together. and then we are going to talk about punitive damages being warranted under the law the judge gave you, then the evidence that we have painstakingly brought to you, to show that they, indeed, are warranted. and then we will have passed through this to the part in the end that i would suggest elevates this, something that can really make a difference, to try to protect the next generation of teenagers from this addiction that kills at a rate of 480,000 people a year today. and those kids are picking it up today because it has an addictive drug that they do not respect and they do not fear because it has been trivialized and sugarcoated to the point it is like potato chips or coffee or jogging, and it is nothing like that. it is a nasty addiction, but it masquerades as something else because people do not get high. how 4273 can this be that kind of drug if you do not get high? it is hard to convince those kids who think in three to five years they are going to put it down. we got these folks -- you heard the evidence -- still targeting the teenagers and will not take the addiction out, and they can, so it would be a truly choice cigarette, not a need cigarette. and we are going to talk about their efforts, their so-called efforts to produce such a cigarette, but i'll save that after they are done, for rebuttal. that is the substantial part of this case. now, let us talk about how patty dawn allen qualifies this case and empowers you to take that next step under the law and the evidence. i put this up, and i am sure nobody can read it. and i put these little stickies on it. i'm going to read them for you because even close they are probably hard to read. the point was the environment when she started smoking. because, remember, it is a different time and a different place. and i'm going to do something, and i do not want to be too gimmicky, but i do not know to make this point with my mouth. it is just such a hard point to imagine that time through the lens of today. 4274 so i'm going to spread around some ads, i'm going to put up some of those orienting things, so that i can do the best i can on behalf my clients and on your behalf to do my job to make that a reality, because it was a different time and place. and in that different time and place, i'm going to go through and try to put these things in a fair perspective to see how, yes, indeed, what they did had an impact on my client and the continued smoking, in spite of family members urging her later, her husband and her daughter, and a sister, earlier, and parents who said, do as i say, not as i do -- they did not say it was dangerous, but said, you know, do not do what i do; in spite of later, doctors talking to her; in spite of information out there you would have to live in a hole not to have heard, this could be the thing causing the cancer, this could be it. but when you put it in the perspective of the time and place, and you see the counter-messaging and the effectiveness on the addicted mind, let alone on the child or the teenager or the senior in high school is who is picking up cigarettes for the first time, and being offered up safer-seeming alternatives called filters that were a fraud, in an 4275 environment in which you said, look, the scientists cannot even agree, wait and see. that message had been in place by the time she picked up her first cigarette. for 13 years, they had been hammering away at it, with all of their resources, creating -- just like you would have to live in a cave not to have heard public health saying these things could kill you, you would have had to live in a cave not to have heard, but it is a hotly controversial issue, nobody really knows. and there is only one reason it was a controversy, they made it so on purpose, and it was a lie, and they knew it. so instead of growing up with concrete, i'm young, this can kill me, and i'm about to engage in a highly addictive drug that i may -- that no matter how you bait it and make it look pretty, there is a big barb in there. and like heroin, i'm going to steer clear because i do not want to be hooked and struggling for life. i'm going to play with it for a few years and then put it down. it is never going to hurt me. they concealed that hook. and here's what the answer to that is. here's their answer to that. well, at the turn of the century, here's some document that says something 4276 about nicotine fit or something that says nicotine is addictive. now, i want to ask you to keep your eye on this because consistency is important in the search for the truth. and i'm going to ask you to look for these answers. if everybody -- at one point of the defendants' case, if everybody knew at the turn of the century, the kids, everybody, this was a highly addictive, powerful drug, how come in '64 they are going to tell you, it is okay for what we did, surgeon general said it was not addictive? well, over here when we want to say patty dawn allen would have known all she knew, we got all these old things from dusty volumes someplace to suggest everybody knew, but when it comes time to say in 1964, we are going to take advantage of the surgeon general, so how were we supposed to know? well, if the people that were making it were not supposed to know, how was she supposed to know? but we can answer that question. i'm not going to put them up, but you have seen them over and over, their documents that say, nicotine is addictive, we are therefore in the business of selling an addictive drug. that is not what they were telling congress, 4277 that is not what they were telling patty allen, that is not what they were telling millions of other americans in that era, but that is what they knew. you know how we know? not because i say it, but because they said it. they just said it behind the darkest, closed, locked doors imaginable, as part of an industry-wide conspiracy to keep it under wraps because if one of the companies said it, it would be out. but why are they in this courtroom? what is wrong with smoking? what does it have to do with them? they are a victim in this case. they will also tell you everybody at the turn of the century knew how horrible they were. there was somebody in an opium den who they were talking about how horrible cigarettes were. and there was something in the florida health notes from the 1800's talking about how bad they were. then we showed you one just shortly thereafter that said they were good, as if someone's combing through the florida health notes. then you will recall when we had dr. cummings, i pulled some up. there were little small articles that were touting how wonderful cigarettes were. and i said, now, let us put that aside and stop this 4278 dragging little stuff out, and let us get down to the business of what the environment really was like for this jury. they would say, everybody, including her, coming years -- goodness gracious, the turn of the century, everybody knew these things killed you, except they were not killing everybody. here comes the cancer out here, slowly crawling up. everybody knew. but this is what i'm asking you to keep your eye on the ball, everybody knew, except when we get out here, they say, our people that manufacture them, we did not know. nobody knew. it was -- the scientists really did not know. which is it? everybody knew, including kids, at the turn of the century. nobody knew when they hit the conspiracy and decided to tell everybody no, you know. we can answer that one, too. you do not need mitnik's mouth to answer that one either. we can use what they wrote behind those same closed doors when they wrote, all but one person who was not part of them all agreed, it is cancer causing. you saw the little document that mr. -- the company called -- i cannot even remember the name -- something little, came a little later in the case -- 4279 arthur little company -- cigarettes cause cancer. did not say anything about confusion and doubt and maybe and controversy. in fact, the very first document that kicked the conspiracy off, the hill & knowlton document that came out as part of their meeting in that historical meeting in 1953, christmas eve, when all the heads of all these -- including these defendants came together in new york city, left their families and got together, not with scientists and public health, but with hill & knowlton to come up with a spin and hatch this conspiracy they carried on for 50 years. that very first document when the hill & knowlton people were interviewing scientists from the people who entered into the conspiracy, including these two defendants, said, would not it be wonderful if we could be the first company to come up with a cancer-free cigarette? but they are in congress in 1994, at the waxman hearings, saying, it do not cause cancer, it had not been proven, we do not know. at the same time they are saying, swear on a bible, it do not cause addiction, it ain't addictive. but they are going to come back, i suspect, and 4280 tell you, look at all these health notes that everybody knew. did they miss that class? what does this have to do with -- i'm going to talk while he is doing it. i hope that is not too distracting. what did all of this have to do with patty allen? wrong smoke. well, i want to talk to you about that. the first part of this case involves -- while he is doing that, i want to talk to you about the class membership, and then i'll move into these individual causes of action. on the class membership, you have to determine was patty dawn allen addicted to nicotine, to cigarettes -- whether ms. allen was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, whether such an action was a legal cause. then, they will say, but for -- legal cause, if it acts in a direct -- da, da, da -- or substantially contributes to produce, so as to say but for. you are going to hear "but for" a lot. and i ask you to do this when you hear "but for" -- and i'm about to give you the rest of the paragraph -- i'm going to ask you to do two things. always look at the rest of paragraph, too, so that that is put in context. and one other thing, i ask 4281 you to remember "but for," and their answer is anything but our product caused her harm, anything but, and how reasonable and fair that is. here's the rest of it: "in order to be the legal cause of copd, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. it may be a legal cause of copd even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause if it contributes substantially to producing." now, i want to set one thing very, very clear. we do not have to prove that she had a toxic overdose reaction and keeled over from nicotine. as if you took that bottle that dr. henningfield had and soaked the nicotine out of it, he said, it can kill you if you drink it. that is not what we have to prove. it is not that the nicotine caused her copd directly, it is was it a legal cause of her copd and death, which means did the nicotine contribute in a meaningful way to her smoking long enough and frequently enough to have gotten sick? and it need not be the sole cause. remember, she has acknowledged fault on her part through her husband and her daughter. she has acknowledged that this is not an all or nothing, that 4282 she shares in this responsibility. and of course she does. and i'm going to suggest to you she does in a manner that is early -- they are far more responsible when this is a 17-year-old girl in the environment like this and -- can you put up the 4-a stuff -- in this environment. but as time goes on, her responsibility grows some. but you know what comes with it -- and i do not mean to make excuses, i just mean to talk the truth and try to get the fair balance in this -- the addiction she is getting. you heard these world class public health officials who came in here, how you get deeper into the addictive cycle, and it gets harder and worse. and remember the document, they called it a holding strategy. they knew they could not keep it under lid forever, but they wanted to hold on as long as they could. and as they held, she got deeper and deeper into the addictive cycle, so it would be harder and harder to break it. and why did they do that? because they did not want to lose one cigarette. remember, in the hill & knowlton, one cigarette could be a billion units less. they did not want not only people quitting, 4283 they did not want them cutting back, they did not want them trying. how do we know? the american smokeout, just one day, try to break free, america. just give it a day. because maybe a day will add days. they went on the attack. they would not give them the one day. do not even try. and then when patty dawn allen does precisely what they were targeting and aiming, they said, what is that got to do with anything? i mean, you did not have to listen to us. she did not even know what they were up to. she did not know they were using other organizations. and she did not have to have heard the frank statement or such. she was a kid. what she has to have done is lived during that time because you had to live in a cave not to have the era of the controversy, which tells the person about the smoke, hey, this ain't so dangerous, besides they do not know anything about the hook hidden in the bait. and then when you get addicted, and you are in denial, and that disease, that addicted mind that is being hardwired as a teenager does not want to give it up, it does not take much. and nobody knew better than them that it does not take much. they could not 4284 put the genie in the bottle, and they could not zip up the lips of public health; but, what they could do is say, scientists cannot agree, wait and see. and while the waiting and seeing is happening, people are getting deeper and deeper addicted. so, yes, her responsibility as she gets older in life and more information is coming out becomes more significant than when younger, but it is never without addiction in the room. you heard her daughter say they were never alone because the cigarette and the addiction was always there. one thing i want to make clear, the percentages in this case, which is the shared fault part. let me just tell you, i'm going to make a suggestion, what the lawyers say is not evidence, but we have an obligation to try to be a guide for you, give you some measuring sticks to consider. and i'm going to make a suggestion that on this evidence that the percentages of fault in this case should be 40 percent on philip morris, and forty percent on r. j. reynolds, and twenty percent on ms. allen. and here's why. you can say, goodness, you are putting 80 there and 20 here. cute trick. let me tell you why, and you assess whether it is a cute trick or whether it is 4285 fair and reasonable. it is your decision. let me give you my thinking, so you can vet and you can process it yourself. they knew it all when they set the stage for this. she was a kid who was in the dark. and it is just, in my suggestion, unfair to come anywhere close to sharing the responsibility of the earlier years. now, when she gets out and married to mr. allen, and the time has gone on, and it is more about the addiction and less about the conspiracy of fraud, her responsibility goes up, but there is a significant curve in that before she catches up. and that is why i suggest each of them have 20 to 40. now, why do i say philip morris and rjr equal? here's why. there are two ways to look at responsibility for something like this. one is, how many cigarettes of your brand did you smoke? and if you smoked mostly theirs, then they are mostly at fault. well, that may work if we left hardwired the addicted child's mind, a teenager's mind, when it is vulnerable. the 20-year-old's mind, the 21-year-old's mind is still vulnerable and developing. and when you hardwire the addiction in, and 4286 you are the one that started this spiral into the deep end of addiction and kicked it off, are you suddenly less responsible because one of your competitors snatched the person you set the hook on, and they reeled her in for more time than you when she finally got on the boat with all the others you cast the net out, flailing on that boat, gasping for air? does that make them less because it is less number? you can bet philip morris did not want to lose her as a customer, but she was already hooked. now, does that mean r. j. reynolds, who was part of this fraud, has carried on and facilitated and exploited that addiction? yeah. they are responsible, too. one thing i want to say on this. under the law, the percentages of fault apply, but not to everything. they do not apply to those intentional -- they are called intentional torts, where someone on purpose did wrongful acts, wrong deeds on purpose, by design. so with fraud and the conspiracy and the concealment, it does not apply. the law says you do not apply that to those. it is apples and oranges to the human frailties or negligence of someone who 4287 was addicted and keeps smoking. there is nothing comparable. so the law keeps those separate, and they ought to be separate. now, i want to walk through, was -- now, this is the situation. could you put up that just real quick? this is that different time. and we have shown some of these slides before. and this is where she would be living in. everywhere you looked. here's the mores, all these -- and they said it is a man's brand. these are funny looking men. and how many of them are not thin? how many of them are not thin? and i'm going to suggest this to you. we hear about other reasons she smoked. remember, it is not either/or. but she smoked because she wanted to be thin. she smoked because she was obsessed with her weight. she smoked because she had stress or depression or back pain. so she is not the right smoker. they drive people, through their ads, to smoke over thinness. you saw the other evidence that we put in, how they exploit the relaxation effect of nicotine. they write about it in private. it is one of the good things they offer up. those are drug effects. does -- is it always 4288 the wrong smoker if somebody has a life that has some stress, a parent dies, or they have some depression? does that make them the wrong smoker? if so, it is going to be hard to find the right smoker. what they did was way too big to hide behind one thin lady. and it has nothing to do with the outcome of your decision here because it is not either/or. the only way it becomes significant to your decisions on class membership in this case is if you were to say, i'm going to throw out dr. burns, his life in public health, and his extraordinary knowledge and experience, a guy the surgeon general turns to; dr. henningfield, who the u.s. military turns to and the surgeon general turns to, and his extraordinary wealth of knowledge, and has sacrificed his life to this issue; dr. cummings who spent his life and got a grant to study all these things, and has the biggest cessation clinic in the state of new york trying to help people; and dr. eye and dr. kirley; and even the family members, and even ms. allen herself. if all of them are just wrong, and she was just smoking to be skinny, then maybe it matters. but otherwise, the question is, was addiction one of the 4289 reasons, a meaningful reason she smoked enough to get sick, not can i conjure up other reasons to say she might. because the instruction in the law tells you there can be plenty of other reasons, so long as this one played a part. and if addiction does not play a part in why someone smokes enough to get sick, what is addiction, addiction to any drug. if a drug addiction is not a significant driving force between continuing to use it and the frequency of using it, what does it do? it is a word without meaning. and that is what the person they brought to the courtroom said, that addiction, he cannot fathom a situation where it would lead to someone smoking enough to get sick, unless they had brain injury. so unless we happen to represent someone with a brain injury, they would be the wrong smoker, all of them. why do i have ads up here of kids? is it just to inflame you, with the santa claus stuff? no. it is highly relevant to the circumstances because parents, why did parents smoke in that era, that the kids modeled after? these kind of ads back. you saw the older ads and the teaching to inhale ads. that set it into the fabric of society, and it got 4290 passed as a right of passage from one generation to the next. and she was caught smack in the middle. it has everything to do with her, with patty dawn allen, because everyone agrees her parents smoking, her friends smoking, and it being glamorous was a significant part of why you would pick it up. she smokes capri. there is no slimmer way to smoke. these are not capris, they are silvas. "cigarettes are like women. the best ones are thin and rich." look at capri. and they want to say, hey, what is that got to do with her addiction? she just wanted to be thin. she is obsessed with her weight. they are playing on that, and it is addiction, even if it is true. once we show she is addicted -- and i do not know what else we could do, it is -- we had the flip chart. it is down now, but we had the flip chart that showed all the people that said she was. and standing alone over here by himself is the guy they hired, who they went out and found, sent him medical -- remember, the lawyers are giving him the medicine and the articles, not the other way around, to come in here and say, not addicted. and we put up the criteria for you. they did not. and these criteria, there is no way she 4291 was not addicted under them, if you really sat down and went through them. but he skipped that part, just got the conclusion that helped. so was she addicted? yes. was it a reason she smoked and continued to smoke, a significant, a legal cause, did it contribute significantly, or was it just a big coincidence? they would have you believe it is just a coincidence. this case is much about coincidence versus common sense, and, ultimately, about truth and consequences. and you are allowed, thankfully, to use your common sense. yes, she was addicted. of course, she was addicted. she smoked after her doctor said, you got copd and are going to die if you do not quit smoking. she got off planes and raced. she got up in the morning before she went to the bathroom and smoked and did it all day. no one ever hardly saw her without a cigarette. is that just because it is yummy? it tastes good? just so much fun? boy, i cannot just get enough of that. i'm going to do it first thing in the morning. i'm going do it all day and right before bed. i'm going to do the next day. and i'm going to do that for 30 years. it is got nothing to do with addiction. even after she could not inhale enough to get it 4292 down or keep it down, she still wanted cigarettes. she is not addicted. this is like potato chips. so, yes, she is a class member. and now those findings come into this courtroom. and i want to just hit this again, now that i've put this massive stuff out here, the environment. this is the environment. and it is significant to say what has this got to do with patty allen? massive marketing. it became the norm. all the adults were doing it. you want to be an adult, we are not -- not only were all these ads here, you could not go anywhere where the people were not smoking. everywhere, planes, restaurants, doctors' offices, the doctor himself. they were everywhere. but, gosh almighty, she knew everything she knew. she picked it up. it was her choice to smoke. we got nothing to do with that, anything but us. that is r. j. reynolds' and philip morris' motto in this case. youth marketing. they hammered away at youth. you have seen it. they have been doing it. they said no brand, success or fall, rides on youth marketing. and they get up and try to parse the word "young adults," their disclaimer language. and then we showed you over and over, it ain't 4293 young adults. they were teenagers. they were going down to 12s and 14-year-olds in it. why are they writing letters directly to students or to principals of students? not just was dr. cummings out in -- when was it, '90-something, but back in -- what was it -- '68. had nothing to do with dr. cummings. they were writing directly to the students. we want you to get our message. these things are not hurting you. scientists cannot agree, wait and see, to the kids. and they are still doing it. that is the environment, but this environment does not stop there. thirteen years, they had an opportunity to come clean and say, all right, it kills you, rather than it is -- scientists cannot agree, wait and see. they single-handedly made that message. she grew up on it. the conspiracy started when she was five. when she picked up a cigarette, it was 12 or 13 years later. she just lived. by now, the scientists still do not know. how scary is that to do? and they concealed the addiction. how scary was it to do what the parents and everybody else that was smart was doing, that sure looked interesting, and all these pretty ladies? 4294 but it is more than that. the illusion of filtration, that did not come along later for her. they had already, as part of the coverup, come up with this, if somebody is nervous, let us give them a self-rationalization to feel safe, the illusion of filtration. what is a filter do but purify? so if anyone's -- we do not know -- everybody does not react the same to our creative controversy without muddying the waters up. everyone does not react the same. so let us get out some products that make it look safe. and then they want to say, listen, that is all the surgeon general's fault. and you saw, we had to get back up and make the record clear after the cross. no, the surgeon general's office and public health was light years behind these guys and were always playing catchup, and they were always taking advantage of it. but the public, we know, the ftc reports believed it was safer, and it was not. the surgeon general in 2010, they are not safer, but people think they are. 2010. what do you think she thought way back then? just take that out of the mix. would not that 4295 be something -- you get an instruction, materiality, something that would have been significant in the decision-making to patty dawn allen. you think it would not have been significant enough -- that is a fraud, those things are not really safer. and by the way, they really will kill you. scientists do not disagree. it is just us behind the scenes saying it looked like scientists disagree. and, by the way, the truth is it is a highly addictive, powerful drug. you take all that out of the mix, and they want to say, just could not be that that contributed because she did not see the frank statement personally. how fair is that? because i want to talk to you about something called reasonable inferences. reasonable inferences. you were instructed you can use reasonable inferences and common sense. like with philip morris, is it reasonable, likely, that she walked into ms. norgaard's and picked up the first pack -- by the carton, i'm sorry, of benson & hedges, the day she walked in, and the day she walked out from living with her a couple of years later, just dropped them at the moment? or is it likely that she had been smoking for sometime before and after? 4296 remember the evidence of there is brand loyalty and very little switching, particularly with young -- with that age group of women. not only dr. cummings explained it, their internal documents would show us that. and we also know that it was like a year or two, shortly before she went -- was seen by her husband smoking the more brand, which is the r. j. reynolds brand, they had just come out, this hot new thing, the long one -- the long one that says you can get three, four, five more puffs. think how many that is times 20 cigarettes. do you think that is an indication? they are brown, they are not real faded. she picks the brown one, but she can get all these extra puffs. what is that say about addiction? so you can use your reasonable inferences to figure out how much did she really smoke during this initiation phase where the hook got set by philip morris. and i suggest the evidence is more than just two years, although i cannot point to a witness who can come in and say. but along the same lines on this suggestion of she does not have to see an ad, it is the wallpapering effect. you have heard that referred to. they were 4297 so effective in getting it out, they are spending so much more money than public health that they created a controversy. did it affect her? i suggest to you here's the best measuring stick for that. let us look at what they intended, what the aim of the conspiracy and the fraud to conceal was. let us look if she followed to a tee the aim. and then let us take one last check and say, are there really kind of a decision that is a little bit of a head scratcher, but for -- i'll use but for -- but for what they did. i would not expect you to do that, but for. so let us think about it a minute. does she pick up a cigarette more likely -- did they want her to pick up a cigarette? yeah, they did. did they want her to inhale? yeah, they did. did they want her to feel safe with filters? yeah, they did. did they want her not to be scared off, to steer clear, because of this wishy-washy message they were creating, the muck they created? yeah. what does she do? started with filters, started without fear, at 17 years old. coincidence or common sense that that had an impact? sole reason, no. oh, and parents and peers are an influence of it, too. think they had something to 4298 do with that? wanted to be thin. think they had something to do with that, or are they just innocent bystanders, common sense coincidence? now, let us move to this period of time where now we are past the initiation phase where she is starting, and they got her hooked. now we have got the environment during the sustaining period. all the while, sales are going through the ceiling. all the while, all those people are dying. all the while, these companies know these people are dying from their product, and they are doing everything in their power to keep it confused so people will keep smoking, on a holding strategy, knowing they are dying, because they can make a lot more money. and every time something came out, like a surgeon general report, like the warning pack, the ftc says, just did not work. every step, they keep driving it up, fighting, knowing the consequences. are punitive damages warranted? is that clear and convincing, so that you can have a conviction, having heard the evidence that punitive damages are awarded when endangering the public, callously, recklessly, disregarding the dangers? what is the other answer to that question, other than yes? yes. yes. 4299 so what happens during the environment that they did to impact the outcome after she gets addicted? they activate a denial big time. they said, you do not need to go through that nightmare, thinking what it would be like to live without these things i'm deeply addicted to. you do not have to. unlike today, not everybody that is addicted today is walking around going, gosh, i got to do something about this. these things are bad. i know they are bad, bad, bad. that is a different environment. heard it is bad, heard it may not be bad. who knows? scientists cannot agree, wait and see. that is what they did. what did she do? wait and see. what did they give her? filters. what did they give her later on? low tar that everybody thought was safer. what did she do? switched to low tar. what did the witnesses -- she is not here to tell you, but what did witnesses say? she was smoking the brown ones because she thought they were safer, or words to that effect. why did she switch to the capris? she thought they were safer, better for her, less dangerous, whatever the word was. that is the message they wanted. that is 4300 precisely what they did. that lines up for legal cause. now, let us say, if you take what they were doing out of the mix, is that just something she would have done on her own? like if you had told the truth, filters do not work, low tar is a fraud, we are tricking the machines, shameful practices ultimately found that they did by the ftc, if she had known all that, would she be switching to them? would she not be -- here's one. they did not want people to cut back, let alone even try to quit, let alone be successful. and they were going right down to bury the people who tried to take one day off for the great smokeout. in one day, they would spend more money than the whole clearinghouse for the public health. you saw the humongous numbers they poured into this, sharing amongst themselves by their market share in using fronts and shields and admitting -- and that is their words in internal documents -- and talking about, we are going to -- how they are going to get away with it with a wink, internally bragging on how well it worked, 20 years, boy, we did a wonderful job. all of that working like a charm on society. 4301 are people -- some quitting? yeah. we got millions of smokers, and if one million a year quit, it is going to add up to 50 or 60 million over 50 or 60 years. that does not change the math. it is 2 or 3 percent are successful, meaning 97 percent were not. but they did not want to even give up that 2 or 3 percent chance. so everything they did was to create an irrational reaction, which was do not even try. now, there is no suggestion that patty dawn allen was suicidal. she was a driven woman, not trying until she got diagnosed. what does that tell you about whether this conspiracy, more likely than not, had an impact on her? put a different way, but for it, you think it -- maybe coming clean, it is true, it really is killing people, and, by the way, you may want to seek help, this is a real addiction, you may want an intervention. they were running in like an aa meeting saying, whoa, my name is -- no, shhh, shhh, shhh, stay in denial. that is why people in aa say, my name is, and i'm an alcoholic. it is an addiction. and once you admit it, it is the end of denial. it would be like having the whole industry get 4302 together and run around the country and go to all the aa meetings, shhh, shhh, shhh, you are not. you do not need help, go home, enjoy. go on enjoying your cigarettes. remember those from the hill & knowlton. and she does not try during that period. that is irrational. take out the but for what they did, and explain that. just because she loved it so much, and she had a little anxiety, and she liked to be thin, but it is killing you. and they are going to say, well, wait, all this pomp and circumstance, and mitnik over there about -- her family was telling her, saying, it is going to kill her. what good is the family? that is one of the most outrageous parts of what they do. the natural support of the family, would you trust and believe your family when they are trying to help? you may not like it, but you at least believe. they sabotaged that safety net of loved ones, sabotaged, because by the time mr. allen is in the picture, 25 years in public health has been running around like chicken little, the sky is falling, crying wolf. and what are the independent-seeming scientists saying at the same time that they are 4303 funding from behind the scenes? they change the name of the organization to take tobacco industry out, make it institute, so it would sound independent? they were saying, absolutely not. it is like, remember, apple sauce. goodness, some women like smaller babies. nobody knows. oh, we would not put those ads in the superman movie. maybe the director liked them. they are hammering away, hammering away, and they created that controversy, and she acted precisely the way they wanted. and when a family member would say, would you please stop, these things could hurt you, or whatever they said, could kill you, whatever, the answer is, i've been hearing that the scientists cannot even agree, and it is been 25 years. by then, the conspiracy is 25 years in. by the time she picked up a cigarette, it was 13 years in. and the cigarette companies promised, if anyone ever finds it, we are going it fix it or filter it out or take it off the shelf, and she is smoking filters, and they are still on the shelf, and scientists still cannot agree, wait and see. so when a family member says it, instead of going -- and, by the way, you know you are addicted, 4304 so you know what you are up against, and the family member can talk honestly about maybe we need to have an intervention, you really are addicted, that is in the dark. do not even know how ill you are with it. it just seems like you are sorry and lazy, will not quit. it is just something so pleasurable, it could be hard to give up, not a really, honest to god addiction. that is not even in the mix for the family. and the family is saying, this could hurt you, so, please, honey. and what do you get? it causes as argument. you get a deaf ear. it goes in one ear and out the other. because you remember dr. burns said there are levels of people's understanding when you deal with addiction. one of them is hearing it, but not believing it. the next is believing it could be in general, but it is not personalized, not me. and it is always going on. so rather than have the family say it and saying, you know what, i do not have any -- i cannot rationalize or justify any way, shape or form in any mind, it is true. i really do not have any. it is just in one ear and out the other. because you are not a scientist, what do you know? not suggesting you have any evidence she said it, but i'm talking 4305 about the reasonable common sense inference. leave me alone. that is one of the things they did. because you think it was a mystery to them that family members, with all this in public health, were going to just go, we are not going to say a word about it? family members were going to join in. treating doctors were going to join in. and they did everything in their power to make sure it did not work, and it did not work on patty dawn allen. and they say, but that is got nothing to do with us. they have not shown you that she saw the frank statement or one of these tv things they ran. she is not here to prove it. and if she was, they would be saying it is self-serving. but actions speak louder than words, and it is the best evidence in this court, and you are authorized by the judge to rely on it. and her actions fit to a tee she was a cigarette company success story, and they want to say it is all just a big coincidence. and i'm asking you to use your common sense, particularly when the conduct really is irrational but for what they were doing. did it contribute? was it the only thing? some of it, maybe, but at least it contributed. 4306 i want to give you one analogy on that, and then i'm going to move to a different subject because i do want to save some time for rebuttal to put things in context. when i was younger, had a lot more hair, my daughter loved coke when she was little. and she drank it before bed, and she would get wired and could not sleep. so she was not allowed to have coke. she could have coke, but not before bed. i'm working on the kitchen table. the kitchen's right over here, but in a different room. and i hear her -- she had already gotten in bed. she crawled out of bed. and i hear her in the refrigerator rattling around. so i think, she is going for a coke. and i said, jennifer, you are not getting into coke, are you? she said, no, daddy. so i went back to whatever i was doing. next i hear, boom. came around the corner. there is a big two-liter thing of coke spewing all over. it is all over her nightie. she is got a glass in her hand, and it is foaming over the side of it. and i asked a dumb question, but it was calling for a direct evidence answer. direct evidence is what someone says. circumstantial evidence is the 4307 circumstances that sometimes are much -- speak louder than the words themselves. and i said, you did get into the coke, did not you? and she said, no, daddy. that was the direct evidence. the circumstantial evidence was foaming all over and all over the ground. and when it comes to patty dawn allen, these defendants have got coca-cola all over themselves. there is no escaping it. i want to talk to you a minute about damages. this is a hard part of the case because we do not have a calculator. and we have to judge what is fair. the instructions tell you the things you can consider; but, again, are they probably the most reasonable part of it, the best guide you are going to get? i think it says fair and reasonable under the circumstances. what would be fair and reasonable under the circumstances? to recognize as a measuring stick for what was taken, another life prematurely, but you do not just say, okay, simmer down. you have to look at the circumstances. and in the circumstances of this case, let me put some of that evidence, just as a reminder. you heard it, and you know it, but let me put it in context. 4308 it is pretty clear, and i mean no disrespect, mr. allen, and i mean no disrespect, amber, but she kept that family -- she was the strength in the middle of that family. and i may probably should not say that because we have got a man in the room, but it is true, you could see it. that is part of the circumstances. and a loving, close relationship. not everybody's blessed with a great relationship. sometimes in a death case, it may not be that tremendous a loss. this is not one of those situations. amber is a bit of a homebody and a bit shy. and her mother was her best friend, her confidant. there was nothing she could not talk about. her husband had a loving relationship. and she was the glue and the heart and soul that kept that family on track. and she did not just wake up one day and die of a heart attack. she smoked after getting diagnosed with copd. and both her mother -- i'm sorry, both amber and mr. allen would plead with her from time to time, stop, and she kept smoking. and it was like someone else was in the room all the time, they are not alone. it is like an intruder in a man's house, he cannot get away from his wife. and if he tries 4309 harder, it ends up in a fight. the total frustration of that addiction in that house is part of these circumstances, what that leaves, the lacerations that leaves. watching her wither away and literally suffocate to death. smoking up to where she cannot inhale anymore, and still announcing she would like to have another cigarette. living in the living room to be close to everybody. mr. allen met this woman, fell in love with this woman, and found his soulmate. and you know they were married for 30 years. almost half of it, she had copd. is that all their fault, and she does not carry any responsibility? absolutely not. of course not. but we walk in this courtroom acknowledging her share in it, and we are here to prove how they mightily share in that. and additional circumstances that, in fairness, need to be put into the assessment, as you sit as a group of appraisers and decide what is fair and reasonable between you, as you try to determine too much compensation is over, too little is under for what was taken, what is fair and reasonable under these circumstances. 4310 and this is a verdict for all time. we do not come back ten years now and do an update. and when you put that all together, i'm going to add another circumstance to this. and that is, the knowledge that has since then been learned because they are suffering -- remember, there is a 23-year-life expectancy -- and nobody's got a crystal ball, but that is the best evidence we got out of it, we read to you. this did not end when we talk out of here. the suffering goes on. and the suffering went on up to the day we walked in this courtroom, and continues every day while we are here, one day at a time. we do not suffer in a lump and are done with it. and in that environment of continued loss, where amber goes in and covers her dad up if he gets uncovered, mom's job, where she is still living at home. the circumstances are this harsh reality. while all that maddening, i cannot get this off of my wife, i cannot even really have a discussion about it, now you are sick, and i cannot protect you from this thing. i'm powerless. mom, i want you to be around. i cannot protect you from this thing. to then find out the reality that we have all 4311 learned here in this courtroom of what they were doing behind the scenes to contribute to it. and to know that, those -- when she switched to capris these little skinny cigarettes that look -- goodness gracious, they are the skinniest little thing, they sure look safer. they got that nice white filter. they did not help mom a bit. low tar? that was a lie. they were tricking the machines. to now process the grief, with that information front and center. filters were a fraud. tricking the machine. the conspiracy. it could have been a unified message and armed me with more power to try and save her from this addiction. how about just tell us she is addicted? really, serious drug addiction. not just some mamby-pamby like chocolate, but serious, honest to god powerful drug addiction, so we can get her help. and then you start finally getting some of that help, with patches and those things. that is part of what they suffer through. and mr. allen, who will not even sleep in the bed and will not change things around, they are frozen because of the nature of the role she played in that family, the horrendous way of watching her die the 4312 way she died, the horrible helplessness of that addiction being front and center every day, every moment, and then to learn afterwards all of this that could have made a difference, that was kept in the deep, dark places secretly by these defendants. and under those circumstances, my suggestion to you is that you use time, the value of the time and the overall impact of that. and i want to change subjects, because i'm running out of time, for just a minute, and i'll come back to that, but i want to change time for a minute. they bring an expert in who is the only one who says she is not addicted. and they pay him $600 an hour, and he comes here and tells you that. his value, his time, 600 an hour, and he comes and tells you that. and even if she was addicted, it had nothing to do with why she smoked. and that is the only witness who stands between justice and an opportunity to make a difference on this class membership subject. now, the surgeon general is dead wrong. i'm not going to play it. you remember this guy testifying? american tobacco, who was owned by r. j. reynolds, the surgeon general is dead wrong. 4313 who else came in there and said, dead wrong? the surgeon general is wrong. remember these talking points that i put up as to addiction, where they said when the surgeon general got around and caught up and figured out it was like heroin, and they sent out the big press release, scare tactic. and i had talked to dr. cummings, were these just in that document, or was that the drumbeat, millions of former smokers, 95 percent cold turkey, not a real drug, hard to give up, like any other pleasurable activity, caffeine, it is just a matter of choice. that is what they were putting out there. that was the message. and the evidence you have here in this case from dr. abramson is millions of former smokers, 90 percent quit cold turkey, hard to give up, because of pleasure, it is a matter of choice. i'm sorry i got side tracked. i want to go back now and finish talking on the subject of what is fair and reasonable under these circumstances. and i would suggest to you, under the totality of the circumstances of this case that i laid out for you, that $600 a day is a fair and reasonable amount. not an hour. that would be overreaching. that would be overcompensating. but for the 4314 magnitude of this loss under these circumstances, $600 a day for amber, for those 23 years that are lived one day at a time, 365 days a year, is fair and reasonable. and the same for andy allen. mr. belasic: your honor, we object under the law, the $600 compared to our expert testimony. mr. mitnik: i did not compare it -- mr. belasic: it is contrary to the law. that is what he did. mr. mitnik: i am not comparing it to it. the court: all right. i overrule the objection. the jury can understand that. mr. mitnik: sure. i want to be clear with the jurors. i'm not saying, here's an expert, and make it the same amount. to the contrary, what an expert does or makes has got nothing to do with their loss. but what i do want to talk to you about is the concept of their value of the time they lost with their wife and with her mother. last, punitive damages, and i'll sit down. are punitive damages warranted under the evidence of this case? i've lost my jury instructions, so i'll just talk to you about them. you are entitled to consider on the issue of reprehensibility, reprehensibility, harm to others. 4315 there has to be harm to my client, and it must flow through her for her to bring an opportunity to you to make a difference. that is the law. and i've laid out why we have proven that and why what they did to millions, they did to her, and how she was a cigarette company success story. and, yes, it contributed; and, therefore, they are responsible for -- here's the law on punitive -- "punitive damages are warranted in the circumstance in a case as punishment or as deterrents." mr. belasic: objection, your honor. can we read the "and"? mr. mitnik: -- "as punishment and" -- and -- "as a deterrent. they may be warranted on a finding that the defendant is liable for fraudulent concealment and/or conspiracy to defraud and conceal." and then here come the elements for you to consider: clear and convincing, was it so gross and flagrant to show reckless disregard of human life for the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct." i do not know how else to answer that but yes. i'm not the one answering it, but i'm making a suggestion of what i believe the evidence shows. 4316 "the conduct shows an entire lack of care, that defendant must have been consciously indifferent to the conferences." it could not be more clear, i suggest. when you talk clear and convincing, that one's crystal clear. "the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendants must have wantonly, recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public; the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of their rights; clear and convincing evidence." and it goes through and explains it. you are going to have it with you. it is more than more persuasive, more convincing, but what it comes down to is that "such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter." the evidence is proof. the youth marketing is crystal clear. the conspiracy is crystal clear. the coverup is crystal clear. the manipulations and additives done to make it more inhalable, to unleash the beast of the addiction full force, is crystal clear. the whole use of the ads is clear. filters could not be more clear in this case, and then low tar. 4317 all of that flows directly through patty dawn allen, and you can consider the harm to others as to reprehensibility to determine whether they are warranted, and this is as reprehensible as it can get. i would suggest, as you work through this -- and i do not always go through saying, mark it this way, but this is a heavy responsibility -- and i would suggest to you, on the evidence and the law, yes, she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and, of course, it was a cause of her smoking enough to get copd. now, we talk about the brands. yes, because they took it over and carried the torch after they wrestled her away as a customer. and philip morris, yes, because they are the ones that addicted this teenager and hardwired her. yes, as to concealment. was it a legal cause of her death? did it contribute, or was it just a big coincidence? i would suggest yes as to both. the concealment, i would suggest yes as to both. they were in the conspiracy together to do this. you saw we presented mountains of documents from both of them. and it need not be just on one or the other. it can be either. if the concealment 4318 and the fraud and the conspiracy as to the addiction alone was enough to be yes, yes, as to the concealing the health effects, yes, yes. not that they were concealed, but what they did to conceal the truth is, scientists do it, or it is not okay to wait and see. and this was the percentages that i talked to you about. and this is the warranted punitive damages. under the circumstances of this case, whether punitive damages are warranted against the defendants, and i suggest yes, yes. and if you answer that, we have a little more work to do. we have one more day of work to do. and we come back just to present a very brief -- we are not starting from scratch, just a little more evidence. then we will have an opportunity to try to deter, to encourage, to encourage at this level here, with you folks in jacksonville, florida, as part of a process -- and no one ever knows which step is going to be the one that counts most, but every step counts -- to protect the next generation of teenagers from this addiction, that they can get out, they can get out. and we have got these two companies who are the leaders of the industry to try and encourage an 4319 industry-wide change. thank you. mr. mitnik: okay. you are almost done from hearing from all of us. i've got all of this, not enough time. the good news, i do not have time. the bad news is i need more time because this is a search for the truth and i want things in context. and i'm -- i do not have time to put it all in context, but i'm going to do the best i can. bear with me, i'm going to talk a little fast. first, ms. norgaard, we just heard about her not really knowing if she smoked the benson & hedges brand. well, there was a second section where she went on, was asked about it, and she said clearly, when asked, do you have a specific recollection that 4430 it was benson & hedges? and she said, yes, and not only that, that she bought them by the carton. lower smoking with teens. you heard one in four are starting today. this was the surgeon general of the united states of america. we put this up for you. tobacco use in teens and young adults remain shockingly high in the united states. more than 3.6 million middle and high school students smoke cigarettes. in fact, for every one that dies due to smoking, more than 1200 each day, at least two youth or young adults become regular smokers. nearly ninety percent of these replacement smokers try their first cigarette by 18. clearly we have not solved the problem. this is not some old document. that is now. that is 2014. but they sit here and i've listened to both. it is -- it is -- it is -- it is surgeon general's fault. it is somebody's fault. it is not our fault. we did not do anything. we get picked on. and at the end of the day, the worst we did was maybe say some stupid things and maybe hung onto a couple definitions, technical, too long. you saw the evidence. that is the best they can come up with. but we are here trying to -- in the only language they understand, they talk about money and 4431 where the money's going. you know what? when it comes to deterring and punishing, they are not supposed to like it, but it is the only currency they understand. and we talked about this in voir dire, that if it -- if the law was different and went somewhere else, good, but that is not the way the law is. and i -- some people said, i'd be bothered to the point of distraction, and others said, you prove to me and it is not going to get in the way at all. remember a/b. every single one of you have said it would not stand in the way. because, you know, if you really want to take on philip morris and r. j. reynolds and try to bring about change in a court of law with people like you coming in here, in florida, that is always where it is going to go. that is always going to be the argument. and if it got in the way of the jurors, you could never bring about change. it is about their conduct. risk reduction. they talked about how the doctor said if you quit by so-and-so date. that is one of the most reprehensible things in this case, and it has directly to do with patty allen. because had they been telling her, it is not just your 4432 husband nagging; the surgeon general is not just chicken little; there is no controversy; we made it up; it was a lie; we got together and did it on purpose to convince you you can keep smoking for a while, it is too iffy. had they told her the truth -- and look, nobody studied the science at that time more than they did. you think they did not know about risk reductions, that if you told the truth, you would give people a chance and let them know that if you stop now, you may be okay? but they did not. they continued to pile on what they called in their own words a "holding strategy" while people were dying. and they want to say, well, what if you had just done it sooner? for them to say that? i want to throw a quick analogy out because i think it helps. this idea on the legal cause question -- and i say it need not be the sole cause? here's a simple concept, bicycle built for two, two people pedaling in the same direction. it is not all or one; more than one person contributes; more than one thing contributes. in this case, it is a bicycle built for three. because i told you, they are trying to put the floodlight, spotlight right on her. how little they 4433 talked about themselves. it is all she heard; she heard; she heard. one of the first things i said to you when i stood up here is she heard; she had -- everybody heard. this case is not about if you heard. they would have you believe if she heard, that is the end of it. you know, if it was, who would be the right smoker? everybody here. everybody's a wrong smoker under their analysis. everybody heard. the question is what were you doing? it is like somebody who takes someone, intentionally trips them, and when they fall down and get hurt badly, you say, now, wait a minute, other people kept their feet and did not fall. that is all on you. do not look at me. important, you heard -- you know what they did not talk about she heard? that it was a heavily addictive drug, like heroin, that they knew all along, celebrated in private. because, you know, if you find the concealment to the addiction contributed as a meaningful way to getting her hooked and we know the hook is what was a contributing cause to this whole ugly story, if it is the concealing the addiction only, then the answer to those questions on the verdict form are yes. it does not have to be concealing lung disease and 4434 concealing. look at the law the judge gave you, either one. if you concealed and conspired and it hurts somebody, you do not get off the hook because you say, i'm going to pick one side of it. they hardly even talked about concealing addiction because they do not have anything to say about that side. i'm going to go over these. i want to say a couple of quick things. i'm going to run out of time. i'm going to be kicking myself if i do not get to a couple of these. hold on one second. they kept saying if you say yes to concealment, the percentage of the fault does not come down. and that is the law. once again, we did not pick the law. it is the law. we have knowledge responsibility, but under the law, that does not fit on those torts, those causes of action. and they -- are they suggesting to you that if the evidence shows it, just do not say yes to those because of the way the law works if you do not like it? we were way too hard on all those people to get folks who were not going to follow this law to wherever this evidence led. another one, thanksgiving. say no. we all go and enjoy thanksgiving. well, we worked too hard. 4435 you people are too committed to this process to take a shortcut. everybody wants to get home. but let us finish a hard job, one more day, and let us do something that matters under the law and the evidence in this case. over and over, how many times did we hear these phrases? it did not prevent her from quitting. she could quit. it did not prevent her from quitting. it could quit. remember one of the first slides i put up in opening was a slide that said, can you quit is not the question. you do not have to take my word for it anymore. his honor has told you the question. look through there and find something that says can you quit? you remember those old documents that were up, where it said our lawyers or the lawyers tell us if it is free -- if addiction comes out, we cannot keep defending free choice? two of them. to some extent the argument revolving around free choice is being negated on the grounds of addiction. cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin. we are citing a quote. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. and then the scare document, the scare tactic document i'm going to put up that shows ninety percent 4436 could quit cold turkey. it is all choice. it is just enjoyment. well, now, there is no way around it. they are addicted. they cannot deny that. you have got these engle findings. but where are we? well, we got abramson who comes in and says, well, even if you are, it would not make any difference because it does not cause anyone to smoke unless they are mentally damaged. it is all just choice. how many times did the word "choice" come off the defendants' lips? it is not about whether she had a choice. you heard dr. burns, said this person could not quit. now, he does not mean physically impossible. it does not work that way. but she was overwhelmed by it, was unable to be successful at it. the question is not could you quit. here's another. remember, they started out wrong smoker? well, here's a question. if they say everyone can quit and it is possible for everyone to quit, some really overwhelming never are, but it is physically -- it is literally possible for everyone to quit. if the question was could you quit, if that was the question, who would ever be a right smoker? 4437 but it is not the question, hallelujah. the question is: was she addicted, and was the addiction one of the reasons she smoked so frequently and for so long and resisted what would have been otherwise rational movements? by the way, those were not out for patty dawn allen to see. those were in deep, dark, secret places. they got triers. you will see. they said benson & hedges -- benson & hedges menthols did not come out until 1968. you -- look, this is a search for the truth. y'all take notes. dr. cummings told you they came out in 1966. that is just not what the evidence was. mr. kelly: objection, your honor, that misstates the evidence. the court: well, that is -- that is for the jury to decide. the argument of counsel is just argument. you are the ones who decide what the facts are based upon the evidence. mr. mitnik: i want to get this real quick. this is the stuff about -- you keep hearing about the -- the back pain she had and about the weight issues. i want to show you a little something. it is all in the records. these are little summaries 4438 for you, just to make it easier. because nowhere on your question is it going to be did she have any problem with -- with being -- wanting to be thin and being -- spending too much time wanting to be thin or whatever definition you put on it. that is got nothing to do with it. they are trying to make it sound like, oh, yeah, you have this problem so you could not be addicted, or, oh, you had a little depression so you cannot be addicted, or oh, you have some back pain; you are on some back medications so you cannot be addicted. the question is: was she addicted? not whether she had bangs and bumps and bruises and hardships of life. that is life. but i want you to see something. this is on the pain medication. she, no question, had pain medication. no question on one note. the doctor really just sounded like it was all the time horrible. but let us really look at the -- pain medication is a very good measuring stick of -- as mr. allen said, yeah, she had a back problem, but she continued on and did things, and it kind of came and went. now, there is evidence in the case. and they put up these records. so let us look. this is a ten-month period where she was on -- 4439 flexeril -- flexeril, which a muscle relaxant, and then darvocet, which is pain. that is for a ten-month period. she was diagnosed with the copd right there. then six months go. now, you see when she is using her medicines, she is filling them up. six months, no medications filled. then here we are, refilled for 9/16 and 9/15. nine months go by, no prescription refills. then we have a one-and-a-half month period, then nine more months with no refills. and then in '99, three -- over three years with no refills. i'm not suggesting she did not have back pain. i'm suggesting they are overplaying their hand on back because we would rather talk about anything but addiction. let us talk about weight. mrs. allen, the medical records they have been parading around. we just pulled them out in a summary form for you. here's her weight: 108, 105, 106, 100, 102, 103, 112, 118. that is when she is diagnosed with copd. let us keep following. 114, 14, 17, 18, 19, 15, 14. her dad dies. her weight drops significantly right after her daddy died. weight's down. weight's down. weight starts coming back. weight starts coming back. we are now getting out away from 4440 the date of her dad's death. mom dies. weight drops down. now she is hospitalized. this is when she cannot breathe hardly and no longer can suck air in enough to smoke a cigarette, even though she wants to and is on oxygen and her weight's down. and, in fact, it actually goes back to 106. she is thin. what is that got to do with the defense or an excuse for that? okay. what have you got? one more. these are critical. you have these pictures? unidentified speaker: yes. mr. mitnik: pull them up, please. now, remember, they are saying -- their suggestion is her whole life, she is been blaming her anorexic -- just a wreck with this weight stuff her whole life. let us look. pictures are worth 1,000 words. there she is. next. that is not high school. next. there she is shortly before she was diagnosed with copd. does that look like some anorexic, sick woman? that is right before she was diagnosed on a cruise with her husband. now, there she is with her family. and amber. now, let us look what she looks like after 4441 diagnosis. but let us find for r. j. reynolds and philip morris because they say she got anorexic. according to their expert, you cannot be addicted with the dsm-5 unless you are in this extreme state that someone who could not work anymore because they could not make it to a break and smoke. that person may run out and be miserable and as soon as the break time, suck it down in the cold and the rain and come back and do that every break and at lunch and all the way home and first thing, but they would not be addicted because they did not have to quit their job. that is who they brought you. they talk about witnesses we brought. they talk about andy allen, jr. we can bring witnesses until we turn into the engle trial. at some point, we quit calling witnesses. and andy was too old at the time he died to have a claim. but they have his depo, what he says. but who did they call? a person? has anyone denied that they are still targeting teens? ms. allen never said, her daughter, i started smoking or changed a brand because i saw this ad. imagine if she had take -- that young lady had taken 4442 this stand and said, my mom told me that on july 12th, 1998, she switched because she saw this ad that said so-and-so. who on earth would believe her? but they say that is what is required or they get a, no, we are not responsible. they say that she never said to her husband, i did this for this ad. that is a badge of the truthfulness. how easy would it be for these two to come in here and say, let me -- i've got the checklist. let us just say it all. but she is not walking around having those kind of conversations with her husband. but what they say she never said, that, boy, there was any kind of conspiracy or fraud or they did anything wrong? she filed a lawsuit. mr. belasic: objection, your honor, the lawsuit is not evidence. that is why we have the trial. mr. mitnik: judge, they brought it up over and over, over my objection. mr. belasic: it is not evidence. objection. the court: i think it is obvious that the lawsuit was brought so overrule the objection. mr. mitnik: she died before her deposition was taken, so we do not have her testimony here. and they are trying to exploit that. they exploited her 4443 during her life, and here's the way we can bring that to the conclusion in this courtroom. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. that violates your order in favor of the defendants. mr. mitnik: i'm talking about the defendants. the court: right. but the deposition and activities of the lawsuit should not be considered by the jury. mr. mitnik: they keep saying, what about this and mrs. allen? there was nothing personal about this conspiracy and fraud with ms. allen, nothing personal. it was cold and calculated. the only people it is personal to is her family. she tried hypnosis, patches, nicotine, wellbutrin, cold turkey. none of it worked. told she is going to die. none of it worked. told her daughter, i do not like it, do not you ever touch them. i'm addicted but they say no. and they say, well, how would we ever know if she was addicted before she tried? for goodness sake. we do not check our common sense at the door. you think she was in that shape, addicted and smoking two packs a day since 18 years old and if we moved it back, that she was not addicted? let us look at the logic. if you are addicted, 4444 it -- if you do not try, you are not addicted. but if you do try, guess what, the conspiracy must not have worked because you are trying. and if you do try it, by the way, or do not and you happen to be addicted, abramson will tell you, so what? the question's still, no, the question. here's what they knew about nicotine addiction. in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. '63, behind the scenes, closed doors, in designing any cigarette product, the down specification should be nicotine delivery. '72, behind the scenes, confidential, nicotine, a potent drug, industry's based upon it, sale and attractive, the dosage source of nicotine. the cigarette's a delivery device. that is what they knew, but they stood up before congress and swore and denied it. and they sure did not tell ms. allen. and if they had it would have changed the course. who would start up on something when they were told when they were young, it is going to kill you, and you are likely to get hooked like heroin? find something else to express yourself. but then everybody else would not have been doing it all around her, police and doctors and everybody else. you think what they did did not have 4445 an impact on this case? and they want to say, everybody knew at the turn of the century. she knew all about addiction. why do not they talk to you about this document? how much time did they spend explaining that? brown & williamson is r. j. reynolds. very few customers are aware of the effects of nicotine, it is -- its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison. if she knew and everybody knew, why are not they explaining that to you? not a word. by the way, they put up, again, the reason she started. and they just left out one of them, glamorous. but you heard it. y'all took notes. the very person they put up that said peers and weight, said, and it was glamorous to everybody. and they leave that out. because you know what? that sounds less like it might be their fault. and i'm not saying all their fault, folks. we are talking about they significantly contributed to the fault here and we are here to prove that. the polls. they showed the polls. i do not have time to go back over the polls. the polls they kept showing, you heard from dr. cummings that people thought it cut your wind and gave you throat scratch. it was not about dying. 4446 the polls that showed it caused a death was a big disparity between heard it because everybody heard it and believed it and a much bigger disparity between those who believed it and smoked and did not smoke, which you know fits to a tee, patty dawn's family. her parents never said, it is going to kill you, just do not do it. they smoked. her sister, who did not smoke, said, stop, it is going to kill you. that is the difference. they say that patty dawn knew -- knew, that was their word -- knew that it was deadly. where is that evidence? had she heard it? absolutely. their whole conspiracy was to take no and convert it into a muddy mess that would not set. and when someone's addicted, it is the set hard, cold facts to get to that level of personal threat. nobody said she knew. everybody admits she heard. it is a life-and-death difference. but the scientists could not agree, so wait and see. that was their message. so when he said it, she said it, fell on deaf ears because of what they did. they say, what have we got to do with this? you have got -- the court: in timing, i made a little bit of a mistake and gave them -- 4447 mr. mitnik: i think they got -- the court: about 20 after, 21 after. mr. mitnik: there is virtually no evidence that the warning statement on the cigarette package had any significant effect. cigarette sales were high. were they all on the cigarettes? yes, they were. were they working? no, they were not. guess who knew? them. they come in here and say they were on there. they were. remember, i asked everybody on the jury, does anybody think that if there are warning labels on it, then you should not be able to sue? some of it, a lot of people did. not y'all. 1968, fourth-graders, fourth-graders. this ain't even to the principal. it is to the students, the class. there is pitching the conspiracy to the kids. but that is not ancient history. 1990, to the principal. nobody knows. scientists cannot agree. 1990. there is no need to punish and deter? i beg to differ based on the evidence, not what the lawyers say. filters, i want to say this. they have said "choice" 100 times. if i had more -- if i had 20 minutes, i'd fill it with filters, filters, filters because they have everything to do with why they are 4448 responsible. they said nobody -- nobody -- you cannot point to a single ad that says filters are safer. of course not. you heard dr. cummings. if they said they are safer, what would they be admitting? they are dangerous. they were not going to say safer because that meant dangerous. but what they did through the packaging and the imaging was to make sure everyone felt they were safer. and we know from the ftc that they worked unbelievably, and everybody switched over because they thought they were safer. but they say there was not anything on the package she saw. there was not anything like that on any package. but we got the wrong smoker. but the problem is with those arguments, everyone's the wrong smoker. misled the public about safety. the industry does not believe that there are any bad elements. if there are any bad elements, they will be removed. these are external statements. here, this is internal. we say, here is our triple, quadruple, quintuple filter, capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke are currently suspect. that was their aim. the smoker of the filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a 4449 regular cigarette. that is not them. that -- excuse me. is that an internal? that is internal, what they are really saying. the illusion of filtration is what they are really saying. and the surgeon general says, new designs were used by tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts. and she never picked up a cigarette, of any evidence in this case, that was not filtered. so when she started way back in that other time and place, they were 13 years into conspiracy, hiding addiction, hiding the truth that there is no dispute; there is no controversy; it is made up and offered false, fraudulent, safe-seeming fixes. let us talk about their choices while you are pulling that up. they made the choice -- choices to do the additives and the engineering for inhalability and addiction. they choose to add the chemicals to increase the addictiveness of nicotine. they choose to spray the nicotine back on the cigarettes. they choose to trick the ftc machines to make the low tars look like something they were not. they choose to promote indirectly that the filters and the low tars were safer. they chose to conspire. they 4450 chose to conceal. and it is one billion a year in advertising, more than one day -- they spent more in one day than the clearinghouse spent the entire year. cigarettes remained one of the most heavily marketed products in the united states with more than $250 billion and -- and $206 -- expended between 1940 and 2005 on cigarette advertising and promotion. and they would walk in here and tell you it does not work. they are just wasting their money. because it worked so well. that is why it worked so well. people do not think they are being led to it. nicotine and disease, what we know. surgeon general report, 2010. highly addictive drug, despite what their witness they hired and paid said. addiction keeps people smoking. that is legal cause. there it is, from the surgeon general of the united states of america. are you going to believe him or abramson? design for addiction. addiction -- addictive and chemicals that help make them more addictive. filtered, low tars and lights, cigarettes are every bit as addictive, are no safer. putting something up or are we done back there? 4451 the court: you have about three minutes. mr. mitnik: i know. i'm saying, you guys got anything else before i wrap up? they are back there furiously looking at the clips. i got one while they are looking real quick. they say that she quit for five months, according to dr. kirley's records. well, let us look at that with the totality of the evidence. here's what you have got. she had not seen him for five months. and she had quit as of the last visit, tried to quit, tried to stop as of the last visit, and she came back five months later and walks into the office. and he figures out she is been smoking. i -- i was not there but doctors know what cigarettes smell like. and she says, i started back two weeks ago. now, it could have been. that is what she told the doctor. except we have another piece of evidence. i'm not just speculating. we have mr. allen. when he said she quit for five months, no, she never quit for five months. a couple weeks. and half their case has been about the five months. and there is some evidence. but how strong is that evidence in the real world? you think he would have known after pleading with her if she quit for five months? 4452 she went through all of those quit attempts. you heard the testimony about chantix, which is the drug that works with the brain level, and even that is a -- got -- i forgot -- seventy percent failure rate or something. but it was the best that is come along. that was not available until after she had -- unable to inhale. is that it? the court: one minute. one minute remaining. mr. mitnik: here we go. truth matters, folks. truth matters. consequences matter, particularly under these circumstances. consequences matter. these defendants would not tell the truth. they knew what the consequences would be to millions and it is still going on today. and patty allen may not have been door-to-door knocking. they may not have came to her first but they cast a big net and they drug her in and did everything in their power to keep her from getting out of the net. and she ended up on the deck with millions of others, gasping for air. and you know what they did? they got a bunch of replacement smokers that were teenagers and she was one of them. and as a result of being one of them, she brings an opportunity here. it does not 4453 come along often. the court: all right. conclude your remarks. mr. mitnik: i ask you, please, based on the evidence and the law, to bring back a verdict that says yes, all the way down to punitive damages. and please bear with us one more day, where i can lay out a plan to talk about. cannot talk about it now, but i can lay out a plan to do something. thank you.