mr. dennis murphy: ladies and gentlemen, we almost at the end of the case. this is the last chance i get to talk to you. i'm going to spend my time summarizing why plaintiffs have not proven their case and why you should not award money to plaintiffs from my client, r.j. reynolds, for mrs. allen's decision to smoke. before i go any further -- and mr. webb and i are sharing the defense time, so if we get near the end of the time, i may have to hurry up and you may see me get the proverbial hook. but i want to make sure right up front i do not forget to join with mr. mitnik and thank you for your service. as i said in openings, our justice system, our legal system, is one of the things that makes our country great. and here we have a right to trial by jury. and this process only works when citizens show up, citizens like you. you know, for us, the lawyers, for judge boyer, this is our job. this is what we do every day. but for you this is something special. you know, i'm sure you have noticed that daily when you come in and out we stand for you. and there is a reason we stand. we stand because you are the trier of fact. that is your official role. but we also stand out of respect for the job you do and the sacrifice you are making. again, jury duty is one of those rare things our country asks of us, rare times our country migh call on us. and you all answered that call and we thank you. let me get right into, as i said in opening, talk about what this case is about and what the evidence shows. first i'll talk about the two things i said right up front in opening what this case is about. one, mrs. allen, first and foremost. the second one, as i said in opening, is this case is about money. make no mistake about it. but this case is also about the evidence you heard over the last two weeks. and i foreshadowei what i thought the evidence would be back in opening. i'm going to talk about that as i go through my closing today. you may remember i put up six points. i put them up on the board. now i have a chart. and we will talk about how the evidence has established those six points. and in fact, not only does the evidence support those points, but there is really no evidence to the contrary on those. plaintiffs' experts and plaintiffs' witnesses support those six. when i go through, i'll explain that for these six reasons plaintiffs should not be awarded money from r.j. reynolds. before i get into those six -- and i'll try to not block everyone when i do not have to -- let us talk about mrs. allen. because this case is about her, her choices, her decisions, her responsibilities. it is not about anyone else. the case is not about whether other people have been injured by smoking, and no one else but the allens get money if they prevail in this case. this case is not about whether cigarettes should be sold, and giving money to the allens at the end of this case will not change the sale of cigarettes. if this case is about mrs. allen, then, why do we hear so much in this case about things have nothing to do with her? we have heard about advertisements from before she was born, advertisements for brands of cigarettes she never smoked. we saw statements from tobacco companie that she never saw. we talked about trade groups that she never heard of. why did the plaintiffs put the focus on all those things that have nothing to do with mrs. allei rather than putting the focus on mrs. allen? and this was clear during counsel's closing argument. he started off his closing argument talking about punitive damages, talking about what you should do for others, what you should do basec on conduct not linked to mrs. allen. and the reason they did this, because the facts relating to mrs. allen are simply not good for them focusing on her case will not get you riled up. so they focused on other things. they want to get you mad. they want to show you ads she did not see. remember the ads during trial with doctors? they want to show you tv interviews from england that were never shown in this country. let us focus on another thing right up front here, the notion of banning cigarettes. in this trial you learned that cigarettes actually were banned in states like florida and a few others. we have demonstrative 1. we saw that map. and those bans were lifted, not because smokin; does not have risks, but because, as with alcohol, the government decided that citizens should get to choose whether or not to use risky products. you may recall that we mentioned banning cigarettes back in jury selection. i asked the group of people back in the room there whether anyone was in favor of banning cigarettes. and the reason i asked that was because that is something that goes to bias. it shows that someone has formed their opinions on these subject matters. and think about that when you think about the witnesses you saw in this case. and, again, should not witnesses be unbiased? obviously by the time they get to the courtroom, they are here to testify for one side or the other. we know that. but the process they went through, their formation and the reasons why they are here, should not it be here -- should not they be here for mrs. allen's case? think about their motives in testifying. i'll give you an example, dr. cummings. do you remember dr. cummings, who was here for three day; he was the one who advocates for a war on tobacco. he is a general in that war. he is general cummings. he is the one -- if you remember, as part of his war he travels around florida testifying in cases like this. he had been to four trials in the last month. i think it was 14 in the last year. he brought all those documents and videos and slides. he is got that traveling show. he goes to these trials and he plays them, whether or not those ads have to do with that plaintiff or not, whether or not the plaintiff saw the film clips he is showing. he let on what his motive was. they have it at the bottom there. he believes they are 50 years too late in banning cigarettes. he wants to use litigation as a means of driving up the cost of cigarettes, to make them so expensive that smoker cannot buy them, so that tobacco companies cannot sel them. he told us up front he is rooting for mrs. allen in this case for those reasons. some of the plaintiffs' other experts were similar. remember dr. proctor was the video. he did not even come; they played him on video. he talked about litigation like this potentially has the same effect as taxation; the cost of doing business of tobacco goes up. that is why he is participating, to raise the cost. dr. burns, similar, "i support litigation that has resulted in rise in cigarette prices as a means of decreasing cigarette consumption." that is why those witnesses were here. they want to drive up the cost of cigarettes. and, you know, that also says something about what they think about cigarettes and quitting. because if their goal is to drive up the cost and smokers cannot quit, well, then they are really just trying to soak smokers. but their goal is to drive up the cost so smokers will not buy them, because they know smokers can quit, and they want to get the cost up high enough so smokers do quit. the other main expert we saw was dr. henningfield. you remember that dr. henningfield did not support a ban. he was the one working with the fda to determine what additiv should be listed on the packs. remember, they have not made a decision on that yet. you heard that from him. he was the one also working with the fda to see how to make cigarettes better. and, again, you heard from him that the fda has not given the companies any guidance on that topic yet. so let us get to mrs. allen and what this case is about. and who was mrs. allen? we heard a lot about who mrs. allen was in this case from the people who knew her. i just want to walk through some of those people you heard from. we heard from her husband, mr. allen. we hearc from amber. we heard from her sister, rose marie nielsen. we heard from charlene crawford, her cousin; ms. dockins, her friend and roommate; sand walker, her sister-in-law; and phyllis norgaard, her friend and roommate. those people may not be memorable because thei depositions were read in. cannot put their faces up and they mean anything to you. but remember, that has the same effect as if they were here testifying live. and we heard what they had to say about mrs. allen when they were here by deposition. let us put up -- we have a chart of some of the things that were said that we used during trial. mrs. allen was determined and very driven. she did what she wanted to do, independent, adventurous a go-getter. she ran the show. if she said she was going to do something, she did it. also the next slide, a couple other descriptions of mrs. allen. remember, she moved out of her parents' home a 18. she moved from desoto to st. louis to california and then to florida, all at a young age. she changed her name from patty to dawn. she excelled at her sales job. mrs. allen told us she was the primary breadwinner. she even relocated he family for work when she moved down to the tamp; area. so that is a little bit about mrs. allen, her personality. mr. mitnik: can we see that? mr. dennis murphy: oh, sure. i'm sorry. mr. mitnik: that is fine. go ahead. mr. dennis murphy: also i tried to do a tim line so we can quickly refer to mrs. allen and her smoking. these are just the basic facts of what you heard here. i put down 1966 as the date, and i do not think there is any dispute that she was not smoking regularly before then. i will not get into when she had her first cigarette. i will not talk much about this first ten years of smoking. as even mr. mitnik said this morning, my client's cigarettes, the cigarettes she smoked, more, they did not come on thi market until 1975, and we do not have anyone testifying about mrs. allen smoking them until 1976 ms. dockins, remember her friend and roommate we had her testifying. so there is no evidence that mrs. allen smoked anything my client made before 1976. as you go through the case, as you go through deliberations, as i go through closing, i'll point out all the things that happened before 1976. we had the '64 surgeon general's report, the first warning on the pack. we even had the second warnings on all the packs. we had no ads on tv and all print ads contained a warning. you remember when we went through with dr. cummings, and he basically confirmed some of those things about more and mrs. allen. she was 27 when they came out in '75, so even older when we have evidence of her smoking them. she had been smoking for ten years by the time she ever picked up one of my client's cigarettes. she had already made her decision to start smoking. she had already made her decision to smoke. she di most of those things we saw on the board. she move to california, down to florida, changed her name, all those things before she picked up my client's cigarette. and look what cigarettes she picked up. we heard about it again this morning. you saw it through trial, saw it with dr. henningfield. more. that was the name, more. it was a long, brown cigarette. someone in -- one of the fact witnesses said it looked like a cigar, one of those who saw her smoking it, long and dark. we heard all sorts of testimony in this trial, all sorts of argument about cigarettes that were light, cigarettes being slim or thin. this cigarette that she picked up from my client was more. it was called more. not less, more. not light, not thin, not slim, none of that. and it is brown, not white. you heard a lot about white and its connotations. remember that more was a brown cigarette. one thing right up front -- well, two things right up front. when dr. cummings was here, he mentioned the ads for a cigarette called misty. well, as the judge will tell you, it is up to you to remember what the evidence was, but we heard from all these -- all those folks who knew mrs. allen, and there was no evidence that she smoked misty. s i'm just going to run a line through that. we did hear that she switched to capri at one point in time. that is another cigarette that my client makes. but remember, capri did not come on the market until 1988 when mrs. allen was 40 years old. and whether i do it now or later, we will see that she sent in that form to philip morris in 1992 or after, based on the date on the form, and she was still smoking more. so she did not smoke them in '8 when she was 40. when she was 44 she was still smoking more. one thing you have heard about in opening and you have heard in the instructions is the burden of proof. and the simple message is it is the plaintiffs who have the burden of proof. reynolds, me on behalf of reynolds, i do not have to prove anything in this case. one example on the burden of proof is advertising. the plaintiffs' basic claim is there were all these ads out there and mrs. allen smoked and they want you to think of "there must be some kind of cause and effect." there were ads for more and she smoked more. had to be the ads, right? but there is more to it. they have to prove it. they have to point to some evidence in this case that supports their claims. and they simply cannot do it for advertising or any statement coming from r.j. reynolds that has her smoking from 1976 on. they cannot do it. so remember, the plaintiff has the burden of proof on these points. they cannot ask you to connect the dots until they show you how the line gets drawn. there is no line between these dots. you cannot draw that line without evidence. let me go back to the six points and work through these. and we will start with point 1. point 1 is mrs. allen was aware of and understood the risks of smoking at all times that she smoked. so now i've got this a little slanted, but we will fix it when we put it up again. so let us spend a moment and talk about mrs. allen's awareness and what was known about 1 risks of smoking during the time she was starting to smoke and during the time she smoked. first thing let us put up, that first warning label. by '66 when she is a regular smoking -regular smoker, there was a warning label on all packs of cigarettes. no doubt about that, because we saw the ftc report that plaintiffs put in. they acknowledged that to the knowledge of the ftc -- a dr. cummings told us that was the body who was looking out for this stuff -- all cigarette manufacturers have complied with the labelling provisions. so the companies did what they were supposed to do regarding labelling. but awareness of the risks of smoking existed long before 1966. we have in evidence -- and we do not walk through all this, but all of this will be back for you in evidence, what you see on the screen -- newspaper coverage from st. louis in the 1950s. again, mrs. allen grew up outside of st. louis. you will see articles like this, "women smokers as susceptible to cancer as men." "survey shows cigarette smokers die sooner." dr. graham, right around the time of that famous experiment, there is an article in st. louis about it, "cigarette smoke/tar causes cancer." all over the newspapers. and, remember, we can go back to 1955. after those studies, after publication, we had the "see it now" show. we had dr. hammond, one of those early scientists. and he was asked about what the public knew of these risks. we talked about this with dr. cummings. and here's what dr. hammond said. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) dr. hammond: "in my opinion, people should b warned of the danger, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business." (the video clip was ended.) mr. dennis murphy: so he believed people should be warned, and they were being warned. if you walk through the '50s, we have got other public health officials weighing in on what the public knows. the surgeon general, leroy burney "they have informed the public." got a lot to do. i'm not going to spend a whole lot of time. we have got dr. heller, again 1957, nci. "they have done an excellent job of covering the problem. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public," back in '57. then we have got the '64 surgeon general's report, and we talked about that. it was front-page news around the country. that is the st. louis newspaper. dr. cummings agreed that it was front-page news around the country. on tv, each network had a special. we heard that. we saw i think it was the cbs portion -- plaintiffs played some of it this morning again -- the harry reasoner. we talked to dr. cummings, and his institution was featured on the nbc show. and abc also had a show. the '64 surgeon general's report received such wide coverage, and we showed this, the florida health notes, florida board of health, recognized that nearly all floridians had heard about the surgeon general's report a year later. nearly everyone had heard. 1964, the same year, the ama recognized that the health hazards of excessive smoking were publicized for more than ten years. ten years before '64, 12 years before mrs. allen started smoking. 1966, after the warnings went on, gallup organization did a poll. you saw polls mr. mitnik put up. here's one in '66 that specifically asked women, "do you agree that smoking cigarettes is harmful to health?" and we saw that almost 84 percent agreed. 11 percent disagreed. that is '66, the time mrs. allen started smoking. 1968, right after she started, we had dr. horn from the clearinghouse. his quote is, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout, 'smoking is dangerou at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." after that we have 1969, and the language on the warning changed. let me just stick here for a minute, because you heard the judge tell you this morning, we heard mr. mitnik tell you, this warning -- make sure i get the right page -- this warning complied with federal law, and the defendants have no legal obligation to make any additional warnings. and plaintiffs make no claim for failure to warn about cigarettes after 1969. no claim about failure to warn after '69. my client, r.j. reynolds, all of mrs. allen's smoking is after '69. '76 she smokes more. so there is no claim that she was not warned about the risks of any of the cigarettes she smoked from r.j. reynolds. it is not part of the case. 1972 the ads were off of tv. no ads for any of the reynolds brands on tv. 1972 -- and radio, by the way. 1972, same year, all the ads for cigarettes had to have that same warning. so all the ads she ever saw for more, capri, had the warning, the warning that the judge told you was adequate and sufficient and that there are no claims in this case about. all the ads for my client's cigarettes. we got to that period between 1966 and '72. we talked to dr. cummings about this. it was that fairness doctrine period, the time when there were anti-smoking ads on tv. we saw the william talm: ad from perry mason. that is the time that mrs. allen was beginning to smoke. it is also the time that the warnings were on the pack. it was after the surgeon general's report, these tv commercials. we learned from dr. cummings that more people quit smoking during that period of time than any other period. it was that time period. we have got '66, right when she is starting, to the early '70s. dr. cummings told us it was about million people quit during that time. mrs. allen's starting to smoke when people are quitting by the tens of millions. the evidence is mrs. allen was different. she chose to smoke while people in similar circumstance chose to quit or chose not to take up smoking. they all saw the same ads, they could have got the same messages from the newspapers, from the tv. she chose one path; these millions and millions chose another. that is what the evidence is in this case. let me just complete our warnings. we had the 1985 warnings on the packs. again, part of her time smoking more would have contained the rotating warnings; all of her time with capri. and just so there is no confusion, like the warning that started in 1970, these are legally adequate. it is part of the judge's instruction, no claim for failure to warn during this time. the bottom line is, smoking and health has been one of the most widely covered topics of the last 50 years. you can go through -- we have in evidence papers from st. louis from the '60s when mrs. allen was growing up. you can see one up there, "deaths from emphysema often linked from smoking rise sharply from 1965." we have another one from st. louis during the '70s. mrs. allen was still there. "hazards for women smoking, prevention of emphysema is stressed. then when mrs. allen moves to florida, the coverage here continued in jacksonville. "great american smokeout, how to keep from lighting up again." and this is just a sample of the coverage that is out there, a sample of all the articles and a sample of what you have in evidence. we also talked about magazines when dr. cummings was here. and articles about smoking were in magazines, magazines that were widely circulated. and as we talked about, this was before the internet, before all those tv channels, and people read magazines. people read reader's digest, time and life. we talked about those being heavily circulated. here's reader's digest. we saw from the 1920s up through the surgeon general's report article after article. we went through those. one thing that the reader's digest said about that time period -- they published 36 articles on smoking and health. the american cancer society termed them a profound influence in creating public awareness of the risks involved in smoking. do we have another one on life, time ? you sa those. some of those will be in evidence. when you talk about whether people knew the risks, you can also look at what the plaintiffs' experts said. first we had dr. henningfield. he was asked, "you would agree most smokers know that smoking's bad for them?" "yes. "virtually all smokers know that?" it goes on, "right" -- here's the important question. "right. bad for you and hard to quit for a long time, right?" "yes." that is what dr. henningfield said, no disagreement. dr. cummings, on the '64 surgeon general's report, "virtually all the american public had heard this message?" yes. it increased thereafter. dr. burns, he had a couple quotes about public awareness, what was known. plaintiffs' expert. "more americans knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name of the president of the united states." dr. burns in 1975. remember i had to get up and make sure he got the date? that is the year more came out, before mrs. allen smoked my client's cigarettes. and if you carry it forward with dr. burns, 1981, "95 percent of the people are thoroughly awan of the health dangers of smoking. ninety percent of them realize that their own health could be affected." 1981, plaintiffs' expert. and this case is not just about the public and that awareness. it is about mrs. allen. mrs. allen had personal knowledge of the risks of smoking. yc heard that she was intelligent, kept up with the news. she was clearly exposed to all this information. you heard that she used terms like "cancer sticks" and "nicotine fit." she had all kinds of people in her life that told her about the risks of smoking. her doctors did. we heard about that. we saw the testimony on that. her children would ask her not to smoke. they would hide her cigarettes. her husband, from the time he met her, would tell her not to smoke. he had a parent who had emphysema. he knew about wh smoking could do. mrs. allen's own parents told her not to smoke growing up, and she had parents with emphysema. an then her siblings. from the start we heard from mrs. allen's sister about what she told mrs. allen the first time she saw her smoking. can we have that up there? "smoking will kill you." rosemarie nielsen, mrs. allen's sister, 1966. personal message delivered that mirrors what the public knew at the time, totally consistent. these are the people closest to her that provide this information. there is no doubt that mrs. allen knew of the risks, and there is no evidence in the case to suggest otherwise. none of those people came in here and said, mrs. allen did not know, she was unaware, she told me she did not think there were risks to smoking. no one said that. no one ever said that she did not believe those warnings from 1966 on. no one came here and said that. you saw dr. cummings. he was on the stand for three days. he told you he reviewed all the materials in this case; depositions, medical records, all of that. and what did he say? "in depositions that you reviewed, do you recall anyone testifying that mrs. allen told them she did not know about the risks of smoking?" "no." that is from dr. cummings. if he had found anything anywhere that suggested otherwise, do not you think he would have brought it up when he was asked? so if counsel put up polls, questions about what people might have been aware of, what people might not have been aware of, and maybe he will put up more, you remember what category on the poll mrs. allen goes in. she knew of the risks of smoking. she goes in the 84 percent of the '66 poll. she goes in whatever the percentage is on the poll that he puts up of the people who knew about smoking. let us go to point number 2. mrs. allen had specific reasons for her smoking. the point here is, as you heard at trial, addiction is not the only reason people smoke. there are many reasons why people smoke, and mrs. allen had her own. and we saw these at trial. to maintain her weight, for enjoyment, to deal with stress at work and to give relief from her chronic pain. and you heard the testimony of the fact witnesses about that, and her medical records. we saw some of those and those will be in evidence. that came from these people, the people who knew her. and the point here is, smoking's not just a one-time decision. it is not a decision you make one day back in 1966 or whenever and then never make again. smoking's an everyday decision. and mrs. allen made her decision to smoke, she took control of her smoking for those reasons, every time she picked up a pack. you know, there is no dispute that mrs. allen smoked for these reasons. remember when dr. burr was here. mr. taraska actually asked dr. burns about these. "pain, stress, we saw on that, and the other thing the jury's been told about, it is your opinion they may have contributed to her smoking?" dr. burns says: "i think they contributed to her continuing smoking several years." that is plaintiffs' own expert. let me get to point number 3. it would save time if i just hold them up here. mrs. allen could have quit smoking, and if she had done so she would have avoided her copd. the court: mr. murphy -mr. dennis murphy: yes, sir. the court: -- let me just stop you for a second. stand up and let your circulation go for about a minute. i know after lunch we all have a different metabolism. i tell you what, you-all go into the jury room and i'll give you three or four minutes in the jury room. thank you. do not discuss this case. [#deleted recess#] mr. webb: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen the jury. how are you-all doing? thank you for -- i've watched -- you know, having this many lawyers talk to you this long in one day, i can understand so thank you very much. in fact, let me say a little more than that, if i might, if i can have the liberty at the outset. let me join the other lawyers in thanking you for your service as jurors in this case. i mean that because we are proud of our system of justice, and we go through this whole process of selecting jurors. people say they can be completely fair and impartial. and these are a little different because there is a lot of feelings out there in the world about cigarettes, tobacco and cigarette companies and controversy in our country. they are a legal product. we had to find people that could actually set aside any biases or sympathy or dislike, okay, and just come into a courtroom and listen to the evidence, fairly sit down and evaluate it and reach a decision. and you have all said you could do that and i've watched you. i've watched you not only pay careful attention to the evidence, but i've watched you be patient because there is been delays with lawyers and things we have been doing. so i know no one can ever ask you to do more than that. just be fair and impartial to both sides, and i know that you will -- you are going to do it. this is the only time i get a chance to address you, so i'm going to do the best i can in about one hour to make some points. and what i want to do is that wh i started this case, i told all of you that there was one special issue that only related to philip morris i was going to try to focus my attention on. i was going to try to cross examine witnesses and stay focused on one special issue that relates to philip morris, and i have it on the screen now. it is -- there is an issue in this case because -because mrs. allen only smoked philip morris cigaretts for a short period of time, two years out of 36 years. mrs. allen smoked cigarettes for 36 years. and i put o the chart that -- and i'm going to walk through this in detail but this pretty much says it. the evidence is pretty clear. the plaintiff has proven that she smoked the benson & hedges cigarettes manufactured by my client, for two years, which comes out to about 5.5 percent of all her smoking. so the question is -- there is a medical issue here, which is whether or not smoking cigarettes for that length of time can increase your risk of copd. and there is going to be a special verdict form in this case just related to philip morris. counsel referred to it as this little thing here. i called it in my opening statement -- there is a 500 gorilla -- 500-pound gorilla in this courtroom, meaning there is an issue here dealing with my client, philip morris, which you are going to find when you get the verdict forms and look at it, there is a verdict form that you are going to fill out that only relates to philip morris, only. and it relates to this issue i have on the screen, which is whether or not they have proven that smoking philip morris cigarettes was the legal cause of her copd and death. and that issue is on the -- and you are going to answer that question first. and i'm going to walk through why you should answer th question no. but what i put on the screen here, there is only three doctors who have testified in this trial that have addressed this issue. the question is: how much do you have to smoke to increase your risk of copd? and doctors used this measurement called pack years. and it does not matter whether you accept my expert, dr. schroeder, who testified that based on 33 years of treating thousands of copd patients and based on the published scientific studies, if an individual smokes 10 pack years or less, they are not at risk for developing copd. david burns, their expert, admitted there is no scientific study that demonstrates any increased risk for copd for smoking at or below five pack years. and dr. kirley, who is their doctor -- that is her treating physician -- testified as their -- that is their -- their treating physician, he testified that based on his education, training and experience, he is never encountered any smoker who developed copd wi less than 20 pack years of smoking. so smoking two years of philip morris cigarettes does not increase your risk of getting copd, and there is no one that has testified that there is, not a single witness. they have got the burden of proof. i have put on the screen just to remind you, when the plaintiff files a lawsuit, they have got to prove their case. and after you analyze the evidence, if you find they have not, it is your duty as a juror to find in favor of philip morris. so on this first -- you are going to -- i'm going to show you the verdict form in just a minute, but there is been issues in this case about whether there is holes or gaps in mrs. allen's smoking history. because we do not know what she was smoking, because there is n witness or evidence. that is not philip morris's fault. the plaintiff is the one that has to fill the holes and if they do not, you are supposed to rule in favor of the defendant. and so they have got the burden of proof and the evidence -- what you have to do is decide it on evidence, not on counsel or anyone else, guessing or speculating. it is got to be based on evidence you heard in the courtroom. and so this is the issue i put up on the screen. i'm going to talk about it for most of my time. was patricia allen's smoking of philip morris cigarettes a legal cause of her getting copd and subsequently dyin that question is not being asked about r. j. reynolds; it is only being asked about philip morris. and counsel told you this morning, he said they have got two theories or paths they call them. they have two theories that they have argued to you how they have proven legal cause so i've put them both on the screen here so we can talk about them. the first one, they claim that they can prove that smoking cigarettes for that short period of time medically caused her disease and subsequent death. an i'm going to talk about that because they are -- they failed to prove that, and i'm going to talk it through in some detail. the second path he told you this morning that he had to follow was that she was so powerfully addicted t smoking philip morris cigarettes for those two years that she just could not -- she just could not quit and went on and smoked for another 30-some years. that is what he told you this morning. so i want to talk about what is the real evidence on both of these issues. this is the verdict form. it is going to be -- it will be the first form you are told to fill out. it only relates to philip morris. and was -- was her smoking of philip morris usa cigarette: legal cause of her death? and if your answer is that -if your answer's no, you have found for philip morris. if your answer's yes, then you go to another verdict form called a, which we will see later. but i'm going to walk through right now why the -they have completely failed, and that is why this verdict form is here, in order for you to address whether this case should go any further as far as philip morris is concerned. so i assume that you are asking yourself, "what does legal cause mean?" and this is the instruction. i want to talk about it for a minute because this is so important to my client. smoking philip morris usa -- this is what the judge is going to tell you. this is his instructions and he is already read these to you. but i'm going to focus on this instruction because this is the issue that i've been involved with since the beginning of the trial. smoking philip morris usa cigarettes containi nicotine is a legal cause of mrs. allen's death if it directly and in natural continuous sequence produced o contributed substantially to producing her death. and this is the part: so that it can be reasonably said that but for that smoking, her death would not have occurred. can we just pause for a moment? what -- what that is saying -- as i put it on the chart, that is saying -- this is called "but for" causation. they have to prove that if you took out the two-year smoking history -- i'll put a red x through it. take that away. just take away her smoking history. they have got to prove to you that if she had not smoked philip morris cigarettes that she would never have gotten copd. in other words, but for her smoking, if she had not smoked those cigarettes, then in 1996 and '02, she never would have gotten copd. in other wore they are going to have to prove to you that even though she went on to smoke for 34 more years, it is that two years of smoking, right there, that they contend is but for that, she would never have gotten copd. and, folk that is not what the evidence in this case has been. so let me walk through it. let me take the two reasons. i'm going to take each one, one at a time. first one, have they proven that philip morris cigarettes smoked during that time period medically caused her copd and death? let us talk about it. there is two types of witnesses that testified. first, we had fact witnesses that tell us how much philip morris cigarettes she smoked. so we have to have that. once you know the amount she smoked, then medical doctors can use their expertise to tell you if that is enough smoking to increase your risk for copd. so on the first question is fact witnesses. what did you learn from the fact witnesses about the period of time and the amount of smoking of philip morris cigarettes? you have got to answer that question or else you cannot -- the doctors have nothing they can talk about. so fact witnesses. there were seven. so i put them on the screen. those are the only seven fact witnesses the plaintiff presented, talking about the issue of what brands of cigarettes and whether it -whether any brand of cigarettes manufactured by philip morris that she smoked. and i've showed you, the first six witnesses provided no evidence. none of those witnesses testified that she ever smoked any brand of cigarettes manufactured by philip morris. there is only one. this is not in dispute. so mr. allen and amber allen both testified they were familiar with their mother's smoking history, and i -- mr. allen's testimony is on the screen now. he testified he could not identify any brand of cigarettes manufactured by philip morris that she smoked. he identified brands of cigarettes that she smoked and they are not philip morris. so i'm not -- but there is no -- so mr. allen, who seemed to have the best knowledge of exactly what mrs. allen was smoking, cou not identify any brand of cigarettes smoked by philip morris. the same is true of amber allen. she -- she did identify some brands manufactured by other tobacco companies, but she did not identify any brand of cigarettes manufactured by philip morris as a brand that mrs. allen smoked. that is a given in the case, not in dispute. we also then have four other fact witnesses -rose marie nielsen, charlene crawford, jeanette dockin and sandra walker -- who knew mrs. allen over the yeai and who they called as their witnesses to prove up what her smoking behavior and patterns were. they -- none o: them, none of those witnesses, said anything at all about smoking a philip morris brand of cigarette, zero. now, so we are down to one witness in this case that the plaintiff is relying on as far as philip morris cigarettes and whether or not -- how much she smoked at when did she smoke, et cetera. and this is mrs. norgaard's testimony. this is not in dispute. i think i've accurately put it on one -- she testified not live but by deposition. she testified that sometime in -- well, she first testified they went to high school together. they knew each other. and there came a time in 1969 to october of 1971 where they were roommates i a townhouse, in a suburb outside of st. louis. they were 21, 22 years old. question: "do you recall what brand patty dawn smoked during that two-year period?" answer: "benson & hedges menthol. well, that is all they are is menthol." question: "and i believe you testified that during that time period, 1969 -- somewhere in 1969 until november 1971, you did not have a recollection as to the amount of cigarettes that mrs. allen might have smoked on any given day." answer: "correct." that is a very important answer because doctors -if doctors try to figure out how much you have been exposed to smoking, if they do not know how much you'v been smoking, then they have nothing they can rely upo was she smoking five cigarettes a day, 22 cigarettes a day? we do not know. and we cannot guess and we cannot speculate. in fact, she does not -- she testified she does not know what brands mrs. allen smoked during ot time periods. she does not know -- ms. norgaard testified she does not know what the first brand of cigarettes mrs. allen smoked was. she also testified she has no idea what brands of cigarettes mrs. allen might have smoked after she moved out in 1971. so all we have is this testimony from mrs. norgaard. there is nothing else. there is nothing else in this case on philip morris smoking history. and so right now with those witnesses -- and that is all there is -- there is no basis. counsel tried to argue to you this morning that maybe -- maybe -- maybe she smoked philip morris cigarettes before or after that time. that is guessing. that is speculating. there is no witness that has testified to that. not a single witness has come into the courtroom and testified to that, not one. and so there is no -- for you to guess and -- you will be told by the judge that we are not here to guess and speculate. there could be a case -- what if -- there could be other witnesses that saw her with a benson & hedges packag or -- or three years later saw her with another brand of philip morris cigarettes, nothing like that. there is nothing, not a spec of evidence that she smoked any -and so for us to guess and speculate, that is what jurors do not do. in fact, let me ask dr. burns, their expert, very directly. "do we know the amount she actually smoked and he told me, "we do not have a specific number, number of cigarettes that her roommate observed her smoking per day." he admitted that. this is their expert. dr. cummings, same thing. but she did not know the actual number. so both of their experts have acknowledged that they do not know the number of cigarettes she smoked of benson & hedges between 1969 and 1971. they are -they are just -- we do not have it. in fact, i then put on this one screen, mrs. norgaard emphasized she does not know how many cigarettes mrs. allen smoked at all during the time period they even knew each other. they talked about before they lived together in '67. during that summer of '67, they lived together. when they were living together between sixty -- when they were not living together between '67 and '69, when they were living together between '69 and '71 and after '70. i asked about all five time periods, and she said, "i do not know how many cigarettes she was smoking a day." so there is no way to get around that. that is her testimony and that is the evidence and there is no basis to guess or speculate beyond -- anything beyond that. in fact, there were no other fact witnesses. there were other witnesses that knew her and her smoki behavior in the '60s and '70s -- nielsen, dockins, walker, crawford. none of them testified that they had any idea of the amount of cigarettes mrs. allen was smoking. we do not actually know that until we get to 1978, which is seven years after -- after mrs. norgaard moved out of that st. louis apartment. because when mr. allen -- we have evidence in this case from mr. allen about amounts of cigarettes she was smoking seven years later, but we do not have any testimony beyond mrs. norgaard of that time period, '69 to '71, zero. now, do the medical records help you answer the question? the answer is no. there are no medical records between 1969 to 1971 that have any reflection o anything about the nature of her smoking, the amounts o her smoking, nothing. we have nothing. we have record 23 years later where mrs. allen said in 1994 and 1995 she had a 20-year pack history of smoking. if that is accurate, if mrs. allen's own statement is accurate, then she did not consider herself a regular smoker in '71. just do the math. if -- if in 1994 and 1995, mrs. allen had been smoking for 20 year -- 20 pack-year history of smoking or a pack a day for 20 years, that means that she viewed herself as a regular smoker somewhere around 1994 or 1995 but not between 1974 or 1975, not 1971. so there is nothing in the medical records that helped you answer this question, either. and, therefore, i put on the screen, what are we supposed to do -- what are the medical doctors supposed to do? because we do not know -- they measure smoking in pacl years to -- to measure exposure. and if you smoke one pack of cigarettes a day for a year, that is one pack year. if you smoked two packs of cigarettes a day for one year, that is two pack years. so here, we do not know whether it is less than a pack year, one pack year, two, three, four. we do not know. we do not know. but by the way, it does not matter because once the doctors testified, no one is even remotely suggesting she smoked more than two packs a day. no one -- in fact, there is no evidence she -- we just do not have any evidence of it. but even if you just wanted to guess or the doctors want to guess, the doctors have testified that there is no increased risk, even with that kind of smoking. and so let us go to the medical testimony. experts testified for both sides. let us go through it. this is dr. schroeder's testimony. he told you that he is been treating patients for 33 years, and he was very, very clear in his testimony. they did nothing to challenge his testimony, nothing whatsoever that it -- and he told you, he actually thinks he is never treated a patient for copd that did not have 20 pack years. that is his recollection. but he said to be conservative, just to be careful, "my opinion is that you would have to smoke at least ten pack years before you could ever, ever be at risk for copd." so his testimony clearly means that she did not smoke enough philip morris cigarettes from 1969 to 19 so that is one doctor. this is the next doctor. dr. burns, their expert. i cross examined him and i got him to admit: "sir, do you agree there is no scientific study that demonstrates any statistically significant increased risk for copd at or below smoking one pack of cigarettes for five years? that is five pack years; is that correct?" his answer: "there is no such study in the literature." and then i said, "i'll take it one step at a time. but we have established there is no study; is that correct?" that is their witness. so even their witness has admitted that just smoking philip morris cigarettes for two years would never increase your risk of getting copd. that is their expert. and then this is their treating doctor, dr. kirley, who testified here. "in your experience, in your practice and also based on, you know, your education and training, have you ever known anyone to develop copd from cigarette smoking with less than 2 years of smoking?" "not to my recollection." "and not to repeat any of the prior questions, but you would agree that just based on a pack year calculation, you would not expect copd to develop in individual who had less than 20 pack years of cigarette smoking, correct?" answer: "i would not expect that, correct."