closing argument by mr. mitnik mr. mitnik: good morning. it has been a lon road. i want to start with how i started talking to you in opening statement, which is to sincerely thank you on behalf of everybody. this has been a sacrifice. this was not some short trial. this was -- we are rolled in now our fourth week of taking you from your time and your responsibilities and your lives. it is deeply appreciative. it is not time spent on something unimportant because this is very important. this case certainly has to do with mrs. allen and amber and andy, her husband. but it has to do with more than that. it is bigger than just that because, based on evidence and the law that i'm going to be talking to you about, the law that the judge gave you, we will be talking about an opportunity to make a difference based on the law through deterrence; through deterrence; to get addiction out, and to deter. make a big difference. so this time has been spent on the important, important matter. we have r.j. reynolds, philip morris, both in this courtroom; two of the largest cigarette companies here. and we will be going through the evidence about why they are both responsible and wl in the punitive damage entitlement, and ultimately when we will be talking about if the jury finds, on entitlement, based on punitive damages, based on the law the judge just gave and the evidence that i'm going to be discussing with you, that then there is an opportunity to deter. that we would come back then after deliberations for that process. only two witness. one per side. no opening statements. get right down to business. but we have to first pass through on the law and the evidence this part. so let me get down to the business, this part. may it please the court? the court: you may proceed. mr. mitnik: i would like to start with the long road that led to here. and if you could, please, give me the -- this slide. this we showed you in opening statement and no you have heard the evidence and now you have some context to put it into. we are talking about in 1950s, early 1950s, and you heard the judge instruct. the conspiracy that we are here talking about started at the end of '53, beginning in 1954, and they marched arm in arm up to the plaza hotel. not before then. it ended out when they disbanded these groups, the tirc, trc, that it was disbanded -- what was th year? mr. prysock: 1999. mr. mitnik: 1999, 2000. that is the timeframe of the conspiracy where they got together and agreed to conceal, where you have heard the engle findings about fraud through concealment. now, a jury sat from 1998 to 1999 and came up with those engle findings that went to the florida supreme court and have then come to you. those findings included that r.j. reynolds and philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective, unreasonably dangerous. those -and i'm going to talk to you about, because the judge made a distinction when you heard the instructions between binding effect of those findings right now, as i stand here talking to you against r.j. reynolds, and ultimately binding effect against philip morris when we have discussed to you and you go back and deliberate and answer certain questions. and i will explain to you why, when those questions are answered, those findings will then fall based on the evidence and the law on philip morris's way. and i'm going to talk to you in just a minute about that distinction and how we get passed that distinction based on the evidence and the law so that these findings come down heaped on both of them where they belong. that r.j. reynolds and philip morris concealed and committed {sic} material information not otherwise known or otherwise -- or available knowin that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose the material fact concerning the health effects or addicted nature of smoking cigarettes or both and that they agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. they were negligent. that the product does cause copd. the product does have nicotine and it is addictive. findings that you have heard from the court in reading the instructions and you have in writing are -- include to add to that, not only does this product, these two defendants sell cause copd and disease and death, but that in this case, it is undisputed that smoking -- smoking cigarettes cause! the copd and death here. i want to make that perfectly clear because when some of the depositions were being read at the tail end of their case there were discussions about other potential causes and things at the end of the day, but this case on the facts here, there is no dispute, no one will tell you to the contrary that smoking caused copd and death here. that is not a matter to be determined. it has been determined and it is the law of the case. in addition -- in addition to the generic finding in engle that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, in this case it has been applied specifically to patty dawn allen. specifically. it has been determined by the court -- the judge just read it to you, it is in the instructions -- that at all material times, at all material times mrs. allen was addicted to cigarettes. so when we hear -- when we heard durin this trial counsel for philip morris with our witnesses on the stand, and all of the cross-examination and saber rattling about smoking here and how can you tell they are addicted and how could you tell you were addicted back then -mr. webb: your honor, for the record, i'm going to make an objection to be heard later on it. i object to this argument about witnesses they called. mr. mitnik: i'm talking about witnesses we called. let me clarify. i think i know what you are concerned about. i'm not talking about dr. bernstein that r.j. reynolds called. he was their witness; not philip morris. is that -- okay. i'm talking about witnesses we called. mr. webb: that is what my objection goes to, your honor. i do not want to interrupt now. i can make my point later, but i want to make sure i made a record of it. mr. mitnik: in any event, when you have heard any suggestion, on whatever source, that there was no addiction to philip morris brand products, the benson & hedges cigarettes that she smoked back i that earlier timeframe, the court has determined, as a matter of law and instructs you it is the rule of this case, she was addicted to cigarettes at all material times which include philip morris's, period. that is done. you will not hear anymore of that. why is that important? i want to walk you through some more of this. but before i do, let me go ahead and clarify this issue with philip morris and the distinction between class membership being determined by the court, as matter of law, and you are instructed as to it as to r.j. reynolds, but not as to philip morris and what that distinction is. the distinction is that the smoking of philip morris cigarettes, we still have a little work left to do there, because we have to show the smoking o their brand by the greater weight of the evidence, the more persuasive, more convincing, more likely right than wrong, or as -- at the beginning when the judge was talking to you during jury selection abou 51 percent or tilting the scales. but the instruction you heard actually says more persuasive more convincing, meaning more likely right than wrong. the work we have left in that department is -with only philip morris is that the smoking was a -- a, not sole -- a legal cause, a legal cause of the copd and death. we know smoking cigarettes was but smoking their brand. a piece of law on that that you have heard, but i would like to just for a moment read -- point out is that there were a bunch of -- with each of the elements in the case, a defective product and negligence and the concealment and the conspiracy claims, in each of those claims, each one ends with an instruction of telling a legal cause. but then there is one at the end that the court gave, right near the back of your instructions, that says, "as to each of plaintiffs claims", that is our side, plaintiffs claims, "the conduct of defendants need not be the only cause, the conduct of defendants may be a legal cause of death even thoug it operates in combination with yet another or some other cause, if --" if; this is a big if "-- if such other cause occurs at the same time as the conduct and the conduct contributes substantially producing such death." our burden with this last piece with philip morris is to show that smoking philip morris brand cigarettes contributed substantially to producing the death. now, let me tell you or talk to you for a moment about what that evidence in that regard is. number one, there are two separate pathways to theii causation being a substantial contributing cause; two separate, independent. either one of them make! them legally responsible. it need not take both. it is an either/or. one is the argument that you did not smoke enough of our cigarettes to add up to enough to be a substantially contributing cause to the copd and death. and that was the one expert who did not look at any medical records that they brought, did not talk anything specific about ms. allen. and mr. taraska went through all of the lack of credentials, not to suggest he did not have the basic credentials, but some of the lack of other credentials. let me talk about that one first because then i want to get to the one that, regardless of this one, under the evidence and the buried we have met causation. but before i get to that let me go ahead and deal with this. the number of cigarettes smoked. number one, what their expert says is in a vacuum, in a vacuum, if you only smoke x number of times -- cigarettes, that would not cause copd, meaning you did not smok any other at any other time in your life; as opposed to, but if you -- let us not take it in a vacuum, which is not the facts of this case. let us look at it as it really happened. there is a cumulative effect of those cigarettes and that that timeframe you heard from dr. burns does have a substantial contributing cause. every one of those cigarettes does. when we talk about the -- i'll pull it up in a bit -- the surgeon general report of 2010 talks about smoking even the early stages of it damages the lungs, under the section on the lung damage. and their experts said, i do not have any opinion about how much smoking it takes to cause pathological harm to the lungs. so when you take it out -- and if you take their argument you could have three cigarette companies in the case, each one smoking their brand for eight years, for 24 years of smoking, copd and death. and each one would stand up and say, i'm no responsible because my years are not enough in and o: themselves. but it is not in a vacuum. it is cumulative. and when you take the weight of the evidence, including dr. burns, highly qualified, that in and of itself meets the standard. when you look at legal cause that it need not be the sole cause so long as it contributes substantially, it did. now, let us leave that alone for a moment because that is one argument here and i suggest we prove -- met our burden more likely right than wrong, more persuasive on that alone. but let us leave that alone, if someone disagreed with that. let us go over to the other way that clearly proves causation against them, and that is the addiction pathway; the pathway where neuropathway are laid down in the formative years of someone's brain, before the brain has matured and it is still forming. and dr. burns used the flip chart and showed you how that worked. and it was not just the nicotine receptors and the little keys that came together, but the permanent damage to the brain was laying down neuropathways at this vulnerable time period, the teaching of that into the -- hard wired into the brain that has a profound effect for the rest of someone's smoking life and history. profound. because we just saw the statistics. someone gets 25 or 26, statistically very slim chance they are ever going to be a regular smoker. a few, but very few. and this is pre that time. and dr. burns explained, but for smoking their product in that formative, critical timeframe, laying down, hard wiring, laying down neuropathway she more likely than not would not have then continued to smoke. if she did not smoke she would not have got the copd. that is the substantial contributing cause. so aside from the shear -- the mere adding up numbers of cigarettes and the timeframe, the evidence is abundant that they contributed substantially to the addiction that lasted for years that nobody disputes those years are clearly, clearly -- in fact, it is not -- it is undisputed smoking caused copd and death. but it does not stop there. our proof does not stop there, because in addition, they are responsible as part of the conspiracy, even though -mr. webb: your honor, i object. this was ruled on -- may we be heard on this? the court: sidebar. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. mitnik: your honor, may i proceed? the court: you may proceed. mr. mitnik: let me clarify something. i do not mean to suggest that conspiracy in and of itself creates responsibility today. what i do mean to suggest to you is that when they have a -- someone that was addicted on their watch, and that is a matter of law determined in the case, that they are responsible through this time period that led all the way up to and including, undisputed enough smoking that caused the copd, and that they cannot escape that, there is no question during those following years, while it is not a ground independent of them addicting her, but there is, from this evidence, no question that during those years they were a coconspirator and that they were part and parcel of the people saying there is no reason -- no real reason to stop. and the filters that do not work. important, before i leave this point is several things. number one, the testimony about laying dow the neuropathways, the hard wiring that ultimately over time would have contributed substantially to the copd and death, the ongoing smoking at those early years were, but for, probably would not have continued smoking and certainly contributed to the death and addiction and to the ultimate smoking that caused the copd and death. you did not hear in this courtroom a single witness say anything to the contrary to rebutt that. you heard medical testimony as to the medical effects of hard wiring the brain and what it does, long-term smoking and addiction; to addict someone in those formative years. you did not hear anybody testify in this courtroom, any doctor, anyone that took this stand, rebutt that. and as you have heard repeatedly, it is about evidence. it is about evidence. what lawyers -- i say, they say, what any of us say is not evidence. the evidence comes from documents, com from witnesses. there is not a document in this case or testimony from a qualified expert in this case disputing that that is what happened. in addition, you are entitled to make reasonable inference from the evidence. ms. norgaard testified she was smoking philip morris, she knows, when she moved in with her and was still smoking them, buying them by the carton when she, ms. norgaard, moved o two years later in this timeframe from 1969 to 1971. a fair inference from this evidence is she did not pick up her first philip morris product the day she moved in with ms. norgaard. mr. webb: your honor, i object to drawing an inference. i object to this argument about inferences. the court: okay. overruled. but ladies and gentlemen, this is argument and it is not evidence. and what the lawyers say is argument, not evidence. mr. mitnik: and what i am doing here throug my argument is pointing out, as the judge gave you instructions, one of them you will recall said that you can make reasonable inferences from the evideni presented. and i want to talk to you -- make suggestions about reasonable inferences from the evidence. it is ultimately your decision. and from what is in the record, what we do know that is in evidence is that, number one, a reasonable inference, i would suggest to you, is she did not pick up her first philip morris the day she walked in. and when ms. norgaard moved out she did not put them down that day. number one. number two, you have heard testimony -- you have heard testimony and seen documents that are in evidence as to -- as to brand loyalty. you heard from dr. cummings, and they are in evidence, two documents, i'll show you in a moment, that internal documents that support that testimony that particularly young smokers do not tend to change brands. they tend to stay with the brand for a significant period of time. that they tend to stay with a brand until something else came along new or different. so when you take that testimony of the likelihood of young smokers staying with a brand foi a significant period of time, and reasonable inferences from the evidence, to constrain it to just that, i suggest to you, on this record, is more reasonable, it is not -mr. webb: and i object to the argument. i object. the court: same ruling. mr. mitnik: could i put up 552 real quick, an( if you could go to page 12, please; trial exhibit 53, that says, those leaving one brand, probably around 8 percent of all, 8 percent. would you then give me page -- i'm sorry, give me next number 16. in evidence it is number 24. an could you take me to page 10. down here. on the whole, younger women tend start smoking at an older age than their male peers, late high school or early college, as general. they tend to try many fewer brands and very importantly had a tendency to copy young men in their brand choice. so it is not just dr. cummings' testimony as to the brand loyalty, but the internal documents suggest it, too. now i want to change subjects for a minute and go to rjr. the testimony was clear that a brand new cigarette rjr came out in 1975 called mores. brand new. this is the one that is got the brown color and it is unique. long and thin. the one they done the ad campaign about it is prominent and it breaks them off. door's closing mr. murphy: objection, your honor, that misstates the evidence. that is not more at all. there is no ads about cigarettes breaking off. mr. mitnik: i'm sorry, that is benson & hedges i stand corrected. mores is the -mr. murphy: sustained? the court: he is rephrased it, and that is the appropriate thing to have done. mr. mitnik: i take back that. that was a misstatement. that was the benson & hedges. but mores was the brown one, the unique brown one that came on to the market, and that was in 1975. and there was a -- you have heard the testimony there was a huge ad campaign associated with this unique looking different cigarette called mores in 1975. mr. murphy: objection, your honor. there wa no testimony about a huge ad campaign for more. mr. mitnik: there most certainly was. the court: ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is -- these are arguments. the evidence will be -and the deliberations will be based on your own memories and to apply your own memories. what the lawyers say is not evidence. and so you will be relying on, for your deliberations, your memory of what the evidence was. you may proceed. mr. murphy: your honor, whether it is now or later, can i make a record on that at the appropriate time? mr. mitnik: can we do it later? the court: later. mr. mitnik: in any event, one thing we know is mores was the unique brown looking one. came out in 1975. and we know in 1976 from her roommate she w smoking mores. we also know from ms. norgaard tha in 19 -- we know she started smoking when she was 18 years old -- or 17 years old in junior high school. we know in 1967 when she lived with ms. norgaard the first time she was smoking but we do not know -mr. murphy: your honor, object to the evidence. there is no evidence that she started smoking in junior high school. mr. mitnik: did i say junior high school? mr. murphy: yes, sir. mr. mitnik: in high school, her senior year. she started smoking her senior year in high school. we know that she was 17 and turned 18. she was tht one that was the younger senior in high school. we know she was smoking when she was in high school, senior in high school. we know that she was smoking regularly when sh was -- moved in the first time with ms. norgaard in 1967. ms. norgaard did not testify as to the brand at the time one way or the other. she just did not -- there is no testimony what that brand was. but we do know in 1969 when she moved in she was smoking philip morris's brand, benson & hedge so that is the totality of the evidence. and you, based on your reasonable conclusions and inferences and common sense from the evidence, can decide ho! long she was really smoking philip morris products. we know she was smoking in high school; senior. mr. webb: objection to smoking philip morris high school. there is no evidence. mr. mitnik: i did not say philip morris. i said we know she was smoking in high school. we know she was smoking in '67. she now had become regular smoker. we know in '69 to '71 we had an eye witness to smoking philip morris brand. we can infer reasonably it was not limited the day she moved in and the day she moved out. and we know that when mores came out in 1975, we know by '76 she was smoking mores and we have testimony that has gone unrebutted that particularly women smokers tend no1 to be much of brand changers. now, let me next go to -- so, before i leave that subject, all that said and done, philip morris, as far as this one little piece left with them is -was that a substantial contributing cause during the timeframe that she was smoking philip morris products. and on the addiction side, it has been determined by the court she was addicted and it is evidence that went unrefuted -- or unrebutted of laying down neuropathways and hard wiring her that had a profound impact on smoking that is undisputed that smoking caused the disease and death. now, i want to go through -- could you give me that slide, the plaza hotel. that is when the conspiracy started, when these people who had previously been fierce competitors agreed, and you saw in the hill & knowlton document -- i'm not goin to pull it back up -- about locking arms and walking in together, because what had happened, suddenly we had gone from a past before this time period where there was a lot of buzz and talk about cigarettes not being good for you and probably not good for you. but that general information was not enough to effect the sales. i'm going to show you in a few minutes, you will recall, the sales were booming. they were booming. but then there was a conglomeration of scientific information. you heard the testimony about from dr. proctor that you played on the video from other witnesses, and you had the mice painting studies that got a bunch of publicity. and suddenly it went from this general loose understanding and talk to something substantiated in a laboratory. and suddenly sales started to come down for that first time in years. and it woke them up and they got together and mat at the plaza in 1953, that christmas meeting in 1954, christmas eve. they did not invite scientists. they did not invite doctors. they invited one of the biggest public relations firms in the country and they hatched this plan of how to deal with it. and saw in that forwarding memorandum by hill & knowlton of how they went abc it. they said, we cannot just deny it. you cannot put the genie back in the bottle. so what we have to do is notch the threat level back to what it was like before. let us create doubt. let us say we are going to get the best and brightest scientists and get to the bottom of all this. and if we do not think there is anything wrong -- remember the frank statement -- but if it is, we are going to find it. we take our product and the public responsibility serious. and we are going to get the answer and we are going to go dig and if we find something wrong with our product that is hurting people, we are going to take it out and we are going to take then off the shelf. and remember the comments, they planned this. remember the doctors. we are going to go through in a minute. they knew it had cancer causing agents they could not get out before this. they knew full well it was the killing people. they did not get together and say, let us take the addiction out, which they could. they had the technology way back then. they got together and said, we are not taking addiction out. addiction is what drives compulsive use. not use and moderation. use and extreme. oi after another after another. hardly five minutes without a cigarette in someone's hand. waking up before their feet hit ground out of bed smoking. chain smoking all day long, day after day, decade after decade. end result for many? disease and death. whether it is lungs torn up with copd or cancer, it was killing people. and they can take the addiction out so people could smoke moderately; reasonably. not compulsively. it might cost them a few dollars, but they can still run a business and their customers would not be dying. but that is not what they did. they said we are going to -- we know our customers and we know ho denial works in addiction, and we know it will be music to their ears to notch it back, the threat level, just a bit so it is not red alert because it takes red alert with an addicted smoker, but if we notch it back, doubt's kryptonite, because that is what they want to hear. all this mice painting, you put enough in a mouse it is going to kill them, i do not care what it is. there is no real proof. there is no reason to stop now. if we find a real reason, we will tell you. so remember in the hill & knowlton -- so go on, this was the plan they discussed arrogantly, so we can tell them, so leave it to the scientists to do all the worry and we got enough to worry about. let us go on, riding in cars and drinking and eating and enjoying ourselves and leave it to the scientists. and the internal documents said they already had the answer that they were pretending to be looking for. and they knew the result and they did not just do it for a moment and then wake up and say, this is not right. let us tell them, let us tell them. rather than own up, they covered up. but how about if they would have just hushed up? because the public health officials were doing their level best. but they waged war on public health officials and waged war on motivation on purpose, knowing th result for money. they did not stop there. they engineered their product to maximize addiction. there is nothing natural about the cigarette. yeah, the leaf naturally has nicotine in it, but do not forget the testimony. nicotine comes out in their process. they spray it back in. now they can grow it without it in it. and they had the technology back then to take the nicotine out. they take that natural product, and you heard dr. henningfield talk about all that they do, and in a few minutes i'm going to put up some slides to remind you, all that they did to engineer the additives, all the things they do, the holes they put in it, the paper, everything about that cigarette is engineered to maximize inhalability which causes the addiction. you smoke a pipe, you can get a little nicotine. it can cause a little bit of stuff. people are not falling over and dying in an epidemic on cigars, but the cigarette's different. and you remember, we will show you in a minute, the death taking off with the cigarettes. the lung cancer taking off with the cigarettes from compulsive sales. the sales going through the ceiling because what comes with addiction? compulsive use, excessive use all day, every day. that is what kills people. not the occasional use. all day, every day. that is what addiction does. they designed and engineered for addiction. get it as deep in the lungs, all the way down -- if you will recall from dr. henningfield, all the way down to the particles in the smoke, the microscopic particles. they are engineering so they fit in the lung and get deeper so it can get to the brain faster and be more addictive. run sales through the ceiling. and remember dr. henningfield said, they are 20 years at least ahead of what we learned in the public health. this was there -- what they knew. and when this hit in '53 their answer was, we are not going to take the addiction out. we are going to conceal, and we are going to agree to conceal and mislead and do everything in our power to keep thos! people smoking and buy it and buy it. we are going to notch down the threat level. we are not going to stop there. we are going to give you filters. if somebody out there is not fully buying in that addictive mind that they knew so well, where denial is a hallmark, and they are talking, you know, whispering, but if someone said, you know what, that is still not enough for that addicted smoker, they gave them the alternative. they gave them the option, okay, just switch to the safe one, the filter, then you would be okay, just switch. you do not need to stop. if you are still worried, just switch to the safe alternative. distinguish away all the dangers and switch to the safe one. what is the filter do but purify? except on the internal documents, we are going to go on shortly, you are going to see, and you have already seen it, they knew it, they called it the illusion of filtration. people were switching because they thought it was safer and they were getting just as much tar and nicotine. it was a horrible gimmick; a sham. that was their response, too. you remember dr. henningfield over here with the yard stick showing what they did with filters and the low-tar stuff to the machines, to trick the government machines, the smoking machine, to make look like, by putting little holes that did not get covered by the lips of the machine but got covered by human lips, by what the game they played in making the filter look big but hiding more tobacco up in it, and all the other things they did to the point they got shut down and can no longer sell a cigarette that says "light" or "low-tar" or "low nicotine" because it was fraudulent. but they did it on purpose. and they got away with it for years. and here's the government putting something "sounds safe" on. you remember dr. henningfield with this (indicating) showing here's the reading on the machines, but the real amount of tar and nicotine, he could not reach it. but they say this is all patty dawn allen. what do we got to do with it? patty dawn allen, yo heard from the jury instruction, is taking responsibility for her part in this because she has some. no matter what they all did, she cannot come in the court of law and seek justice without first doing justice. the golden rule with personal responsibility is you hold the mirror up first to yourself, but the situation where there is enough fault to go around and it is not in fairness just one person to heap it all on them. but if you are going to say "and i blame you, too" then first look in the mirror. she is done that and insisted on it. you saw in the instruction the party that ms. allen agrees. the second rule with personal responsibility is if you are going to talk the talk, walk the walk. if you are going to talk about someone else's responsibility, if it is shared responsibility, then by, golly, you talk about your own, too. for them to suggest that somehow i'm engaging in bad conduct because i did not take the addiction out, we did exactly what i have on the screen. and no one wanted smoke it. but no one can somehow claim that philip morris engaged in flagrant or reckless conduct. and by the way, there is no evidence that mrs. allen had any interest, apparently, in smoking the cigarette. there is not -- but we put it in the marketplace. it is there. it was there. it is gone now because no one would smok it. so, yes, on this -- whether or not they had proven by convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted as to philip morris, the answer is no. comparative fault. mr. murphy talked about this briefly. i do not need to repeat the arguments that he made. the fact is mrs. allen is responsible for her choice to continue smoking without trying to quit for 32 years. and when you allocate fault, i respectfully suggest that you talk about that among yourselves and you make that decision. and by the way, if you should ever come to the point where you decide that mrs. allen's not 100 percer responsible and you allocate any fault to reynolds or philip morris, you then have to allocate fault between those two companies, okay? so i'm not -- i do not think you should ever get there. but -- and i do not have to remind you that if you are going to allocate fault between reynolds and philip morris, she only smoked o product for 5 percent of the time. so i just tell you that so as you go back, if you ever get to that point, then that is something you should be considering as you decide to allocate fault, if you ever get that far, which i respectfully suggest you would not. so i'm -- i think i've talked on long enough, probably talked on too long. thank you for listening to me. i really mean that. i really appreciate you. i -i've watched you. you are listening. those are -- those are -- this is -- this is my issue, that first verdict form, legal cause. and when plaintiff got up this morning and used these two theories, i think i've -- respectfully, i've gone through and talked about evidence and testimony to sho! you the truth, which is that they have not proven that, which is why i respectfully ask you, after you deliberate and talk to each other, that you check no on the verdict -- the first verdict form, which only relates to philip morris. thanks a lot. mr. mitnik: i'm going to move quick because i do not have a whole lot of time and i know y'all have heard a lot and are probably tired but these are important points. this is the law the judge gave you. you got copies of it. this is, like, four pages from the back. you kept hearing what amounts to a -- a -- a trick question. gosh, if she can quit, we win. if we did not quit, if it is possible, she is get -- if that was the standard, we would not be here. we told you upfront it is possible for people to stop. it is not can she quit. the question is: was the addiction, a, not the, sole, only, as they want to make it sound, they said the word "the cause" a bunch of times. it is not "the." it is "a cause." one of the causes. need not be the sole cause. was the addiction one of the reasons she continued to smoke a substantial contributing cause, cause? that is a trick question to suggest if she coul quit they get a free pass. it is not the law, please read it. in fact, they keep talking about but for, but for, but for and they are leaving out the one that comes ne the end that is the contributing cause. when you ha! more than one thing going on at once, you have an instruction that reads this way. the conduct of defendant need not be the only cause. the conduct of defendant may be the legal cause -- be a, i'm doing it myself, a legal cause, not the, a legal cause of death, even though it operates h combination with the act of another, we have two defendants, or some fault on my client's part, with th act -- or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the conduct and -- and here the -the key language -- and conduct contributes substantially to producing such death. contribute substantially. not it is just if she could stop. it is not just only -- only what the defendant did. you have a combination of things an they are legally responsible. it is a legal cause so long as it substantially contributed. how in the world could they say other than that on this record and these facts? how can they say that? you have dr. bernstein, the guy hired, that said, i'm not going to go back into him. he said on the whit chalk, without hesitation, addiction is a significant factor and my people keep smoking. he said it. the gu that was fighting it. you saw the surgeon general reports. you saw the records. you saw the internal documents about how cai quit, so hard to quit, addiction people downplay, what a powerful addiction, it is how many kids are converting into being addicted to the smoking and how they think they are going to be able to stop and then they are not able to stop. how we have this huge cottage industry out there making money off of people trying desperately to stop, even today with all the information and now there is not a mixed signal anymore. and people, still the best they can do is 3 percent after two years. it is an powerful addiction. the surgeon general report of 2010 talking a powerful addiction. it is a powerful addiction. how can they say what they did to engineer that product intentionally, to put in additives, to do everything in their power to take a natural product and make it as addictive as they possibly could was not a contributing cause? because when their own -- when their own expert, dr. bernstein, takes the stand and says for r. j. reynolds, yeah, even i've got to admit, it is a significant factor. so this one is passed. and it does not say but for when we are dealing with more than one thing involved. next from the jury instructions, i need to set this law straight. punitive damages, you heard over and over on punitive damages, they cited the one paragraph out of it that was tied directly to my client. read the rest of them, please. such conduct is car— that the defendants must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences. entire lack, wont and reckless disregard for the safety of the public. and each of those are or any one of them. and on punitive damages, in considering whether to award punitive damages, you may -- you may consider har to the defendant -- i'm sorry, to the defendants' conduct, to the allens, you also may consider similar harms suffered by others not parties to this lawsuit in assessing reprehensibility. so when they want to say, oh, it is just her, what is -- why are we talking about these other people? why are we talking about what is going on out there with other kids that were intentionally addicted even today and over the years and all the other 440,000 people in america that die every year? what is that got to do with it? we are just trying to make you mad, but it is maddening. but it is a fact and it is a fact that fits under the law in this case no matter how much philip morris and r. j. reynolds do not want it to be so. no matter how much that they want to duck responsibility, they cannot duck the law. they did not come in here -and you saw it, they put it up, one hundred percent fault. the loss of a mother and a wife, zero value for the loss of that relationship and companionship. they do not value companionship much. speculation, we heard all about speculation. you may use reasonable and common -- reason and common sense. why? reason and common sense have nominal ic for r. j. reynolds and philip morris in a court of law. to reach conclusions, you may draw in— reasonable inferences from the evidence. they asked you to reach an unreasonable inference that she walked in the door with ms. norgaard and picked up the first philip morris and set it down the minute ms. norgaard left. that is an unreasonable inference. but they call it speculation when we rely on the law to suggest reasonable inferences from that evidence. it is not speculation and guesswork. you cannot hide behind words in a court of law, not when we have got people handpicked that are paying attention that are fair minded. you would never guess it -- but here's r. j. reynolds, you would never guess it, the way they talked about mrs. allen -mr. dennis murphy: your honor, i object. can v approach? the court: no, i sustain the objection. mr. dennis murphy: thank you. mr. mitnik: the court has determined that mrs. allen was addicted to r. j. reynolds tobacco company's cigarettes containing nicotine and that her addiction was a legal cause, a legal cause of her death. the engle findings will apply to plaintiff's claims against r. j. reynolds tobacco company. but when they talked about those claims, they use the word -mr. dennis murphy: your honor. mr. mitnik: -- alleged. mr. dennis murphy: i object, again. he is -- he is referring to counsel. may we approach? mr. mitnik: i said when they talk about it, they use the word "alleged." the court: ladies and gentlemen -- yes, you may approach. mr. mitnik: judge, can i withdraw it and move on so we do not have to approach and i can finish my closing? the court: we will make the record later. he is withdrawing it. thank you very much. mr. mitnik: nor out of the instructions from the court, the court has determined as a matter of law that at all times material hereto, all times material hereto, that includes philip morris, that includes, back in this timeframe, whatever it happens to be using reasonable inferences. we know in 1976 that she had changed after mores came out in '74 -- i mean, '75, that she was -sometime had made that change. we know she was smok in '66. we know that in '67 -- i'm -- '67 she was smoking regularly and in '69 to '71, we know for sure because there is a witness who actually can say philip morris. philip morris cigarettes, she was addicted to. that is been determined by the court. all relevant ties. so when we hear, oh, how can you say that? it is unfair. it is speculation. there is not a lick of evidence. the court found it. they want to say she had a powerfully addicted -- they cannot deny she was addicted to their product. it is been determined. the powerful part of it was the neuro pathways. bless you. the neuro pathways and the -- the hard wiring at the formative age. you did not hear what -you hear about speculation versus evidence. what evidence did you hear to contradict that at that timeframe, when she was in the formative years and hei brain was not done forming, that those pathways laid dow had a lasting effect on her addiction for life? what evidence did you hear presented to contradict or rebut that hard evidence that is -- you hear about it in the surgeon general report of 2010, you heard about it fror dr. burns, you see it suggested in their internal documents and not one bit of evidence to the contrary, but they say, why are we here? they want to talk about how many cigarettes, numbers smoked, adding up. ms. norgaard did not add i cigarettes. she did not follow her around with a calculator so that 40 years later we could have a number. but dr. bernstein says -- but dr. bernstein, after looking at the medical records, the guy they hired and reviewed it all as an expert that does this and reviews it for them regularly, says she was smoking twt to four cigarettes from age 18 on. guess what? that in -- i mean, two to four packs a day from 18 on, having looked at all the totality of the evidence. that is all philip morris. the medical record says neither -- excuse me, she smoked extensively and had a two-pack-a-day smokin history from age 18 up to 2002. so to say there is no evidence, there is. materiality -- this is important. when we talk about the cause of the things that they were doing that would have had an impact on her not trying to stop for years or trying occasionally, her husband said that -- a day or two at a time, but not the extensive attempts that happened after diagnosis. so there were some efforts during that time, but not the extent of that. mr. webb: objection, that is not the evidence. i object to that. mr. mitnik: that is what he said. he said two o three days. mr. webb: there was no testimony to that, your honor, and i have to object to that. mr. mitnik: there -- there most certainly was. the court: well, the objection is overruled because this is argument and we will rely upon your collective memories to determine what the evidence w and -- and to remember what the evidence was in this particular case and apply it to the law that i have and will continue to instruct you. mr. mitnik: may i proceed? the court: you may. mr. mitnik: a material -- you are -- this is in the instructions. in determining this causation of them doing things, having an impact on her starting smoking, on her continuing to smoke. the material fact, the -the question is: were the things that they concealed immaterial? a material fact is one that is of such importance that patricia allen would have considered th same significant, significant in her decision-making process, not that the all end, but significant. that is the law. how can someone say that if you had heard what yc were doing to engineer this product, what you were doii to make it so a young smoker can get started, what you could do -- what you were doing to make it as inhalable and as addictable as possible? if behind the scenes in their secret books, the ones locked up and they did not see, if you saw what they were talking about, we are selling an addictive product. most people cannot stop. we got to create this controversy. people -- this causes cancer. it is got carcinogens. the evidence is overwhelming against scam, but let us tell the people we are going to search for an answer and we will take it out if we find anything. if she had read what they were writing behind the scenes that you have seen over and over, but she did not have the opportunity to look at that. but what she did get is this mass effect where they were -- you saw the tvs, all of the money that they were spending blanketing, bragging on how they covered every tv, radio, every place. she is not here alive to say, i saw that. but you are allowed to use circumstantial evidence and common sense. mr. dennis murphy: your honor, i object to thi it is pure speculation. there is no evidence that she saw any of that. the court: overruled. mr. mitnik: absolutely. you do not have to have someone come in, particularly someone deceased, and say i saw this. we can rely on circumstantial evidence and common sense and the evidence in the record about you would have had to live in a cave to have missed it. surgeon general talking about it. nobody denied it. not a bit of evidence to the contrary. so was she subjected to that, those messages? well, let us look at actions speak louder than words. let us look at them for just a second. they made all these public assurances. she had a -- you -- you hear people -- word clearly is on the street. it is one thing to have -- to hear, like, a boogieman, there may be danger. it is another to have an intruder in your house. that is where that level hits the top. it is where that level hit the top, they brought it down. i'm not putting the graphs back up, everybody saw them in the polls. they brought it back down. so now let us see if it had an impact by looking at actions speak louder than words, intended action -intended reaction and actual re— reaction by her. well, she started up a product. we have seen the yearbook, not -- not just something way off, her yearbook, where they are making a joke out of cigarettes and the fact that he is in on it, permitting it. and they had pictures in there of their editor of the yearbook smoking. and you heard the testimony, the teachers were smoking. the kids were smoking at schot that was the environment left. we are out from 1963, she is a senior in high school, in 19— this is -- i mean, 1953 when the conspiracy started, or '54, the beginning of it, all the way out into 1966 when she is a senior in high school. we are talking about like a -what is that, a decade? and here's what happened by them ratcheting them down. we are making light of it, smoking. everyone's smoking in school, doctors smoking, police smoking, airplanes smoking. and she is in that environment and she smokes. she does not have access to what is in their book of secrets, but she is getting this message along with everybody else in america her age. and what does she do? if but for their message, it would have been one single solitary message, do not ( it. you are going to die and you are going to get addicted miserably for life. but she picks it up along with about everybody she knew. circumstantial evidei how about with now she is smoking, but you know what she does? she does not just pick up any cigarette, she picks up a filter. she starts with a filter, the one that differentiates and distinguishes the threat from her parents. she goes with the safe one. coincidence? perhaps. more likely than not? more likely that had an influence, she picked the safe one. by the way, they say that she smoked -- never smoked any lights so why do we talk about the lights? well, she smoked capris and the capris -- by the way, here's mores, just to show you. now, here come the capris. and it is hard to see on here. let me get these down. here's one you can see. only 9 milligrams, tar. regular menthol 100s. she was falling into the lights trap. the one that they were gaming the machines on purpose -- mr. dennis murphy: objection, your honor. h testifying about that that is a light cigarette. there is been no evidence on that milligram cigarette being light. mr. mitnik: only 9 milligrams. mr. dennis murphy: he cannot speculate on that. no evidence in the case. mr. mitnik: i'll take the word lights out. may i pro— the court: ladies and gentlemen, you will rely on the evidence that -- that you see. and you can make judgments based on -- on -- that you collectively made based on the evidence. but it -- there is no evidence that i recall that she was smoking lights. mr. mitnik: it does not say -- may i proceed, judge? the court: yes. mr. mitnik: it does not say lights on the box. it says only 9 milligrams of tar. this is the stuff where they are made in the machines to say low tar, low -mr. dennis murphy: objection, your honor. there is no evidence that these cigarettes were labeled as low tar. mr. mitnik: your honor, it says only within the site. mr. dennis murphy: it is different than saying lo tar. the court: okay. ladies and gentlemen, you can use your common deliberations to determine what the meaning of those are. these are arguments by the lawyers, they are not evidence and please do not consider the arguments by the lawyers as evidence. and you may proceed. mr. mitnik: and by the way, it is undisputed she switched to those capris in the '90s. so in -- filters, low tar was part of the gaming the machine. now, she did not know that. no way she did not know that. had she, would it have mattered? perhaps not. more likely than not? yes. they were sending a message loud and clear there is no need to stop. there is no real reason. and -- and you saw all the documents how they celebrated and plotted and planned it and then years later said how wonderful and we need to gear it back up and how they were talking about using filters because people thought -- they knew they were not working. this stuff about the government disputing whether filters worked or not. remember the testimony. the industry, these defendants were 20 years ahead. and we showed yo the documents way back they knew that filters were not working, that people thought they were. it is the illusion of filtration. they knew. they strung it along with the government and the public. and my client's smoking only filters. and that is exactly the way they intended with the filters, which is do not even try to stop because you are doing the safe one. but there is no evidence? yes, there is. that is evidence. it is powerful evidence. husband and -- her husband and her children urge her to stop. her doctor says -- her doctor says, you need to stop. rational, national -- natural reaction is self preservation to stop, but for the power of addiction, but for the power of addiction. someone who -- they said, well, she stopped finally. no, she stopped when she could not inhale deep enough. they would have you believe that the sucking in and blowin out, which is so much fun, she just could not give it up and never got over it. it is addiction. addiction does not remove her from all responsibilities, but for goodness sake it levels a lot on them when they did it intentionally. starting with someone young and galvanizing it over the years. she is on oxygen and still smoking, this intelligent person who can make decisions, acting utterly rational that is the ugly face of addiction that they keep talking about. she did not try. she did not try. playing on -playing on some prejudice that you may hold it against her. that is why during jury selection we worked hard to say we are going to be showing you some ugly face of end-stage addiction and we need to make sure everyone's not going to have a bias type reaction but can look at it as a piece of evidence level-headed in the case. because it is ugly evidence, but it is powerful evidence of addiction. on this stuff about -- out of one side they say, everybody knew that they were addictive, everybody kn they were horrible. for good gosh, in the 1900s everybody knew. but then when we move into the conspiracy timeframe and they start fighting on that list, well, now, wait a minute, doctor, or whatever witness is on, was not there really some debate with the doctors? what -- the doctors, scientists really did not know about addiction. they were fighting about it. the scientists really did not know how bad it was for you. well, which is it? everybody knew in the 1900s but evei the scientists did not know in 1990. which is it? which is it? well, the truth is that they knew and the scientific community was dragging behind and they were taking advantage of it and millions of smokers did not have a true picture. because the truth matters. not to these defendants, but it matters and it matters here. and they simply were not telling the truth that they knew and they were ahead of everybody. and people knew that there was a general risk. they did not know what these people knew. that is why tl polls show what they showed, that is why the sales happened, that is why after the surgeon general of '64, they spiked in sales. what they were doing, of ratcheting the threat level down some, worked, instead ofjust coming clean and we would not be here. but they do not have anything to do with it. the -- the -- the de-nic cigarettes. ooh, we are damned if we do, we are damned if we do not. we are just victims. victims. really? you marketed just a few little market areas, not across the country and surprise, surprise, when you are loading up at every 7-eleven and place with cigarettes that have the addiction in them and you give them to someone who is addicted to them, one than does not have the addictive substance, they pick this one. and what, ultimately, we will be talking about, if we have convinced you, as i believe the evidence shows and proves, that the answers to the questions on that verdict form are yes as to both defendants. yes, yes, yes and yes, entitlement to punitive damages. we will then be talking about ways to get them to bring them out, not just one product, but out. the addiction. they have talked about the government this and that. well, sometimes we can come in a community of peers ai do big things the government has not. you hear about choice. she chose, she chose, she chose. you also heard that it is constrained choice, that it is no longer free choice. not that it is ultimately zero choice, that is why she is taking some responsibility for her part, but their part rachets in that choice in an unnatural state they share serious responsibility with and they take zero. zero. filters is another one. by the two sides, they say over here, gosh, everybody knew that filters did not work. and then they say over here, gosh, we had a legitimate debate whether they worked. which is it? truth matters in here. well, the truth is they knew before the scientists knew and long before patty allen and the other millions of smokers who is switching over to filters or picking filters as their first brand because it is safe, when it was not one bit safe and they were running that game on those machines to make it look that way. another one, the heroin came out. i need exhibit 5. the surgeon general of the united states of america stood right in front of a bank of microphones and said, it is like heroin. what an important moment in time. to say -- link it to something like that where people say, you know, growing up i might have experimented or tri this or that, but not heroin. why? because that one, if you start, you may be addicted bad, bad, bad for life. scared million of kids away from heroin because of its reputation for a horrible addiction. and when it went public, here's the -- the industry's response. claims that cigarettes are addictive -- addictive are irresponsible scare tactics. the claim that cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to cocaine, heroin and alcohol, is -- use is irresponsible. what a missed opportunity, ratcheting it down. but when you look at their internal documents, they knew full well. no, people did not get high, inebriated from it. but that just meant you could use it all day. that did not make it safer, the addicted part. and you did not have the horrible detox. that is two days. but you have neuro pathways that last a lifetime. horrible failure rates, even with chantix today. but that was a public message to the patty allen and the rest of the smokers out there. they put up this smoking on one side and copd on the other side and put mrs. allen up. can you bring that slide? mr. prysock: we do not have it. mr. mitnik: let me keep going. let me talk -i've got a slide on this one. while we are looking, let me just talk to you about it. they put up the picture of smoking and arrow of a box over copd and they dropp a little stick figure in the middle, remember that? well, how about we do this. how about we take somebod; and put the stick figure on this side and over on this side, we put addiction. now, what goes in the middle there? everything they have been doing, they engineer and entice and bring them in. they say, oh, where is the ads she saw? do not forget i love lucy. philip morris. once a week they are sitting around that little tv with the family, ricky ricardo with his cigarette and lucy saying how wonderful it was, all and on, week after week after week. no, we did not have anything to do with it. we did not have anything to do with any of that. what if we put from addiction to trying to stop in the boxes? addiction and trying to stop. what would go in the middle there? all the stuff we have been talking about for three weeks that they did. but they just want to put her in a box in the middle. pull up 5 -- 552 real quick. it is the one that says few campaigns have conscious recall. i'm going keep talking because of time while they are looking. if you get it up, holler it is up. the court: you have six minutes. mr. mitnik: okay. they say in their own internal documents, we have already shown it to you before, that few campaigns have conscious recall. that is the way works. and they are trying to take advantage of it in this courtroom to escape accountability. it is page 12 -- 15, are you on 15? few campaigns have consciou recall. they know it does not so now it is an escape route here with accountability and justice. that is not the way the ads work, but they work. that is -- they spend billions of dollars, they are spending them today. they are not wasting their money because they do not work people just do not go, oh, i saw that ad and start it. but it has -- we have talked about the generation -generational effect and the right of passage and it does have impact on people. they lit that fire and they keep fanning it because it works. they talk about, ah, we only brought 70 exhibits. if we brought all of the exhibits in this case, what -the engle case took a year. and they reached these conclusions that are binding on r. j. reynolds. and when you answer yes as to -- appropriately as to philip morris, they are binding to all of them. so we are -four weeks is long enough. the warnings, you heard so much about warnings. let me get it straight. nobody's saying the warnings had the wrong language after that first one. but that is not an excuse for them in this case. if it was, we would not be here. they played that as if, well, we have a warning, so, therefore, she knew everything she needed to know. that is not -- if that was the case, we could not be here. it is all the -mr. dennis murphy: objection, your honor. h misstating the law you read to the jury previously on the warnings. the court: overruled. mr. mitnik: it is all the things that they did, all the things that they did to send a different message, a mixed message, there is no need to stop now. there is no clear and present danger. it is wishy-washy. it is way off. it is watered down. that is what we are here about. okay. to end, i've got a whole bunch more i'd like to talk about, but i'm going to be out of time. what i do want to talk to you about at the end is on this verdict form. the answer as to philip morris is yes for the reasons that i've told you. they cannot escape responsibility, not on this evidence. the verdict form as to each of them on each of these is yes for the reasons that we have talked about. when we get down to the comparative fault part of this, let me make a suggestion to you. yes, patty allen has fault. a young girl picking up the first cigarette and being lured in to that hidden -- it is -- it is a hook wrapped with bait. the hook of addiction was hidden b the downgrading, belittling, trivializing addiction was like wrapping it in a worm and then they make it all sexy and alluring. she has some responsibility for taking that bait. but the decisions -- when you talk about intelligence and -- and ability to make a decision and capabilities and smarts and all of that, these executives certainly had that capability. and they were not hindered by addiction. they were full grown ai they made decisions, not a negligent one, but they made intentional decisions, knowing the result was disease and death. so does she have fault? yes, she does. over these x number of years where there is very little trying, does she have fault? yes. but they said no reason to do it. by the way, here are filters. and they did it on purpose. so do we have the lion's share of that fault? yes. when she was at the ugly end state of addiction, struggling at the end, does she have some fault in there still? absolutely. but this is the result, they walked her that whole way for compulsive use for profit, knowing that is the ugly ending. they share the lion's share. and i would suggest on this that a fair fault distribution is sixty percent on philip morris -- i'm sorry, on r. j. reynolds, twenty percent on philip morris, twenty percent on patricia allen. it is -the court: you have one minute. mr. mitnik: okay. it is important we get a verdict here. and it -- the comparative fault leaves room if somebody on all this evidence says, i do not think that is enough. you can make adjustments and put more on philip morris. mr. dennis murphy: objection, your honor. th; not what the jury's supposed to do. they need to be unanimous on the evidence. mr. mitnik: absolutely. unanimous. and we need a -- we are asking you, this is important to put your heads together and be compromised within reason without giving up your -- your firm beliefs -- mr. dennis murphy: your honor, i object to hi giving instructions to the jury about how they are supposed to deliberate. that is supposed to come from the court. the court: sustained. mr. mitnik: okay. in the end, someone may say a high as thirty percent on patricia allen. i suggest on this evidence that twenty percent is more than enough to recognize her part in this. and sixty percent on r. j. reynolds for what they have done for all of those years. and, remember, they are in the class, fraud by concealment, conspiracy, defective product, negligence. serious stuff. and philip morris, albeit by sheer math, they had a small percentage of the total time, but it was such a profound important time and they knew it and did it anyhow on purpose, for profit, but that adds to it. mr. dennis murphy: your honor, objection. the court: you need to wrap it now. mr. mitnik: thank you very much. please do the right thing. please answer these questions on the law and the evidence. and with those answers, we have a brief bit tail end, but a very important end. thank you.