closing argument mr. belasic: thank you, your honor. you know when we started, we had a roomful of more than 150 people, and every juror had a chance to plead hardship and tried to get out of serving. none of you did. all of you stepped up. you committed a great act of public citizenship and civic responsibility. for that, you have the gratitude of everyone in the room. now, next week when you are celebrating thanksgiving, maybe one of the things you will be thankful for is that this trial will be over. and i'm going to talk to you why under the evidence this trial should be over today. but just knowing you are celebrating thanksgiving, on behalf of reynolds and philip morris, mr. mitnik and everyone else, we thank you for your attention and for your focus today. now, there was not a lot of things that the various experts or dr. abramson and the other 4334 experts agree on, but one of the things that they did agree on, the two jacks, jack henningfield and jack abramson agreed that everyone is different. and what they meant is every smoker is different. and the reason that is important here is that this case is about mrs. allen and the specific facts that relate to mrs. allen. it is not about whether there are any other class members in the engle cases. it is not about other smokers in florida. maybe smokers who in the 1950s actually were listening to and relied upon statements, maybe smokers who really did start smoking because of advertising or who had no idea that smoking was dangerous. but it is not about those smokers. and just as importantly, it is not about any of our personal experiences. and we learned a lot about you from the questionnaire and from your answers during the voir dire process. and we know some of you started smoking and quit fairly easily. and we know that others of you smoked for a long time and had a much more difficult time. we know a lot of you have different ideas and came in with different opinions about smoking. 4335 but each of you -- and the reason you were selected by the attorneys and approved by the judge, each of you said you could set aside those personal experiences and could judge it only on the evidence that relates to mrs. allen. we put in the evidence that relates to mrs. allen through a variety of ways. first, through cross-examination of their three experts; dr. burns, dr. cummings, dr. henningfield. each of them in a row admitted a wide variety of things about mrs. allen. we cross-examined mr. allen and amber allen, and they gave us further testimony and information about mrs. allen's smoking. and, of course, we presented the evidence from her doctor, dr. kirley. you heard the sworn testimony from her family members that was read. what we have is a wealth of information about mrs. allen. and what we know is that she was warned from the start. contrary to what mr. mitnik says, she was not a black-and-white photo in the 1940s and the 1950s of a lot of guys smoking that had no idea. we know that from the very beginning, the warning was there on the pack even as far back as 4336 when she was 17. we know that she was warned it would kill her from the time she started by her sister. her sister is in the same environment as her, she knew smoking was dangerous. so we know that she was warned. and we know that she knew the risks throughout her life. how do we know that? we know that she was warned when she started at 66, and we know that from the time she lived with mr. allen she knew the risks. because i asked him that exact question, and in his own words he said, "yes, she knew the risks." and he admitted that that was one of the reasons that they agree that she was a cause of her own injury. mr. allen admitted his wife knew the risks. she was not forced to smoke. at no time in the '60s or the '70s or the '80s or the '90s did they ever present this evidence that somehow she was forced to smoke. and as you know, she never even tried to quit. she made no effort to quit until she got copd. she did not try. that was a choice. just like it was her choice to start, it was her choice to never try to quit until she got sick. 4337 we know that she was responsible for her smoking behavior because, first of all, the surgeon general reports say so. and i'll review some of that evidence. dr. burns himself said that even addicted smokers are responsible for their own smoking behavior, and because mr. allen has taken the position in this lawsuit that his wife was responsible for her behavior and that she was a cause of her own injury. but we also know it from our own commonsense when we see the evidence. here's what we know: as far back in the 1950s, let us talk about her information environment. the family. her sister; same environment, same parents, same advertising, same black-and-white photos of some 1950s guys from those tobacco institutes. her sister knew that smoking was dangerous, knew that smoking was bad for her. that is the environment that she grew up in. she made a different choice than one of her sisters. she chose to smoke. we know in the 1950s and the 1960s her parents always warned her not to smoke. and, yes, we know that this was not the most specific warning, but one thing she knew is that the two people that were 4338 raising her and loved her did not want her to smoke. and that is why the children, not just patricia, not just pattie dawn allen, not just barbara henk, not just rosemarie nielson, the kids in that family knew that smoking was dangerous. we know that the surgeon general's reports came out on lung cancer before she even started. and we know, again, from her family environment, her own sister, her own sister remembers the '64 report and her own sister already knew that smoking was bad for her health. that is the environment she grew up in. she told everyone that she started smoking at age 18 in 1966. we heard that someone remembers she smoked a few cigarettes in cars that year. regardless, she did not start smoking as a 12-year-old or a 14-year-old. she started smoking, she said, became a smoker at age 18 when she was an adult and was ready to leave home and start a new life in st. louis. she said, not something that mr. mitnik said, not something that i said, not something even that mr. allen said, she said why she started smoking. she told her husband why she started smoking. she told her daughter why she started smoking. 4339 it was not because of advertising. in her own words, it was not because of advertising. it was not because of some statement that the plaintiffs never could prove that she heard. she said she started smoking because her friends said smoking was useful for weight control. now, they are not suing her friends because it was her choice. but she did not start smoking for advertising. we could not get more direct evidence unless mrs. allen was alive and was here to tell us herself. she told the people she loved, her husband and her daughter, and they confirmed. mrs. allen, in her own words, says that is why she smoked. it was not because of fraud. we know that every pack she bought january 1st, 1966, when she was only 17, every pack of cigarettes that she bought had a warning. and it was the legally-required warning. the companies did not break the law. the companies followed the law. the companies put that warning on every single pack that she bought. she was not duped. in what other -- mr. mitnik wants to talk about analogies. but in what other product would we say that someone that knew it was dangerous and 4340 received the pack and had every product she brought had the legally-required warning, what other product, what other case would we say that that person had been deceived? it is not commonsense. we know that the same year, the very year she started smoking, the same year that the warning was on every pack telling her she knew from the warnings this is not a safe thing to do. her sister said smoking would kill you. and i ask you to consider two things. obviously, she was told -- nobody disputes it. their experts agree. dr. burns said, "well, that is not surprising at that time." well, that is the opposite of their fraud case. she did not smoke in those black-and-white movies from the '40s and '50s. she started in the technicolor world of 1966 when her own sisters knew that smoking was dangerous and deadly, when she herself was warned and when every pack had a warning. the rest of that is a distraction. she did not smoke in the '40s and '50s. how did her sister know if there was such a great conspiracy and fraud? her sister knew; mrs. allen knew. and her other sister told her that smoking was 4341 bad for her lungs. so she knew it had a warning, it was not safe. she was told it would kill her. she was told it would hurt her lungs. and she knew that 30 years, 30 years before she ever got copd. in 1970, she was warned again on every pack that she bought. more importantly, the most personalized warning she could get, she knew that her own father who smoked had the same type of lung problems that she eventually would get. he stopped because he could not breathe normally. she knew that. he told her to quit. she knew that. now, each time these people told her to quit, she had a choice to make. mr. mitnik said there is no choice at all. nicotine has just hijacked her brain. 60 million other people quit, but she could not. there is no evidence of that. not one of their experts said that she could not quit in the '60s, '70s or '80s. you know what their experts did admit? dr. burns said, well, the reason he cannot say that is because she never even tried. and that is a choice. when you were told this is dangerous, do not do it, this is dangerous, it could kill her, you have a choice. you have a choice to make an effort to quit and to stop. 4342 and even dr. cummings and dr. henningfield admitted nothing about nicotine stops a person from trying. but she did not even try. she did not want to quit until she already had the disease. so in 1977, she goes on smoking. in 1978, we know that when she met mr. allen, shortly thereafter he asked her to quit. and, again, the most personalized warning: he told her about his own father. we heard two days ago that his father had died in 1971, and, again, from a form of copd, emphysema. so she knew, once again, in the most personalized warning possible what could happen. and this is 13 years after she is told that smoking could kill her. this is two years after she finds out that her own father has had lung injury and he quit. now she gets yet another warning. she chose not to even try. she did not say, "i'm going to go out and i'm going to make an effort. i'm going to set a quit date." she chose not to try. throughout the '80s, her husband repeatedly warned her. by '85, the pack warning was even more specific. and, again, there is no evidence that 4343 even what it said on the pack, "it will cause emphysema," that she put it down for a minute. there is no evidence that she even tried to quit during the entire 1980s. by 1990, her children were warning her. first her son, her husband, and then her daughter amber. and, again, throughout the 1990s until she got sick in 1996, she responded to these warnings saying, "leave me alone," and she chose not to try. now, there is no evidence that if she had tried, if she had set a quit date, if she had made a serious effort that she could not have quit. and the only time we know that she made a serious quit effort was 1998. by that time, she already had the disease and she quit for five months, and she went back because she was gaining weight. her own medical records shows that. she did not go back for nicotine. her own medical records said she went back because she was gaining weight. we know dr. kirley told her to quit. now, did she -- was she completely ignorant of nicotine. no, she called her own smoking, her own smoking behavior she described as a nicotine fit. she called the cigarettes that she smoked cancer sticks. the family called cigarettes coffin nails. 4344 that is the environment she grew up in. not a 1940s black-and-white movie where no one knows. the evidence in this case is about mrs. allen. it is not about personal experience and it is not about some hypothetical smoker. she knew from the beginning, and her husband confirms, she knew the risks. now, we know she never relied on statements from tobacco companies because throughout her life when she told people why she smoked, she said it was because of her friends and weight control. she never once said, you know, it was because of an ad or because somebody said something on tv. and, in fact, she was alive when this lawsuit was filed, and we know from mr. allen's testimony that they discussed her smoking after that and he never -- she never once told him, "i was defrauded by something they said. there was an advertisement." that is direct evidence. mr. mitnik wants to say, "well, if i put as many boards about advertisements, that will prove that there is some sort of fraud." none of his experts said that. it would have been the easiest thing in the world for one of them to say, "we actually have evidence that 4345 mrs. allen relied on something a company said to continue smoking." now, could she have quit? their first expert or their second expert, dr. cummings, had to admit that anyone can quit. now, he fought it. we understand that he is been in more than 50 trials. he is made over a million dollars. he is paid to come in and look at records and tell people that the plaintiff is addicted and cannot quit. dennis had to play the video to show that just a few years ago he testified under oath in yet another one of these cases that anyone can quit smoking if they make up their mind. that is their expert. he then admitted, and he had to admit he had said this in the past as well, that the success rate for quitting among people who really want to quit and stick to it is one hundred percent. and that is the plaintiff's own expert. he did not say, you know, if she had tried to quit in the '60s, '70s or '80s, she could not have quit. he did not say that. this is what he said. dr. burns said, "i cannot say." he could not say that nicotine addiction somehow stopped her from quitting. and remember what you heard 4346 yesterday, her own doctors said if she quits by '75, she never gets copd. her own doctor said if she quits by '85, she does not get copd. but she made a choice not to quit. she made a choice not to try. and even her own experts do not say that nicotine addiction stopped her from quitting. as dr. burns said, she never tried until she got the disease. that is what dr. burns told us. he says addiction does not prevent them from making the choice to quit. she never made a choice to quit, ladies and gentlemen -- we went through the records -- until december 1997. thirty-one years of smoking, the first time she was motivated to quit, dr. kirley wrote it down and she quit for five months and then went back because she gained weight. the surgeon general tells us that the majority of people, actually more than ninety percent would quit during the time she was smoking, who quit during the years before she got the disease, they quit on their own. it was not something that was impossible. and dr. burns own public health service, own 4347 public health service says that the studies suggest that everyone can quit smoking. you know, we heard a lot about this number: 50 million to 60 million people smoke. from the beginning, dr. burns explained it. those are people who are alive today. it is not taking people in the '50s and '60s who quit for a while and then died. we have about 300 million americans and 50 to 60 million of those people who are alive today are former smokers who successfully quit, and each of their experts agreed to that. it is not something that is impossible. and, in fact, as i asked dr. burns, it is one of the most common health behavior changes that people can make. does it mean it is easy? no. does it mean that people can prevent their own disease by making a choice? yes. that is why the surgeon general calls it the most preventable -- the highest preventable cause of death, because people can prevent their own disease. and we know that her own doctor said she prevents her disease if she quits in '75. she prevents her disease if she quits at '85. he said that she would more than likely be alive today even 4348 if she had waited until 1996 to quit. but during none of those times did she even make an effort. we know that dr. cummings said whether its filters, menthols, two packs a day, even highly-addicted smokers can and do quit. and so now i'm going to talk about question 1, and question 1 is was the plaintiff addicted to cigarettes -- it is two parts. was the plaintiff addicted to cigarettes and was addiction a legal cause of her death? and the first thing when you look at that question, it does not ask did addiction have something to do with her smoking. it does not ask chart up the reasons that she smoked and see if addiction is one of them. that is not what you are being asked. that is not what the instructions say. the question is whether addiction was a legal cause of her death. you know from the judge's instructions, and you can read them, that whether smoking caused it is something different. no one disputes that the years of smoking were what caused her disease. that is the medical cause. the legal cause is what you are being asked. and it is the legal cause of her death, not why she smoked. 4349 so let us look at the evidence. first of all, we brought dr. abramson. they criticized dr. abramson. the reason we brought dr. abramson is right off the bat, their first expert, dr. burns said that there were different definitions of addiction. i showed him a 1915 public health services report that says smoking was addictive and he said, "well, we do not know what definition they are using. there is a difference between lay definitions, that -- colloquialisms that lay people use and scientific definitions. and then he gave a definition, and then dr. cummings used a different one. we brought dr. abramson because he was the only witness that actually uses the medical definition. the definition that addiction trained and psychiatrists who make addiction diagnoses use. and that is why we brought him in. he uses the diagnostic and statistical manual that has the tobacco use disorder diagnosis. and we know it is used by addiction specialists around the world. and of their three experts, only one of them was even a medical doctor. dr. cummings is not a 4350 doctor. he has a ph.d. in public health. dr. henningfield is not a medical doctor. he is a researcher who is trained in psychiatry. he is not a doctor. the only doctor they brought was dr. burns. and dr. burns told us he has not seen patients for many years. he retired in the 2000s. and he told us that as far back as the 1990s, he spent most of his time on two things; these lawsuits and writing articles for various surgeon general reports. he said he spent only 5 percent of his time seeing patients. and that is why we brought dr. abramson, someone who is the only addiction-certified, the only board-certified psychiatrist and has seen thousands of drug-addicted smokers. and that is why the only diagnostic opinion in this case on the medical definition that is actually used by specialists is that she had a moderate tobacco use disorder but she was not addicted. now, did she have withdrawal? the description was, well, first, she only quit once for five months before she got too sick to smoke. and that really is not disputed. in 1998, she would already had 4351 copd for several years, she quit for five months. you all saw the medical records. her family says she was irritable and antsy. you heard what serious withdrawal is, whether it is barbiturates, whether it is heroin, cocaine, alcohol, it is a lot more than being irritable and antsy. it leads to people being hospitalized. it leads to people having to medicated to put up with the withdrawal. and even though she was irritable or antsy, she was able to quit. she quit for five months. it did not interfere with her work and it did not stop her from her daily activities. not like serious drug withdrawal. so whether or not you decide that under some definition of addiction she was addicted, the most important part of the question 1 is taking that addiction, was addiction a cause of her death? and you are going to be told that it has to be a cause in a direct and natural and continuous sequence. now, was it a direct or continuous cause? well, we know that her choice not to quit before 1996 is what led to her disease. we know from her own doctor that if she had quit from 1966 when she started in '96, that she 4352 avoids her disease. we know that she would be alive today and not disabled. that is what dr. kirley said. that is why we had to read his deposition in our case. plaintiffs did not read that to you. her own doctor said that. well, she had 30 years in which if she quit she would not have developed the disease. did addiction stop her from doing that? no. even dr. burns does not claim that. even dr. cummings does not claim that. in fact, dr. burns kept shooting back at me, "mr. belasic, we do not know, she never even tried." and that is the point. she made a choice not to try to quit during a 30-year period when her own doctor says if she quits, she does not get the disease. and but for that choice, she does not get copd. but for her decision to make no effort to quit because she did not want to, until she got sick, she will not get copd. that is the but for cause. that is the legal cause. it is obvious you have to want to quit. that is what their experts said. that is what dr. cummings said. from '66 to '96, she never wanted to quit so she never tried. 4353 dr. burns -- these are their experts -- said the smoker has to make the decision. she did not make twenty percent of the decision, as mr. mitnik suggests. she did not take twenty percent of the responsibility. she did not assume twenty percent of the health risks. she was the only one who could make the decision. she had one hundred percent of the decision. she had one hundred percent of the choice. and like her family members who quit and the 60 million others who quit, that choice is uniquely personal. it was not 80/20, this is addiction, this is a choice. it was one hundred percent. when she made the choice to continue, she increased her risk. had she made the choice to stop, her own doctor says she will not get copd. the surgeon general says the same thing, no one can make you quit, no one can do it for you. dr. koop -- this is after that video. remember, he had a video saying these are the choices. this is years after the video. this is dr. koop, the surgeon general. the choice to light up is always yours. you are the one that has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump 4354 into your mouth. and that choice was one hundred percent hers. no one from r.j. reynolds or philip morris could come to her house and pull the cigarette out of her hand. no one could make that decision for her. and not even her family members. dr. burns is asked specifically: does addiction mean that the smoker is not responsible? and he says no, the smoker is responsible and he says you do not lose control over your behavior. and that is why when i presses dr. burns, that is why he had to admit that he could not say that addiction stopped her from quitting from 1966 when she started until 1996 when she got the disease. he had to say i cannot say that because she never tried. now, when she started in 1966, women were quitting in droves. it was not a steamroller or a conspiracy like you have heard in the opening. people were quitting in droves. from 1966 when she started to 1970, 13 million people chose to quit and successfully quit. she chose not to. she chose to make no effort. she never tried to quit until after, 30 years later, after she got the disease. 4355 and that is why dr. burns again had to admit that addiction did not prevent her from quitting in order to avoid her copd because we do not have any evidence of that. the only time, ladies and gentlemen, that we know that she quit and we can look and see, well, why did she go back, why did she relapse as all of their experts say, is that 1998 time period. we know she was able to stop. we know she stopped for the first month, the second month, the third month. we know she stopped for five months. and then the medical records tell us why she went back. it is not nicotine addiction because dr. kirley, the entire time that he saw her, never found that she was addicted, never diagnosed her as addicted. said years later when we took his deposition, said i'm not an expert on that but as a lay -- as giving a regular opinion, he said, yeah, she could be considered that. but what his medical records say is not that she went back because of nicotine but that she was so concerned about her weight that when she started gaining weight, she went back. you remember this. we went through it with dr. abramson, some with dr. burns. these are her 4356 own medical records. starting in '94, she is told to quit. by '95, she is told to use the patch. she does not go and get the patch. she does not try. again in '59, the doctor prescribes a patch for her. she does not use it. in '96, he suggests the patch for her. she does not use it. in '97, he again raises the patch. she tells him, "i'll get the patch," but she does not. but she does not, ladies and gentlemen. and in '97, he says, "you need to stop now." and, again, she does not try to quit. and you saw what i went through in dr. abramson, three, four, five, six times this was raised. she had a choice. nicotine was not stopping her from going on the patch. nicotine was not stopping her from making an effort. but she did not try. when she did quit, january '98, first time, first time she has tried to quit in her life, she already has the disease. those 30 years where her own doctors says if she quit, she does not get copd. she made no effort. now she is trying to quit, and we know what happened. after 12 days, she ate better. she gained six pounds. after six weeks, she was eating even 4357 better and she gained six more pounds. and then five months later she started cheating. and why did she cheat? she had a frantic work schedule, the stress from her job. we are not making this up, ladies and gentlemen. this is what her own doctor said. she cheated because of a frantic work schedule, not nicotine. and when she went back to smoking, her weight went down two pounds. mr. mitnik keeps bringing it back to the environment, that 1940s black-and-white world where no one knows. that was not mrs. allen's world. the people in her environment were people -- the people that chose not to smoke. like her sister, rose nielson. her own husband, mr. allen, told us yesterday or told us two days ago that he knew as far back as his junior high classes that it was bad. when he met his wife, he believed smoking could kill her because of what he had seen with his father. they were not duped by some conspiracy, and either was mrs. allen. and the people in her environment who did smoke, what happened to them? were they all slaves to nicotine? no. her mother quit. her father 4358 quit. her sister barbara henk smoked and quit. her sister-in-law sandra walker you heard about quit. her cousin quit. and phyllis norgaard, her roommate that we heard so much. they all quit. they made different choices than mrs. allen. they smoked the same types of cigarettes. they saw the same types of advertisements that mr. mitnik had up here. they heard the same information. they only had three tv stations, as they kept making a point, but they quit. what was the difference? the difference was them. they made a different choice than she did. as dr. burns says, you cannot say that addiction stopped her or prevented her from avoiding her disease because she never tried. and but for that choice, she does not get copd. that is what her own doctor says. now, plaintiffs made a big deal in opening and they have asked some of their experts. they say, "we admit that she was a cause of her own injury." and they are always very careful to say it was a partial cause. but let us think: that is a big admission. you do not have a lot of lawsuits where the plaintiff comes in and says that one of his loved ones caused 4359 their own death. so what does it mean under the evidence here? well, we know at a minimum that what the plaintiffs are admitting is that mrs. allen knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke. and mr. allen says so. he says she knew the risks. and we know from her family that she knew the risks as far back as 1966. we know that when the plaintiffs admit she caused her own injury, that she had the ability to quit. because think about it: if she did not have the ability to quit in the '60s, '70s, and '80s when she would have avoided her disease, would the plaintiffs admit that she was a cause of her own death? of course not. the only reason the plaintiffs admit that she and her choices about not quitting were a cause of her injury has to be because they know she had the ability to quit smoking. that is why dr. burns had to testify the way that he did. and we know she had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have avoided her copd and her death because her doctor very carefully went through the years in which if she quit, she would never have gotten copd. 4360 now, if she is addicted, they have to prove that it is a substantial contributing cause that but for that addiction, she would not have died. is it substantial? is nicotine dependence substantial in the sense that makes a difference according to the surgeon general? no tobacco company evidence here. let us see what the surgeon general says. and if you look, look at that tobacco smoke causes disease, that is the same surgeon general's report that mr. nation held up yesterday. look at what they say about what tobacco company dependence does to relapse? do they say it is substantial? "measures of tobacco dependence account for only modest variations, modest amounts of variation in the risk of relapse." instead, look, what do they say relapse is caused by? a function of multiple personal factors. people are different. so what was different for mrs. allen between all the smokers that quit and everyone that quit? she had the same information environment. they have established that she saw the same ads, same schools, same media. she did not smoke some unusual brand that no one else smoked. dr. cummings said these were 4361 popular brands that millions of other people smoked. millions of other people smoked filtered, menthols. it was not her cigarettes and it was not nicotine and it was not her brain. it was her choices. her sister rose chose to quit and did. her parents chose to quit and did. her sister-in-law chose to quit and did. she made a different choice. she chose to not even try to quit until she had the disease. and then she chose to quit for five months and then she chose to go back, unfortunately because of her own views and her own condition about her weight. and we know that from the medical records. here's what dr. kirley said and what dr. kirley -- what we read to you yesterday. she started in '66 and she got the disease in '96. it is a 30-year period of smoking. and it is undisputed, everyone in this case agrees she never made a quit attempt for those 30 years. that is her choice. it is not a question of blaming. in america, cigarettes are a legal product. and in america, people can choose to start. they can choose to quit. and no one is going to make you, but more importantly, no one can 4362 make that decision for you. she never tried. her own doctor says in '75, she quits, she does not get copd. by '75, she had known that smoking could kill her for ten years. if she quits in '85, she avoids her injury. by '85, she knew what had happened to her father. she knew what had happened to mr. allen's father. she had been warned repeatedly. and in 1985, ladies and gentlemen, it said right on the pack that she could get copd. it said, "smoking causes emphysema." she never tried to quit. and dr. kirley said even if she had quit in '96 when she got the disease, she would still have copd if she quit in '96 because that is when she got it. but he said if she had quit then, it was more likely that she would be alive today than she would pass away and she would not be disabled. that is what would have happened if she had chosen to quit. and there is no evidence that she could not have quit before 1996. they did not even attempt to elicit that from their experts. now, what -- why did not she quit? we know why she smoked. she told everyone. friends told her for weight control. we know she was under a lot of stress. we know their own experts admit people 4363 smoke to reduce stress. we certainly know she smoked for weight control. we know she had a long history of injuries. we know that she was in continuous, severe pain. now, think about the version of pattie dawn allen that was presented to you in opening. you did not hear about any of this. and think about the version that was presented when mr. allen testified on direct. he was specifically asked by mr. prysock, apart from copd, how was her health. he said it was fine, did not tell us about any problems. now, when i asked him about this, about medical records, these things that clearly related to her smoking, he told me repeatedly, "i did not know that. i did not notice that. i did not know when she went to the doctor, she was private, she did not tell me." that is fine. nobody is criticizing him for that. but the image and the difference in the facts that were presented when you actually got to see the whole truth is radically different. mrs. allen had continuous, severe pain. she could not sleep normally. she would wake up and when she would wake up at night, one of the things 4364 she would do in her pain is smoke cigarettes. she had to take a lot of medications. she said without the medications she is not crying around the clock. and everyone agrees, none of this was caused by smoking. none of this was caused by nicotine. it is definitely the reason that she is smoking. here's all the narcotic pain medications that she was taking. remember, mr. nation was trying to say that, well, she -- he was showing off all these tests that he knew. she did not take a pcv or an mri, trying to imply that she was not in severe pain. this is what she said. she told her doctors that she was in continuous, severe pain. she said she could never sleep normally. she said, "i'm crying around the clock if i do not take these medications for my pain." she took all of these pain medications. we know that she had an anorexia. her husband did not, but she had anorexia. her doctors diagnosed her with it. and we know that she had body image distortions. everyone agrees that that is not caused by nicotine. it is not caused by smoking. 4365 so when you look at the story, there is no question that she was a successful, determined women. we know how successful she was in business. and we know, obviously, and everyone in this room has sympathy, that she died and she left a husband and a daughter behind and a son, andy. we never heard from andy, jr. or what he thinks, but she also left a son. and some of you may be thinking, okay, this is a woman who was depressed, who was in continuous pain. this is someone who had anorexia. and we would feel sorry for that person and think that person should be helped. but that is not the law in this case and that is not the claim. under the law, you cannot award money or write a check to mr. allen because his wife had these problems. these problems were not caused by smoking. we know from the deposition of one of the fact witnesses that she herself said, she told her, mrs. allen said she was also bulimic. she was very, very obsessed with weight. now, how bad was this pain that caused the stress and the depression that led her to smoke? how bad was it? well, she says it is continuous. 4366 cannot push a vacuum since 1990. do you remember when i was cross-examining mr. allen and he said that her pain problems would, quote, flare up occasionally. i asked him, is not it true that her back was so bad she could not even push a vacuum since 1990. he denied it. this is what she was telling her doctor. now, he probably did not know because he said he never discussed these issues with his wife. he did not even know when she went to the doctor. he did not know her doctors' names during the six years they were down in cape coral. this is information that we had to bring to you. i asked him, "did she have problems putting the dishes up?" he said no. this is what she said, she could not even reach to put the dishes up, could not bend to get a dishwasher. we know her back pain was so bad she could not carry her laptop. i asked those questions. mr. allen denied it, said he did not know that. that is what her own records say. this is this important record from 1991. now, this is five years -- think about this, this is five years before she has copd. there is no smoking-related disease. she is never tried to 4367 quit. she is never tried to quit, all the experts agree. she has a lot of pain and stress from back pain, from shoulder pain, from her neck pain, from her job. unfortunately, she gets depressed. she says it is so bad she has a hopeless outlook on life. look what she is worried about? she is very, very worried about work. she is the primary breadwinner. mr. mitnik said she is the one holding the family together. she is very worried about her work. she appears to have major depression. now, we had to bring you these records. when i asked mr. allen about this, did not know anything about it. said they did not discuss it. this is the evidence. that is what she was worried about. and their experts agreed that people smoke to reduce stress. there is no question she did. their experts agree that people smoke for weight control. we know she did. her own doctors say it. they put up a chart, mr. nation did, and it was a series of boxes and it had addiction on one side and disease on the other. and then it had something in the middle. and i put this up because there was one thing 4368 that mr. nation's chart left out. it is not just addiction on one side and disease in the middle. it is not a direct cause. addiction is not some direct cause of copd. nicotine does not cause cancer or copd. what is in the middle? what is in the middle is a human being. a different person, as dr. henningfield says. everyone is different. what is in the middle is mrs. allen. and what comes in between this claim of addiction, however -- whatever definition you use, and the result is mrs. allen's choices. and we know from her own doctors and her own experts that if she had chosen to quit smoking in the 1960s, but for her choice, she does not get copd. we know that if she had acted on -- acted on the advice that she continued to get, we know she could quit. she quit for five months and went back because of weight, not nicotine. we know that but for those choices, she would not have gotten the disease. and that is the big difference. addiction has to be a legal cause. maybe it is a weird thing to all of us, but that is the way the law of florida 4369 applies in these cases. it is not about why you smoked. it is whether addiction is a legal cause. it is not about whether smoking caused her copd. that is been decided. we agree with that. addiction is not a legal cause when her own doctors admit that but for her choice, her choice to continue, she would not have gotten the disease. for all those reasons, i suggest that the evidence requires that you vote no. even if you find that she was addicted, was the addiction the legal cause, not the medical cause, was it a legal cause so that but for she would have avoided her injury? the evidence is no from her own doctor and from their own experts. now, questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form deal with whether or not any concealment or statement by these companies caused her death. and it is the same legal cause standard. the questions are whether a concealment of a fact caused her death. the questions are whether there was an agreement to conceal and did that cause her death. well, the first thing you want to look at is, well, what did she know when she started? she knew it had a warning. that the product was so dangerous, one of the few products at the time that 4370 actually had a health warning. she knew the government required that and she had that warning on every pack. and she knew that smoking could kill her and could hurt her lungs because those were the exact words that her own sisters told her. so she knew from the very beginning dangerous, my family thinks it could kill me. she continued to smoke. there is no evidence that if r.j. reynolds had said something and it was in the newspaper that she would have stopped smoking. we know what happened when she responded to warnings. there is not any evidence that it was a concealment of a fact that caused her omission. if somebody tells you, hey, there is no mold in the house, you might buy it. if somebody comes up and says there is mold in the house, you are not going to buy it. her sister told her the smoking would killer, the pack warning told her that smoking was hazardous and it was dangerous, and it told her that smoking could cause emphysema in '85, and she still did it. it was not something hidden. the issue is did something these companies say or did not say cause her death? no. it was her 4371 smoking and her decision to smoke when she was warned, when her own husband says on the stand, quote, "she knew the risks." when you look at the jury instruction -- and i'm going to get to it in a moment. the jury instruction says that the way you have to decide questions 3 and 4, the fraud claims, are that she has to rely on the company for something they said. there is no evidence she ever heard anything the company said. there is not a shred of evidence that she saw a false statement and decided to smoke. they had three experts. they had a full week for one of them to say that mrs. allen saw some statement and relied on it. but that is not why she smoked. she knew it could kill her for 30 years. but what the instructions say are you have to see whether but for that statement, if somebody had not said it, she would not get copd, or that but for that omission, instead of omitting they had told her, she would not have gotten copd. now, do we have to guess, well, what would have happened if somebody had said smoking could kill her? well, we know, she was told smoking could kill her. she continued to smoke. she was told smoking could hurt her lungs, that is what her 4372 sister told her. and she responded identically to all of these personal warnings: "leave me alone. get off my back. it is my business. i do not want to talk about it. let us not discuss it." not once, not once did any of her family members or any of the experts claim that she ever said, "i do not think it is dangerous. i do not understand the risks." just the opposite and in her own words, this is what her son said. she told him, "i understand." and the plaintiffs in this case are not even making the claim. mr. mitnik can say, just as i can, he can make whatever argument he wants. but evidence needed to come in. there was not a shred of evidence that she thought smoking was safe in the '60s or the '70s or that she did not think it would kill her. we know what she was told. that is why they admitted that she caused her own injury, and that is why mr. allen on the stand said she was responsible because she knew the risks. and she does not learn them in '96. she knew it from 1966 on. every pack had a warning. so here's the instruction. there has to be 4373 reliance. and reliance means you see something and you rely on it. i tell you that house has mold, do not buy it. you go and buy it, you did not rely on fraud, you were informed. she was told smoking could kill her and every time she picked up a pack, she had a warning there. and that is all the law required, and the companies complied with the law. and now mr. allen is asking to be paid millions of dollars because his wife made a choice that he disagrees with. and, of course, every single one of us has a loved who died and we can look back and we wish they had done something different. we all wish we had taken better care of ourselves or we had exercised or we had eaten better. and of course -- mr. mitnik: so long as i can put the jury in the shoes similarly and ask them to put them in the shoes like he is, i'm okay with this. otherwise, i object as the golden rule as he full well knows. mr. belasic: it is not golden rule. the court: okay, okay. just avoid the appearance of the golden rule then. mr. mitnik: great. mr. belasic: all right. but that is sympathy, for the results of her 4374 choices cannot govern your decision. you were selected because you all promised you could put that sympathy aside. there is no second-guessing mrs. allen's choices in this courtroom, not with the mountain of clear evidence that we have as to what she knew and why she acted. she said she smoked for weight gain. and in 30 years, she never once suggested that she did not know the risks or that she had been misled. even when, even when the lawyers filed the lawsuit and her husband discussed with her, her smoking, she never suggested that. mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. that misstates material facts in this case. the court is aware of it. can i approach? the court: if need be. bear with us for a moment. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. mitnik: he keeps saying she is never announced that there was any fraud, any disagreement, anything as if this was a complaint being brought by a husband after she died. the complaint is record evidence to your honor. 4375 it is -- the court is fully aware -- and that he is, that when she was alive, she sued these companies for fraud, conspiracy -- mr. murphy: -- this is not a substantial complaint. this was something you -- you can stand up there and, oh, yeah, she did. mr. belasic: when she discussed the lawsuit, her husband asked her why she started smoking and she did not say, "well, i had a claim for fraud." the court: that is just both sides of the argument -- mr. mitnik: as long as i can go into it. the court: you can. (the sidebar conference concluded and proceedings took place in open court as follows:) mr. belasic: so when she filed this lawsuit, she was alive. and the lawsuit was drafted up by her lawyers, but then she discussed it with her husband. and i asked mr. allen what they had discussed. and they discussed why she smoked. and, of course, for the 20 years from 1978 on until the time she got disease, they had discussed smoking many, many times, and we know that he had asked her why she smoked. and in all those times before the lawsuit was 4376 filed and after the lawsuit was filed, she never said that she smoked because of something that a tobacco company said. and you know if she did, mr. mitnik would show us the evidence. he does not have it. and if he knows she continued smoking because of some false statement in an ad, they would show you the evidence but they do not have any. they put three experts up and not one of them, not one of them, even dr. cummings said that mrs. allen was defrauded and that if something had been said differently, mrs. allen does not get copd. she believed it could kill her. she was warned that it could kill her in 1966. but she liked smoking and she made her own choices. it is not a crazy choice. millions and millions of people chose to smoke and 60 million chose to quit, including almost her entire family. she made a different choice than her family. for those reasons, the plaintiffs have not met their burden of proof. and, of course, it is their burden to present evidence, not just argument. when mr. mitnik gets up, i will not be able to respond. look and see what the evidence is. was there testimony? was there a document? or is it 4377 just a very skilled lawyer making an argument? because there is no evidence in this record that shows us that concealment caused her death, that it was a legal cause. and there is certainly no evidence that some agreement to conceal, that some meeting in 1953 was a legal cause of her death. she was warned from the very beginning. question 5, one of the things that you have if you answer no, the verdict form will say we are done and your duty is over. if you answer no on questions 3 and 4, then you will go forward. one of the things that mr. mitnik said is that this admission of responsibility does not apply to your answers on questions 3 and 4, and i want to talk more about that. question 3 and question 4 ask you was concealment, was some sort of fraud a legal cause of her death? and when you get the verdict form from the judge, on page 3, it is going to tell you what happens. if you vote yes that some sort of concealment was the actual legal cause of her death, then there is no percentage of responsibility. then whatever percentage you assign will not apply. that is what mr. mitnik said. 4378 so think about that. if you vote yes on fraud on questions 3 and 4, she is not responsible. all of the responsibility that they have taken, it is going to be zero percent. now, it should be an easy decision because there is not any evidence that this was a woman who did not know the risks and if she had only been told it was bad for her she would have quit. there is no evidence of that. so when it comes time to turn the percentage, if you even get that far, think about this, their lead expert, dr. burns, says that does addiction mean that the companies are responsible and not the smoker, no. he says that even addicted smokers are responsible, and he uses that word, "responsible," for their own behavior. the surgeon general says that even though it is addictive, it is the smoker that has to decide whether or not to continue. and we know that she made a choice with a family and her sisters that knew it was dangerous. with the parents' warnings, with the surgeon general's report, with the knowledge in her family, with the starting as an adult, smoking for weight control, being warned on every pack, being 4379 told it would kill her 30 years before she got the disease, told it was bad for her lungs, warned again. warned by her own father that smoking would damage her lungs because it had happened to him. warned by her husband. warned by her husband about her father who got the same type of disease. warned by mr. allen year after year in the '80s. warned that it would cause emphysema in 1985. warned repeatedly by her husband in the '90s and by her daughter and by her doctors knowing that smoking was affected by nicotine, knowing that it was a cancer stick. but the one thing she did not rely on was some statement from a tobacco company. there is not any evidence that she would have quit smoking if someone had not put it out an advertisement. you know, they say late in her life after -- after she got the disease, she switched to these skinny cigarettes. there is no evidence she ever smoked them before she got the disease, they say she switched to them? and there was some evidence, there was some claim that she said, well, the white ones are safer or the brown ones were safer. contradictory 4380 evidence. there is not any evidence that she saw some statement by a company. they did not even present evidence that there was an advertisement for her brand that said it was safer. we saw the pictures of more ads that had good looking men for a few years and then good looking women. and then mr. mitnik put up, i do not know, ten boards of skinny women. but what he did not do is present any evidence that the companies ever told her that smoking these skinny cigarettes was safer. and there is no evidence that she ever even smoked those skinny cigarettes until after she got the disease. it should not be that hard when you have a woman who had as many discussions about smoking, it should not be that hard for plaintiffs to prove the fraud case. and they have three highly-paid experts who have made millions of dollars and not one of them claimed, yeah, she smoked because of an ad. if that ad had not been run, she would be alive today. and if that sounds harsh, it is because the law is strict and because your obligation is severe. your obligation is significant. you all swore that you would apply that law, to hold them to evidence, 4381 not to lawyer argument or sympathy for mr. allen. so if you find a percentage of fault, put one hundred percent down. she did not make twenty percent of the choice. if she had made a different choice, would she have avoided twenty percent of the copd? no, her doctor says she does not get copd. and the only thing that changed or affected whether she could quit in '75, that is her decision. the only thing that affected whether she could quit in '85 was her decision. and why do i say that? it is because the evidence is that she did not even try. it might be different if you had a smoker who tried to quit in the '60s and '70s and they could present evidence, you know, she tried to quit but nicotine pushed back, nicotine controlled her. that is not the case we have. she made no effort to quit whatsoever before she got sick. and that is why dr. burns had to admit he cannot say that it stopped her from avoiding her copd. the but for cause of her death was that choice. and she was the only one who could make it. she made one hundred percent of the choice. your honor, this is a good stopping point. [#deleted recess#] mr. belasic: thank you, your honor. welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. i'm just going to talk with you a little while longer. obviously i went over a great deal of the evidence, and i think an overwhelming mountain of evidence that shows that mrs. allen was aware from the start of the dangers of smoking, was not deceived and chose not to even try to quit for 30 years until she got her disease. and then the evidence very clearly from the doctors show that she was able to quit and but for her obsession with weight, which is sad but not something that was caused by a tobacco company, she would have quit. she quit five months and because of her obsession with weight, she went back to it. we saw the record. she was frantic with work and she started to gain weight so she smoked again. but for that, she is still alive today and is not disabled, according to her doctor. but for her decision not to try to quit in the '60s '70s and '80s, she does not get copd at all and that is her doctor. what i want to talk to you with my remaining time is the issue of damages that mr. mitnik brought up, and i want to remind you first that if you reach this issue -- and, frankly, i think you should not -- under the facts and under the evidence that have been charged, vote no on the first questions and you would not reach it. but if you do, i want to remind you that if you have already found yes on questions 3 and 4 -- questions 3 and 4 are those 4392 issues of concealment. was concealment a legal cause of her death? if you vote yes, then it does not matter what percentage you assign to patricia dawn allen. if you vote yes, all of the plaintiff's arguments about taking responsibility are mooted because she is going to get 0 percent. there will be no way to hold her accountable for her decisions. now, i do not think you should vote yes. as we discussed, concealment was not a cause, she was well aware of the risks, and when she was warned, we know what happened. she did not take warnings to heart and change her behavior. she ignored them. she was told right on the pack in '85, smoking causes emphysema and had no interest. she was told that her father father-in-law had died of emphysema from smoking and took no interest. she was told by her own father that his breathing problems had caused him to quit. she saw him successfully quit. she did not try to emulate. if you vote yes on 3 and 4, there will not be any responsibility for patricia dawn allen. that is just not fair. now, mr. mitnik said he would talk a little about punitive damages. before we get there, let me 4393 say a few things about compensatory damages. mr. mitnik obviously made his case for why damages should be awarded, and as you know, it is his burden of proof to prove that there -- that we are liable in the first place. it is his burden of proof to prove that any damages should be awarded, and you have the ability to -- and if you decide to award damages, to award anything from zero on up. but it is also the plaintiff's burden to show the amount of damages. and you will have a very specific instruction that you can read in your jury instructions. judge wallace will tell you the law, the rules for damages. and basically it comes down to this, that it has to be a reasonable and just amount that is supported by the facts and circumstances. now, did mr. mitnik give you an amount? well, sort of. he gave -- started talking about our expert was paid $600 an hour. that is right. we have to pay experts for their time, just like they pay their experts. remember, dr. burns said he made $3.5 million testifying in these cases. now, he writes articles for the surgeon general, but he makes three and a half million giving testimony in these cases and saying that people are addicted and that the people 4394 who sue companies should get big money. that is what he does. dr. cummings made over a million dollars. but you know what? none of that and certainly not the amount that was paid per hour, none of that has anything to do with mr. allen's damages. they have to show that it is supported by the facts and the -- and the circumstances. and mr. mitnik says, well, you know, y'all pay your experts 600 an hour, and then two sentences later, he says, well, i suggest $600 a day for the -- the 21 years or the 23 years for the life expectancy. where did he get $600 a day? what evidence shows that you should measure damages at $600 a day? what criteria, what fact? you know, i'd represent to you, he pulled that number out of thin air. there is no basis or evidence. he is asking you to speculate. he has not met his burden of proof to show a reasonable amount of damages, even if you get there. now, the final question you are going to ask is question 8, if you reach it. and i suggest again, under the facts, you will not even be there. this case will be over, we will go home. but if you get to question 8, the issue is is mr. allen entitled to punitive damages? are 4395 punitive damages warranted? and the purpose of punitive damages is supposed to be punishment and deterrence. "and." remember, mr. mitnik read it and said "or." i had to correct it. look at the instructions. it has to be punishment and deterrence, and those two are very different things. and i would suggest that they cannot meet both of those criteria under these circumstances. we talked a little bit about this in voir dire, and you are going to see the jury instructions, but let us be very clear about what punitive damages are and where they go. this is an additional request, an additional claim for money by mr. allen, and any amount, from $1 up, if you choose to award punitive damages, can be awarded only to the plaintiff. any punitive damages award goes to mr. allen. it is his claim for more money. does not go to the state. does not go to anyone else. plaintiffs are asking for more money. so apparently they want $600 a day for 23 days, which is millions of dollars for both mr. allen and amber allen. so they want to be paid millions and millions of dollars for the choices that their wife and mother made that they now regret, choices they now second-guess and say she should not have made. 4396 they want to be paid millions of dollars for that. and apparently mr. allen is going to request some additional amount of punitive damages. i do not know whether it is going to be big or millions of dollars more, but that is what this request is. and it can only be given to mr. allen, not to any public health agency, not to people who help people quit. it is not going to charity or anti-smoking groups. check written out to mr. allen. now, here's some of the instructions that judge wallace has given you. you will have these in writing. and as mr. mitnik said, there is a different burden of proof, a much higher standard for punitive damages. it is no longer just this preponderance of the evidence; what is the greater weight of the evidence? instead it has to be clear and convincing. it has to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue. look at the next instruction we highlighted in 17. when you consider whether -- whether to award any punitives, you may consider the harm that the defendants' conduct caused to the plaintiff. you cannot -- you cannot punish a defendant for any harms suffered by any persons other than plaintiff. 4397 so if you are thinking about punishing, it cannot be for any harm to other smokers. it can only be for the harm that the conduct caused to the plaintiff. and that is what i want to talk about in my last few moments here. they have made a lot of charges against the tobacco companies. and they have made a lot of claims. they put up a lot of documents. and i'm going to explain some of the context of that in evidence that you saw during the trial, but i'm also going to talk about how that evidence does not show conduct that actually caused harm to patricia dawn allen. so these are the plaintiff's charges against r. j. reynolds, and they are against philip morris as well. and the evidence here applies to both of these companies. they said that there was this concealment. they talked about the finding. the question here that i'd ask you to look at is what was the evidence in this case on whether the information was really secret? i mean, we know that the fact that nicotine was in cigarettes was not a secret and that it was a critical reason. that was not a secret. dr. burns admitted that. and it is true. a century ago, they were calling the cigarette an addiction. 4398 but more importantly, look, they were saying it is so generally inhaled. plaintiffs made a big deal. they tried to pretend that cigarettes were not inhalable before r. j. reynolds came along. right when dr. burns was on the stand, i showed him this. he said cigarettes were always generally inhalable, contradicts mr. mitnik's argument that he made in opening. and i followed up and asked dr. burns, well, were they lightly inhalable, moderately inhalable, deeply inhalable? he answered yes to each. it is not like people could not deeply inhale cigarettes. in fact, 100 years ago, it is an addiction and it is so generally inhaled. and we know that well before mrs. allen started smoking, there were warnings in the popular press, the most popular magazine of the day. it was not a secret. we know it was in newsweek. it was in time, life, time magazine again, about smoking causing cancer and death. and it is true that the tobacco companies did not jump up and say absolutely everything in those studies is something we agree with. it is true that they show you a variety of statements. and we look back on hindsight 60 years ago at those black and 4399 white photos, and you think they made some stupid statements. and they are right. they probably hung their hat too long on scientific debates and scientific controversies. but there is not any evidence that these 1950s tv shows had any effect on mrs. allen. she was not even smoking then. and when she did smoke in the modern 1960s, her family already believed that smoking was dangerous. her sister knew it would kill her and told her. mrs. allen's suing -- or mr. allen's suing because his wife got a lung injury that caused her death. her sisters rose and barbara told her in 1966 that smoking would harm her lungs and could kill her, the exact same injury. and we know that the surgeon general said that the public was well-informed even in 1957. he did not say that the tobacco companies had deceived the nation. he said they were well-informed. the idea -- they show you some documents. well, nicotine is the source of habituation. 30 years later, reader's digest, the article written by the boxer is saying that nicotine is the source of all pleasure. that was not a secret. and it was not a secret to mrs. allen either because she 4400 referred to her own smoking as nicotine fits. when -- when she would go without smoking, she would describe herself as having a nicotine fit. she knew nicotine. she knew that it was in the cigarette. and the companies did provide the list of constituents, the compounds and the carcinogens that were in smoke to the surgeon general, and the surgeon general's report was widely viewed. in fact, here's another florida health note, and, no, no one's saying they read the florida health notes. but look at what it says. it says: "nearly all floridians have heard about the surgeon general's report on smoking and health which was released in '64." and we know that mrs. allen's own sisters have heard it. we have heard that evidence and that is why her sisters told her that smoking could harm her lungs and could kill her, right when she started. look what sister rose marie nielson said, and this answers mr. mitnik's smoking environment. this is the environment that our smoker, mrs. allen, was raised in. her sister says, back then, everyone knew that smoking was not good for you, and nobody is that stupid to think that smoking is ever good for you. 4401 and you will remember, that deposition was read to you a few days ago. that was -- that was the one that ms. massa read, and the testimony from the sister is emphatic. that family knew smoking was bad. she warned her sister it could hurt her lungs and kill her. and by '64, the vast majority -- if we ever had an election that could get 81 percent of people to agree on anything, it would be an incredible landslide. by '64, before mrs. allen had ever smoked, 81 percent thought smoking was harmful to health. and later, it was ninety percent. the warnings were on the entire time. dr. burns himself said in '75 -- mrs. allen had only been smoking for a few years. in '75, he said more people know smoking causes lung cancer than knew the name of the president. and by '81 is when he said that. he said 95 percent of smokers are thoroughly aware of the health dangers and that includes mrs. allen. she knew and believed then that smoking was dangerous. we know she smoked for weight control and stress, and we know from her doctors and from her own husband and from the testimony of the fact witnesses that she never made an effort to quit 4402 smoking until she got a disease, until it was too late to reverse. well, look, there were a lot of statements where the tobacco companies are saying things that you look back and you think it is pretty stupid now. were people saying, oh, my god, the tobacco company says they do not agree; it is safe; i better run out? here's the survey that asks people, do you even listen to or rely on what tobacco companies are saying? percent, 3 percent said they would be most apt to believe the tobacco industry. the american cancer society, the ama, the u.s. department of health. and it is not that surprising. i mean, if we want to find out if a diet of cheeseburgers and french fries can cause a heart disease risk, we do not call up ronald mcdonald, and that does not make any excuse for the companies. but the evidence is people were not looking to tobacco companies as a source of health information. they were not gullable. in 1959, only 3 percent were even listening. and, of course, mrs. allen was not listening. their experts do not dispute that when she heard it could kill her, that when she heard it was dangerous that 4403 she never said, oh, no, i do not think so. and, again, in 1970, again, only 3 percent even trust the tobacco companies. now, there is no evidence in this case from any of the plaintiff's experts that any survey, any data, any poll that said, well, smokers saw, you know, some tv show when a tobacco guy came on 60 minutes or something or 20/20 and they went out and smoked. there is certainly no evidence that it affected mrs. allen. but the evidence is -- the evidence even from the tobacco companies is people did not consider them reliable. they listened to the public health community. they made a big deal out of psychological crutch, and i think this was mr. kelly that pointed out, actually the term "psychological crutch" was in the surgeon general's report. it is not some dark idea that is made up by a tobacco company. it was the surgeon general that said there are some beneficial aspects of smoking, including reducing stress, like mrs. allen used, and it was the surgeon general that it referred to as a psychological crutch. okay. i want to talk a little about advertising. the advertising of brands that 4404 mrs. allen smoked, they were not on tv. they did not have celebrities. and we know that she did not claim that she smoked because of that. she smoked because of weight control. and, yeah, she filed a lawsuit. the lawsuit is not evidence. it is mr. mitnik's job and the lawyers' job to actually bring the evidence. and there is no one in this case that said she smoked because of an advertisement. a few years after she got the disease, she switched to these skinny cigarettes, and the two people who were -- who were asking for millions of dollars say that she said, well, i thought the white cigarettes were safer, and then one says, i thought the brown cigarettes were safer. she does not say that she believed any statement from a company, and they did not -- certainly did not put a single advertisement out that says that mores or capris were safer. mr. mitnik says that this -- that by paying mr. allen millions and millions of dollars that this lawsuit will somehow protect you in the future. well, youth smoking is already at the lowest level ever studied. that is dr. henningfield and dr. cummings. giving millions of dollars to mr. allen is not going to do anything. 4405 on filters, they keep saying that there was filter fraud, yet they do not show a single advertisement that said, hey, filters are safer. but here's what the surgeon general said. they looked at the statistics for real people, not -- not something a tobacco company did. and it said that real people had lower amounts of tar and nicotine and it decreased their mortality rate. so they looked at actual smokers, and the rates of lung cancer were less. and in '81 again, lower rates of lung cancer. they are not relying on anything a tobacco company said. in 1989, filtered lower-tar cigarettes reduce the risk of lung cancer. 1990, again, a lower risk of lung cancer. and, of course, there is no evidence that mrs. allen would not have started smoking if everything was an unfiltered cigarette. her friends told her, start smoking because it is good for weight control. they did not say good for filters and there is no evidence. dr. henningfield talked about design and he admitted, it is impossible to make a safe cigarette; it is very complicated. but he admitted something more important. over the years, he said the tobacco 4406 companies have made efforts to try to remove harmful compounds from tobacco smoke. you look at the punitive damages standard. it has to be an entire lack of care, something that is the equivalent of -- of willfully disregarding any duty or an intentional causing of harm. the companies, their own expert admit, made serious efforts to try to take these harmful compounds out and they reduced these chemicals. it decreased the tumorigenicity. the surgeon general themselves say that the companies worked with the government to try to make safer cigarettes. we know that reynolds' president, in fact, wrote this letter in '68, saying, cooperate as much as possible to foster a relationship with the government and gain the cooperation and proper research. if there is a safer cigarette, let us do it, he says. he does not say we want to kill our -- why would they want to kill their customers? he says, internal document, if there is a safer cigarette, let us work on it. and the surgeon general said that what they did with reconstituted tobacco actually did reduce tumors, less tumorigenic. they decreased the ph levels. they decreased the carcinogenic activity. 4407 that is the surgeon general measuring the actual cigarettes that were made when mrs. allen was smoking. i do not -- i'm not going to talk that much about ph because after dr. henningfield testified, there really was not much left. he agreed he did not know what the ph levels were for the cigarettes she smoked. he agreed that the ph level of cigarettes was actually lower than milk. he agreed that the surgeon general had said that at the regular ph of these cigarettes, there was almost no -- almost no free nicotine. so even the surgeon general rejected it. and we talked a little bit about ingredients. everyone agrees the ingredients were disclosed to the government 30 years ago. dr. henningfield said that was not good enough. he then agreed -- and you can see the list; it is in evidence -- that in '94, the companies released a list of all the ingredients to the public, 20 years ago, and that for the last five years, the fda's been regulating ingredients. yet in all that time of turning over the ingredients list, 20 years to the public, 5 years to the fda, 30 years to health and human services, the government's never said, take an ingredient out, and 4408 they have never said, if you do take an ingredient out, it would be safer. okay. in fact, when we did make these additive-free cigarettes, the public health community attacked us. now, here's one of the issues. i just asked dr. henningfield straight out. if you make a cigarette without additives, is it safer? no. you make a cigarette without additives, is it less addictive? he admitted no. so i want to talk a little about nicotine in these last few minutes. the government at one time said increase nicotine. it will make cigarettes safer because people will smoke less and get less tar. then the plaintiffs here are suing the companies for not taking it out. contradictory. we know that experimental and alternative cigarettes were brought that were safer. r. j. reynolds made a cigarette that reduced cancer risk by enormous amounts that we are going to see. philip morris produced a cigarette, next, that was not addictive. and look what happened. the government held the secret meeting and said they were worried that premier -- this is reynolds' cigarette -- does not cause cancer. it is actually 4409 safer than current cigarettes. the cancer risk associated with smoking premier was lowered significantly, but not the risk of heart disease. they did not help the companies. they went to attack it. and they said that we should work on negative publicity to kill premier and that they should set up a committee to attack the problems of these products. same thing. we saw the meeting. we went step by step with dr. henningfield. philip morris made a nonaddictive cigarette and the response of the publishing health community and the government was to attempt to kill it. they held the secret meeting. they invited, you saw, half a dozen lawyers to figure out ways to attack it. they -- they got the american medical association to attack it, even though the surgeon general said that it was not addictive. companies made a nonaddictive cigarette and here's what happened. (video clip was played as follows:) "unidentified speaker: next cigarettes may be the most dangerous product put on the market in the last ten years." (video clip was stopped.) mr. belasic: dr. henningfield said that the 4410 next cigarette was not addictive. the surgeon general, in 2010, said that the next cigarette was not addictive. the government invited this guy and five or six other lawyers and dr. henningfield to the secret meeting, and they went out and attacked it. and they went out and attacked it and tried to get the ftc and the fda to ban it. and they won. they killed it. philip morris was not going to be able to market a cigarette when the public health community is saying that it is the most dangerous cigarette. now, if i had not told you about this, you would have thought if somebody made a safe cigarette and tried to kill, it would be the evil tobacco companies. instead, it is philip morris making the nonaddictive cigarette; reynolds making the cigarette that decreases the risk of cancer, and it is the government trying to kill those. and dr. henningfield discour- -- says, hey, that was not my opinion. but he was there at the meeting, and he agreed every step of the way that is what these people did. punitive damages should not be awarded to companies that have spent decades trying to reduce the risk of their cigarettes that actually did what 4411 the plaintiffs are suing for, to reduce the risk of cancer, to make nonaddictive products and then have the government try to ban them. bottom line, after all of these design changes, after all of these design changes, does that mean that the cigarette was more dangerous to mrs. allen? i asked dr. henningfield, if you took a roll-your-own, natural tobacco out of the ground here in florida, rolled it up and smoked it, is that safe? is it safer? no. he said roll-your-owns were more addictive. a factory made cigarette is not more addictive. it is not more dangerous. i had to show him, after he agreed, but i had to show him dr. cummings' article, their other expert. dr. cummings himself wrote an article that said roll-your-owns are more addictive than these modern cigarettes. that is their two experts contradicting these claims. companies made a lot of misstatements. companies went out on a limb and had an argument with the public health community. but in the end, the companies spent a great amount of money trying to research and make these cigarettes that their own experts reveal are safer. none of this -- none of this caused mrs. allen's injury and under these 4412 circumstances, giving extra millions of dollars to mr. allen is not warranted. if you find that he is entitled to damages, you will have found whatever is just and reasonable, and he will have been fully compensated, but there is no reason to give millions more under these circumstances. now, again, you have someone who was told about a product that was dangerous and could kill her and used it for many years, and then years later, her husband brings a lawsuit and says, it is your fault because she could not stop smoking; nicotine hooked her. but when the evidence comes out, we find out that she never tried to stop during those 30 years, that she never even made an attempt. and when the evidence comes out, her own experts say, i cannot say that nicotine stopped her because she did not try. and when the evidence comes out, we find the only time she tried to quit and made a serious attempt is in 1998, two years after she got sick. and the medical records, not some tobacco company witness, not some lawyer, the medical records say she went back because she was frantic at work and she was starting to gain weight. and there is no doubt that it is a sad story, 4413 that we can have sympathy for her, but they have not met their burden of proof. but for her obsession with weight, she quit smoking in 1998, and but for her decision to never even try to quit, she could quit smoking before '96, when her own doctor says that she would avoid it. however they label addiction, however they label her behavior, that choice was the cause of her injury. and for those reasons, ladies and gentlemen, i think the evidence warrants a finding in favor of the defendants, and mr. kelly is going to talk to you about philip morris. mr. kelly: yes. thank you very much, your honor. how time do i have? the court: it is in here. mr. belasic: minutes. mr. kelly: doing a little math? the court: yeah. yeah. you have -- let us see. i'm sorry. mr. belasic: your honor, i had 59 minutes plus and a half for myself. the court: that is right. mr. belasic: he has 20 minutes, i think. 4414 the court: yeah, that is about right, just about 19 or 20 minutes. mr. kelly: thank you, your honor. may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. kelly: counsel, mr. allen, ms. allen. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i'm going to try not to cover too many of the areas that mr. belasic already covered, but i do want top focus in on the claim as it relates to philip morris specifically. it is -- it is been laid out for you by mr. mitnik on behalf of mr. allen. the first issue i want to address, though, is the one that is the very first you are going to address, the first question on the verdict form. and if i could have the elmo, please? okay. was patricia dawn allen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause? now, you are going to see, back in the jury room, those instructions and those terms are all going to be defined for you, and you will get a chance to apply those instructions -- i'm sorry i'm talking so fast -- those instructions to the evidence that you have heard. but i've listened to the plaintiff's 4415 presentation on this question, and i have these observations to share with you to suggest to you that there seems to be quite a bit of evidence that is undisputed that there is agreement on. there are 30 years of smoking, from '66 to '96, for ms. allen to become diagnosed with copd. not much dispute about that. over the first 20 years of that smoking, had mrs. allen stopped smoking, she would not have gotten copd. no dispute as to that. had she stopped when she was diagnosed, she would still be alive and not be disabled. no dispute about that. the question is then, no matter how you decide to define addiction -- and certainly there are plenty of definitions to choose from in the record. however you define that, that does not answer the question that is in the -- the verdict form because it is not do you find that she was addicted and then move on, but it is connecting that to her illness as a causal factor under the law such that it is a legal cause. and over that 20 or 30 years of smoking, a condition that she had, however you define it, could be a potential hurdle to stopping. certainly 4416 possible, as we know from the evidence of what addiction is, that it can be a hurdle to stopping. but we also know, on the other hand, that millions of people who are addicted have stopped but then others have not. so you get these statistics delivered to you concerning an addictive smoker, and you wonder, i would guess, where does ms. allen fit in? is she among the millions of people who, had she tried, she would have quit, or is she among the other group who, being addicted and trying, had a hard time and could not for a long time quit or possibly at all? where does mrs. allen fall among all these statistics you have been given? people are different. i -- i latched onto that and as soon as dr. henningfield said it. that is right. all these statistics do not tell you anything about ms. allen. the plaintiff has the burden of establishing the burden under the law that ms. allen was so substantially affected that she continued to smoke over that time. and what do we know about that time? we know that she never was motivated to quit, never decided to quit. motivation and a decision to quit, according to the plaintiff's experts, are necessary 4417 to a successful quit attempt. she never demonstrated that over the first 30 years of her smoking. the effect of her addiction, however you characterize that, on her smoking is not apparent in the first 30 years because she never tried to quit, never attempted to quit. the plaintiffs are suggesting to you that you can insert into the question a kind of generic or hypothetical smoker and assume that that smoker would have had a difficult time and been unable to quit had that smoker tried. all that hypothetical analysis and assumptions are not sufficient under the law to prove the case. in the end, the question is would ms. allen have been able to quit had she attempted? if your initial reaction to that is we do not know because we do not know anything about ms. allen during that period of time, plaintiff has failed to meet his burden of proof. you have no information about ms. allen virtually of what her daily activities were, what her goals and objectives were, what her stresses were, what her joys were through the '60s and into the '70s. mr. allen did not meet her until 4418 '78, and then into the '80s, you know a little bit about her. but it was not until the defense got up and told you a whole lot more about her from medical records that you got a sense of who ms. allen really was as a person. and it is that person that you have to make a decision about, not a generic or hypothetical smoker, not a statistical person, but the real person. and i'd submit to you that as i'm listening to what the plaintiffs are arguing, they are not arguing with you at all or to you at all about the person, mrs. allen. they are arguing to you about a hypothetical smoker. and it is the person who is the subject of this case. that is why we have these individual cases because we focused on the person. and for ms. allen, there is essentially no evidence at all in the '60s and '70s, even through most of the '80s to explain what would have happened had she been motivated and attempted to quit. we do know that when she was motivated and attempted to quit, she did. and plaintiffs have not addressed that at all. all right. let me turn to philip morris and the claim that has been made against philip morris. 4419 if i could have the slide, please, tammy. all right. there is a burden of proof in the case. there is two actually. the burden of proof in the case, except when you get down the road in the jury verdict form, is greater weight of the evidence. and the way that i like to think about it as we go through the evidence that we are going to talk about is it is like a high jump. and if you get over the bar with your evidence, considering all the evidence in the case, then you have made it to the greater weight of the evidence, your burden of proof. got a note that is popped up on my screen there telling me -- all right. it did not pop up on yours. excuse me. okay. so as you go through the evidence and you are discussing it among yourselves and you come upon terms like, well, it is unknown; it is kind of uncertain; yeah, that is really speculation; well, those are assumptions; it might be; it could be, possibly -- and you are going to have lots of discussions in there about what the evidence really proves and what the truth is. and you are going to be talking about, well, possibly it is this; maybe it is that; there is maybe; 4420 could be this; those are just assumptions, those are indications to you that the evidence has not made it over the burden of proof. please bear that in mind as you work your way through the evidence. mr. mitnik gave his opening statement to you. he said that the claim against philip morris was based on these facts which he planned to prove to you. number 1, mrs. allen started smoking with benson & hedges menthol cigarettes. number 2, mrs. allen's addiction began with benson & hedges menthol. and 1 and 2 added up to 3, that smoking benson & hedges menthol was a legal cause of her copd because the claim was she started with benson & hedges menthol and that is what initiated her addiction. did mrs. allen start smoking with benson & hedges menthol? here's the evidence. mrs. allen started smoking in 1966. not much dispute about that. benson & hedges menthol first came on the market in 1968. undisputed that mrs. allen did not start smoking with benson & hedges menthol. that is dr. cummings' testimony. it is undisputed in the case. at the time mrs. allen began smoking in 1966, benson & hedges menthol had yet to be on the market. 4421 and here is -- you will remember, ms. norgaard testified by deposition that in 1969, when she lived with ms. allen, she recalled that the brand of cigarette ms. allen was smoking at that time, '69 to '71, was benson & hedges menthol. well, that is all they are is menthol. we will talk about that in a minute. and the claim was -- and the plaintiffs presented this. the claim was through their experts that beginning smokers are brand-loyal so that if you know the cigarette they were smoking three years into their smoking history, you can assume or conclude because they are brand-loyal, that is what they started with. and that was the basis of the claim until dr. cummings showed up and said, they were not even available until 1968. second point of the plaintiff's claim against philip morris, after striking out on the first claim that ms. allen started smoking with benson & hedges menthol, did mrs. allen's addiction start with benson & hedges menthol? well, she started smoking in 1966. and the plaintiff's witnesses claim that she was addicted to the cigarettes she started smoking with, whatever they were, within -- either immediately or within several months. 4422 there is no claim that benson & hedges were smoked until 1969, when ms. allen was 20 or 21 years old and she lived with ms. norgaard until she was about 23. dr. henningfield was here and testified on direct and cross examination and then -- let me get this right -- on -- not direct or cross examination or even redirect examination, but in response to a juror question, which was to dr. henningfield. at what age is the human brain, male and female, fully developed, thus reducing the risk of addiction? he said going into the 20s. relatively few people, even today, get addicted to tobacco after they hit their 20s. but according to all the experts in the case, mrs. allen was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine before she even began smoking benson & hedges menthol. so the first two components of the plaintiff's claim they made against philip morris in opening statement fall away in the evidence. and that leaves us with the argument concerning the claim that benson & hedges smoking caused copd. remember our time line from opening statement. this is the period of time when she was smoking 4423 benson & hedges menthol, allegedly by ms. norgaard. ms. norgaard described the cigarette benson & hedges menthol, well, that is all they are is menthol. that is not benson & hedges menthol. benson & hedges is not a menthol-only cigarette. so dr. burns agreed to it. there is no dispute about it. take a look at the ads. they are both regular and menthol. this is not a benson & hedges cigarette that is a menthol-only cigarette. now, is it unreasonable to suggest that a 41-year-old memory from ms. norgaard taken in a deposition in 2010 might have got that detail wrong? use your common sense. a 40-year-old memory of that kind of detail is more likely to be wrong than right. and the way that she describes the cigarettes is not benson & hedges menthol. the causation instruction that you have already seen a couple of times has substantial factor and but for. in -- in our testimony with dr. burns, dr. burns was asked if the two-year smoking period for benson & hedges menthol, '69 to '71, was removed from her 30-year smoking history, would she still have gotten copd? dr. burns says, i'm not suggesting that if you remove those two years, she would not have gotten copd. what i'm suggest is 4424 that it -- it contributes somewhat. well, it has to contribute as a substantial amount, and he cannot say what that amount is. it is not possible because, as he said, he does not have any clear testimony of the amount mrs. allen smoked until 1979. so to make the proportional assessment that dr. burns described in his examination, to try and tie benson & hedges cigarettes, if that is what she smoked for those two years into the 30-year smoking history, you have to know what that amount is and he does not know that amount. so the plaintiff has the burden of establishing that. they have the burden of establishing that substantial factor. and dr. burns cannot do it, and there is not sufficient evidence in the record to allow anyone to do it. on the claim of concealment. during the years 1969 to 1971, all of the facts in evidence that mr. belasic mentioned were in place. all of the warnings were in place by '69. a new one came in in '70. so the question to -- to ask, i would think, as a practical matter is did mrs. allen smoke benson & hedges menthol in 1969 to 1971 because important information was kept from her? and for 4425 all the reasons that you have already been -- that are laid out for you, the answer is no. do i have a little bit of time left, your honor? i think -- the court: yeah, i have you till 53. i may have mixed it up. you have got about another ten minutes. mr. kelly: oh, all right. well, i'll go back. no, i will not. i will not. that is the claim against benson & hedges menthol. it is questionable, i'd submit to you, under the evidence whether, in fact, it ever was benson & hedges menthol, but there is no evidence that benson & hedges menthol was the cigarette that she started smoking with or was the cigarette that initiated her addiction. and there is no testimony at all as to the level of addictions during those two years of smoking. you will recall that both dr. cummings and dr. burns described a power of addiction, a heaviness of addiction that is dependent upon the characteristics of the smoking. dr. cummings had a whole list of those first time, the first cigarette, time of last cigarette, chain smoking, withdrawal symptoms, time between cigarettes, all sorts of 4426 details he looks at, none of which are present during this time period. dr. cummings is not able to say what level of addiction there might have been during that time period. and there is absolutely no way, short of rank speculation, to say mrs. allen could not have quit had she wanted to as a 21- or 23-year-old in that period of time. no suggestion she ever wanted to or tried to. there is no indication at all that she had a level of addiction that would have impacted that decision in any way at all during those early years. from the evidence you have in the record -- and i -- and i would say this, that the evidence available before the '78 and '79 period when mr. allen met his wife is -- is very thin with respect to mrs. allen's daily activities or her -- or her life and the decisions she is making and the pressures she is feeling and what she is doing. and it is just, i think, a real temptation to fill a void in the evidence with assumptions or speculation. it is just, i think, natural. it is something i suggest you need to resist when you are in the jury room because there are these huge gaps in the evidence that plaintiffs have not tried to 4427 fill. and you cannot substitute evidence in or make assumptions. where there is no evidence, plaintiff has not met the burden of proof, and that is certainly true for all those early years, '69 to '71. well, on the claim that mr. allen wants more money in punitive damages, remember, there is that higher burden of proof. and -- and if we are here in phase ii, there will be additional evidence to consider. but right now the question is whether or not anything that -- and you will look at the companies separately for this and together, that what harm mrs. allen -- what about '69 to '71 for philip morris harmed mrs. allen? we know it is not the cigarette smoking because there is no evidence of that being a substantial factor. we know it did not cause her addiction. but that is the first question you have to ask. and then you look to see whether that -- that conduct of selling cigarettes that had filters on them in '69 and '71 -- that was the time period when the government and the industry was working together with the tobacco working group, when they were identifying ways to make less hazardous cigarettes, '68 to '78. that was the time when the public health community was saying, you know, if you are 4428 going to have to smoke, filters are the way -- way to go. take a look at the ads that went with benson & hedges menthol. they are just -- these are longer. you get more puffs. there is nothing safety-related in those ads except for the surgeon general's warning. the court: did you -- the timing may have been a little bit off. a couple more minutes. mr. kelly: all right, your honor. the court: i'm sorry. mr. kelly: let me close. and thank you for your patience over the course of this case. i know it -- it -- it is hard to sit there and listen to somebody talk at you for so long and especially to see some -- another attorney stand up and talk with you for even longer. but i appreciate your patience. i appreciate your service and your dedication to your service over these two weeks. your hard job is about to start. i do not get a chance to stand up again and question whether or not the plaintiffs met their burden of proof. that is for you to determine when you go in the jury room. mr. mitnik has a chance to stand up because 4429 he -- mr. allen has the burden of proof. he has the high burden of proof on punitive liability as well. the final say on whether or not he is met his burden of proof is not lawyer argument. it is the evidence that is been put in front of you and the evidence that is missing. you make those determinations when you go in the jury room. thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen. thank you, your honor.