mr. williams: may it please the court, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. let me first say thank you for your service. we have the best legal system in the world, but it would not work without you. and we know this is inconvenient. it takes you out of your routine. but the entire reynolds team thanks you for your time that you have spent with us the last week and a half. secondly, we thank you for your patience, because we know there are breaks and everything and that can get frustrating. now, mr. wilner started this case off by talking about punishment, by talking about punishment, punishing reynolds because of deaths of other smokers and how many people cigarettes kill. i think i stood before you about a week and a half ago and i told you everybody knows, our government knows that cigarettes cause disease and they are addictive, but we have decided as a society that smokers should have the right to smoke if they want to. that was not news to anyone, including our government, that cigarettes kill people. that cigarettes can cause disease. but we give people the right to choose to trial day 8 4/17/13 58 smoke. we warned them. and you heard a lot of evidence and information that tobacco is addictive, no matter what word you call it, addictive and causes diseases, has been known before we were a country. and you heard some of that with dr. schaller. so we are not to start off with punishment, because as i told you when i stood before you a week and a half ago, this case is about buck aycock and the choices he made about smoking and never trying to quit, and that is going to be a big thing here because that makes a difference. now, the court read to you this morning eleven questions that you are going to have to answer. and you know what? ten of them have buck aycock's name on them. ten of them. because the case is about buck aycock. now, the plaintiffs spent much of this case talking about other smokers and other cigarettes, about other cigarette companies. and you heard the stipulation that reynolds is responsible for american tobacco and brown & williamson. mr. aycock never smoked any american tobacco cigarettes. he never smoked any brown & williamson cigarettes. so that is one of those things that you can take off your plate if there is any confusion there. mr. wilner: we object to that. he seems to be arguing that they are not responsible and the document says they are. trial day 8 4/17/13 59 mr. williams: i'm talking about brand of cigarettes. the court: i'm going to sustain the objection. mr. williams: buck aycock -- and they -- the court: the jury will disregard his comments about taking it off the table. mr. williams: i was talking about brands, your honor. the court: okay. mr. williams: but i hear you. they showed you a lot of ads. they showed you a lot of tobacco executives talking. and there is no evidence at all -- and they have to prove this case with evidence. they cannot ask you to fill in the gaps for them, to speculate. it said direct evidence or circumstantial evidence. it did not say speculate, guess, supposition. they have to prove their case, and they showed you a lot of ads, a lot of executives talking, and no evidence that buck aycock ever heard those, relied on them in any way, shape or form or anything like that. the things you saw, a lot of things you saw in this case, do not go to the issues that you have to decide. and during my opening statement, i said the facts that really matter in this case are the facts that relate substantially and directly as to why buck aycock died. those are the trial day 8 4/17/13 60 questions that you are going to have to answer. now, as i said and the judge said, mrs. aycock has the burden to prove those facts to you. she cannot ask you to guess or speculate or fill in the gaps that may be missing in things she has to prove. when you look at the proof that she and her attorneys showed you, if all you can say is, maybe she is right or possibly she is right, then she has not proven her case and your verdict should be for reynolds. let me talk about something that ms. aycock said that is certain in this case. i told you in opening that this case had been made a little bit simpler because mrs. aycock has admitted that buck aycock was a partial legal cause of his own death. the judge read you that instruction. now, think for a minute. under what circumstances would mrs. aycock admit that buck aycock was at least partially a legal cause of his own death? what would she have to believe in order to make that admission? first, she would have to believe that buck aycock would not be the cause of his own death if he had not known that smoking was dangerous. she has to believe that he knew that smoking was dangerous and he continued to smoke in order to make that admission. second, she has to believe that buck aycock had the ability to quit and did not. buck aycock would not be a partial legal cause of his own death if he did not have the trial day 8 4/17/13 61 ability to quit smoking. you would never admit that he was a legal cause of his own death if he was unable to quit. you would say that he was blameless or without fault, and that is not what they are saying. now, ms. aycock has admitted unequivocally on that stand that buck aycock never tried to quit smoking. you heard the testimony during trial. she admitted that. you heard mrs. aycock say she knew buck aycock wanted to quit but he could not. she said she could read him like a book. well, the truth of the matter is mrs. aycock wanted buck aycock to quit smoking. that was very clear to everybody in here. but buck aycock, who this case is about, did not want to quit. they did not bring in one witness, one family member, one coworker, one friend, no one came in here and told you, i saw him put down the cigarettes. he tried to quit but he could not. he said he was going to throw away his cigarettes or throw away his ashtrays, the things these people do when they want to quit. you did not hear that evidence in this case. and now they want you to fill in that gap for them, that blank, to speculate as to what was in buck aycock's mind, but you cannot do that. you have to -- they have to have proof, they have to prove their case, and it is clear: buck aycock did not want to quit smoking and he never trial day 8 4/17/13 62 tried. and we cannot confuse those two things. the evidence says that buck aycock never tried to quit. they want you to speculate and think that he wanted to quit but could not. those are huge -- that is a huge difference there. the evidence is clear he never tried to quit. there is a big difference between not trying to quit and not wanting to and not being able to. and for buck aycock, it is the former. he did not want to and he did not try. now, this is a wrongful death case. what does an admission of fault in a wrongful death case mean? the only thing this admission can mean is that buck aycock had the ability to quit smoking at the time that would have prevented, prevented, his own death. this means that buck aycock knew that smoking was dangerous, had the ability to quit, knew that he should quit and did not at a time that would have prevented his own death. that is what that admission means in a wrongful death case. now, you heard evidence in this case that 60 million people saw the ads and had the same changes in their brains but they quit. 60 million people have quit smoking. they had the same nicotine in their bodies. they saw the same cigarette ads. they had the same changes in their brain. they saw the same warnings. they had family members who wanted them to quit. and those 60 million people made a trial day 8 4/17/13 63 choice to put down their cigarettes and to quit smoking. others chose to continue smoking, and buck aycock was one of those. and that is a very important fact that you need to think about when you decide this case. now, the judge instructed you that, as a result of the plaintiff's admission, the court has already determined as a matter of law that buck aycock's actions were a partial legal cause of his own death. that is already been decided. as judge goldberg explained, it is binding on you. and as a result, if you get to the questions in the verdict form assigning fault, you are required under the law to consider some fault to go to buck aycock. so as i said, this case has been made a little bit simpler because you are here to decide issues about buck aycock's death, and the plaintiff admits that buck aycock was a partial legal cause of his own death. i want to point out evidence that shows it is not just partial. buck aycock's informed choices about smoking make him the whole and the sole legal cause of his death. he knew that smoking was dangerous, and we will show you evidence on that. he chose to smoke and he never tried to quit, and the reason he never tried to quit was through no fault of rjr. rjr cannot be found liable in this case simply because it makes cigarettes or simply because it advertises cigarettes or simply because it spends a lot of money trial day 8 4/17/13 64 advertising cigarettes. those are not grounds that rjr is liable for any wrongdoing to buck aycock. let me step back in time. remember, buck aycock was born in 1923 and likely would have been in the first grade in 1931. and i'm getting to things that he knew and why we can show you that buck aycock knew that smoking was dangerous. dr. schaller came here and showed you what kids in alabama elementary schools were being taught about smoking at the time buck aycock was in school. remember this excerpt from the fourth grade textbook. it tells you that smoking is dangerous and addictive. and this was long before buck aycock smoked his first cigarette. remember, there is no evidence that he smoked anything before he was married and 20 years old, and when he first started smoking he was smoking prince albert ryo, which rjr is not liable for. you recall that the judge charged you on that, instructed you on that during the case. and buck aycock continued to smoke prince albert until he went into the navy, and he smoked a lot of prince albert cigarettes, mrs. aycock told you. and that should tell you that none of the ads that the plaintiff took a whole half morning showing you played any role in buck aycock starting to smoke. you recall that mrs. aycock testified how you smoke a roll-your-own trial day 8 4/17/13 65 cigarette. you put the tobacco on paper, you buy your paper, buy the tobacco in a can, spit on it and roll it up. mr. wilner: your honor, excuse me. we object. we were told that we could not argue about that. the court: i sustain the objection. get off the subject and move on. the jury should disregard the references to what he did with -- mr. williams: the ads you saw, ladies and gentlemen, were glamorous -- i'm sorry. the court: go ahead. mr. williams: the ads you saw, ladies and gentlemen, were glamorous hollywood stars. you did not see ads of what i just described. dr. schaller also showed you information that was available to the general public about the dangers of smoking and about the addictiveness of smoking before buck aycock touched his first cigarette. you remember this article in reader's digest, which is a magazine of just general circulation, 1938. and we know buck aycock did not smoke before 1943 or '44. and dr. cummings, who was the plaintiff's expert, told you that people get information about smoking from their own world, their families, people around them. most of the people in buck aycock's world were nonsmokers. he was from a family of eight kids. five of them did not smoke. trial day 8 4/17/13 66 mrs. aycock grew up a few miles down the road and never touched a cigarette in her life. her parents did not smoke, nor did her two sisters. mrs. aycock remembered that winston jingle, "winston tastes good," (noise) (noise), "like a cigarette should." but she is a non-, never smoker. that should show you the disconnect between all the advertising and its effect on people. just -- we are not saying buck aycock never saw cigarette advertisement. that would be insane. but the point is cigarette advertising did not make him smoke. it did not force him to smoke. that was a choice that he made. rjr selling cigarettes in america is legal and not wrong. it cannot be a basis for liability. its advertising is legal and not wrong and cannot be a basis for liability. mr. wilner: excuse me. that is an improper statement. it could be a basis for liability if it is negligently performed. that is not a statement of the law. the court: i'm going to overrule that objection. mr. williams: rjr -- the court: i think it goes to what is publicly presented. mr. williams: now, mrs. aycock told you that she hated smoking from day one and started talking to buck aycock about quitting before they moved to florida in 1953. she also admitted to us, and you will recall this, that she began trial day 8 4/17/13 67 working in a pharmacy in 1953. and this, again, is about all the information that was out there about the dangers of smoking. you do not have to see a scientific document; you do not have to see a tobacco document. if i know, if you know that smoking is dangerous and addictive, there is no more to know. mrs. aycock was working in that pharmacy, and she testified, in the 1950s, folks would come in and ask for cigarettes and ask for cancer sticks or coffin nails, communicating very clearly that they understood that there was -- cigarettes were dangerous but they were making a decision to smoke. she also testified that buck aycock was not the type of man that you would tell what to do. she was asking him to quit during this period of time. she knew that they were dangerous, and he did as well; but buck aycock believed that his smoking was his business, and he told her that, that his smoking was none of her business. you will recall she testified and she continued to complain and implore him to quit smoking over the years and he decided to ignore her. but the public information that was available to him was widespread. you will recall the information of that cancer by the carton in 1952. you will also recall a gallup poll in 1954 showing that ninety percent of the folks had recently read or heard something that cigarettes may be a cause of cancer. so trial day 8 4/17/13 68 it is not a secret. but let me stop right here. the mid-1960s: buck aycock knows that smoking is dangerous. he is been warned and informed that smoking is dangerous by public health officials, general public information, his wife, from various sources that you hear about dangers of smoking. he has the ability to quit but he does not try because he enjoys smoking. but how do you know he had the ability to quit? well, you heard from mrs. aycock that he was intelligent, he was hard-working, and when he put his mind to something, when he set his mind to something, he could get it done. and you also heard -- and this was uncomfortable for me because we are not trying to sully buck aycock, but he started drinking when he started smoking in the 1940s. drinking and smoking are two vices that typically go together. a family issue arose concerning his drinking. what did buck aycock do? he did not continue to drink. he went to aa and he quit. so what did he do? he acted. there was a problem that he saw, he acted and he was able to surmount that problem. there is a big difference when it came to his smoking. that was not a problem for buck aycock. that was a problem for people around him, but not for buck aycock. trial day 8 4/17/13 69 if he could have quit drinking, he could have quit smoking if he had wanted to. but he did not try, and that evidence should tell you a lot. so when you sort through all the evidence in this case and put it together, you will see that buck aycock's choices, his informed choices, about smoking and his choice not to quit are really the only legal cause of his death. buck aycock knew smoking was dangerous, but he wanted to smoke and he just never tried to quit. now, the fundamental -- a fundamental nature of this lawsuit is that buck aycock knew that smoking was dangerous before he got started, got warnings throughout his whole life and continued to smoking anyway, never tried to quit. and then after his death, a lawsuit is brought by mrs. aycock. during opening statements, they asked for 8 million and here they have said from 3 to 8 million dollars, boatload of money. so they are asking you for a lot of money in this case, a case where buck aycock knew it was dangerous from the beginning, ignored the warnings he received from every possible source his whole life, never tried to quit. that is the fundamental nature of this lawsuit here. and that is the fundamental reason that i'm going to tell you why your verdict should be for rjr, just those reasons. it was about buck aycock. and there was nothing rjr did wrong to make him start smoking, to keep him smoking, trial day 8 4/17/13 70 or anything else. now, class membership, i'm going to talk about the verdict form. the plaintiff has three hurdles they have to clear in order for buck aycock to become a member of the engle class, and they have to clear those hurdles with evidence. once again, you are not to fill the gaps with supposition, with speculation, or anything like that. they have the burden of proof on this. they must convince you that it is more likely than not that buck aycock was addicted to rjr cigarettes containing nicotine, that buck aycock's addiction to rjr cigarettes was a legal cause of his death, and that buck aycock smoking caused him to develop lung cancer. you will remember i told you during opening statement this case is about three causations: medical causation, addiction causation, and legal causation. causation, causation, causation. the first question was -- is whether -- was lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking a legal cause of buck aycock's death? we will talk about addiction causation in a minute. now, the plaintiffs have to prove that lung cancer caused by smoking caused buck aycock's death. that is what i call the medical causation. and you heard a lot of evidence on this. and the plaintiff cannot meet her burden of proof trial day 8 4/17/13 71 that buck aycock had and died of lung cancer caused by smoking because the medical test necessary, a biopsy, was never performed. his doctors wanted to perform one. his family said no, and that is not a criticism of their private decision; but this is about evidence in this case. it is about proof, and the proof is not there. you heard medical experts in this case. every medical expert in this case told you that you need tissue, pathology, a biopsy, to diagnose cancer. you will recall drs. ford and andrews readily told you that, and they explained why. and the reason is because cancer can look like -- the abnormality that you think is cancer can be so many other things on x-ray or on ct scan. and, in fact, buck aycock's chest x-ray proves that. the technician thought it was either cancer or pneumonia or both. you just cannot tell. and dr. burns, the plaintiff's expert, also admitted when he was confronted by a medical treatise called harrison's, that you have to have pathology; you have to have tissue to diagnose cancer when my colleague chris kreiner cross-examined him on it. you remember that. dr. burns did not tell you that at first, but there were three medical doctors in this case: two with us, drs. andrews and ford, and dr. burns. dr. cummings is not a medical doctor, and dr. burns admitted that you need pathology, you need tissue, to diagnose cancer. harrison's, trial day 8 4/17/13 72 this is the quote that he did not deny when he was confronted with it: the diagnosis of cancer relies most heavily on invasive tissue biopsy and should never be made without obtaining tissue. no noninvasive diagnostic test is sufficient to define a disease process as cancer. that is what he was asked, and he admitted to that. he did not dispute it. you heard a board-certified radiologist, dr. ford. he came in here and explained to you why you cannot say from buck aycock's ct scan report and chest x-ray that that was cancer. it could equally be infection or inflammation, and i'll get into why his medical records support that. dr. ford was the only radiologist that you heard from in this case, and he is especially qualified because he was a neuroradiologist, a specialist in studying brain scans and the central nervous system. and he explained how dr. freedman's report on buck aycock's head ct does not and cannot prove that he had cancer in his head that started in his lung. the lesions noted in the report were just as likely infection or inflammation as they were cancer, and the head ct does not prove that buck aycock had lung cancer. so the question is not whether the lesions could be cancer. dr. ford readily told you that they could. but he also told you that radiologists make lists of what they trial day 8 4/17/13 73 see, and in this case, the list had to include inflammation and infection, and a radiologist cannot narrow that down. the technology does not allow him or her to do so. the list of what could have been going on in buck aycock's head included cancer from other sites in the body, including the lung or the liver, or it could have been inflammation or infection. noncancerous lesions can be cavitary, like he talked about, and noncancerous lesions can come in different sizes and be present and multiply, like in buck aycock's case. and, again, ladies and gentlemen, the issue here is proof. ct scans cannot prove that cancer is more likely medically than the other possibilities: infection and inflammation. the plaintiff has the burden of proof. if you have to guess or speculate about what it was, or even if you think it is 50/50, then they do not meet their burden of proof. your verdict should be for rjr. dr. ford is not a professional witness like dr. burns. he was not glib. this was his first tobacco trial that he is testified in. this was his first tobacco deposition in this case. dr. burns is not a radiologist, and he certainly does not have the expertise in brain radiology that dr. ford did. the chest x-ray, let us talk about that for a trial day 8 4/17/13 74 minute. dr. ford explained it revealed an abnormality that could be cancer, could be pneumonia or some inflammatory process or a combination of the two. an x-ray just does not tell you. the chest x-ray finding does not prove more likely than not that buck aycock had lung cancer, and it certainly does not prove that he had lung cancer caused by smoking, because there are more than smoking as causes of lung cancer. you need to know cell type, and you heard evidence on that: you have to have pathology. and dr. ford also told you that the brain scan, the bone -- i'm sorry -- the bone scan and the x-ray of the abdomen were not diagnostic. mr. wilner said they showed cancer. they did not. they were nondiagnostic. they did not say that buck aycock had cancer. you heard from dr. andrews yesterday, a pulmonologist. he treats patients with all sorts of lung cancer, both critical and infectious, as well as people with other critical life-threatening diseases. he reviewed all of the medical evidence in this case, and he noticed several reasons why buck aycock's clinical presentation is inconsistent with lung cancer. for example, he showed you buck aycock's june 1995 chest x-ray, which was clear. dr. andrews pointed out that it would be very unusual for a lung cancer to be undetected trial day 8 4/17/13 75 in june 1995 and one year later to have spread and developed significantly and metastasized to the brain with multiple nodules. he told you buck aycock's clinical presentation under these circumstances is more consistent with infection. he also noted that buck aycock did not present with the typical pulmonary symptoms that you see in an advanced lung cancer, like difficulty breathing or spitting up blood or something like that. now, mr. wilner talked about hearing hoofbeats, do not think about zebras. well, the problem with that is you cannot take some of the evidence into consideration, cherry-pick what supports your theory. you have to look at all of it. that is the way -- what you have to do in order to get the right answer. mr. wilner and dr. burns did not show you buck aycock's june 1995 chest x-ray, and they did not talk about the record that showed he did not have pulmonary symptoms in 1996. we had to do that. they also did not point out the 1996 chest x-ray showed that buck aycock's mediastinal -- and these are big words that dr. andrews went over -- and hilar structures were normal. and the significance of that is it would be extremely unusual for an advanced cancer to start in your lung, to metastasize to your brain without the mediastinum and hilar lymph nodes developing some abnormality. and as you will see, buck aycock's were normal in june of 1996. trial day 8 4/17/13 76 now, dr. andrews told you how buck aycock's medical history revealed that he had been diagnosed with hepatitis, cirrhosis of the liver and two unusual infections in 1991, e. coli and klebsiella. and dr. andrews explained to you how buck aycock's liver disease and age -- he was 72 at the time -- rendered him immunocompromised, which means his immune system did not respond normally to infectious agents. this gives further reason to why infection and inflammation were significant probabilities in june 1996 and could not be ruled out without tissue pathology. dr. andrews also noted that buck aycock had an elevated cea, he called it, in june of 1996. that is a tumor marker that principally indicates a gi tract tumor. and buck aycock did not have an abdominal ct scan, which would have detected an abdominal tumor or liver cancer, which he was at increased risk from because of cirrhosis. again, ladies and gentlemen, the issue is one of proof here. and this is not being critical of the medical decisions that the family made in 1996. however, this is a lawsuit and a lawsuit demands proof and the proof is not here because there is no tissue. it cannot be proved more likely than not that buck aycock had lung cancer caused by smoking. now, dr. andrews practices in tampa, florida, as he told you. and as part of his practice, he has to certify trial day 8 4/17/13 77 death certificates. he explained to you that without pathology, dr. gleason's june 24th final diagnosis was not proof with medical probability. and when dr. gleason completed buck aycock's death certificate without pathology, and said, cause of death, carcinoma left upper lung, that was dr. gleason's best estimate. but without pathology, it does not prove more likely than not that buck aycock had lung cancer. and most importantly, it does not prove more likely than not that buck aycock had lung cancer caused by smoking. nowhere does dr. gleason talk about smoking. it is not in any of the medical records or anything like that. but buck aycock's problem was caused by smoking. he could have put that on the death certificate if he so desires on the line beneath that, due to consequences of smoking, or something like that. he did not. he left that blank. dr. andrews explained to you that a death certificate is not a diagnosis. the same standard of care does not apply. it is your best estimate. you are dealing with a person who has passed and not a live patient and so the standards are not the same. dr. burns told you that it is either reasonable degree of medical probability or unknown. and that simply is trial day 8 4/17/13 78 not the case in florida the way medicine is practiced. let us talk about addiction causation. there is no definition of addiction in the legal instructions that the judge gave you. you will have to decide what addiction means for the purposes of this case. no doctor treated buck aycock for addiction while he was alive. there is no medical record that says he was addicted to nicotine. there are no medical records that say buck aycock was being treated for nicotine addiction. the claim that buck aycock was addicted was really developed for this lawsuit. it did not happen or occur while he was alive. it was never a medical issue that any doctor identified that he was having a problem with nicotine addiction. the witnesses who told you that buck aycock was addicted are drs. cummings and burns, both of whom never met him, never examined him, never talked to him during the course of his life. they have been paid a lot of money for their opinions, which are based solely on the testimony and depositions of people who want mrs. aycock to win this case. so their testimony is slanted. but even they could not say that someone had -- that buck aycock had tried to quit, because if that evidence existed, you could bet your bottom dollar that you would have heard it again and again and again, and you did not. trial day 8 4/17/13 79 now, the plaintiff cannot prove that buck aycock was addicted if he never made a real quit attempt. and dr. burns defined a real quit attempt as a sincere motivation on the part of the individual to try to quit. an attempt that shows genuine motivation. like when buck aycock stopped drinking. that was genuinely motivated. he wanted to stop. he got help. he put effort into it, and he did it. that never happened with smoking. that is not -- was not a problem for buck aycock. now, you did not hear any evidence about any smoking cessation aids, him going to clinics, or him doing anything to stop his smoking. and for those reasons, you should vote no on this question of whether he was addicted to cigarettes. he never tried to quit. so how can you say that you are addicted? question 3, and this is the third question, remember, the findings do not apply to these three questions; this is just based on the evidence in this case. the plaintiff must prove that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of buck aycock's death for him to be a member of the class. when you look at what plaintiff said, their claim is essentially that buck aycock had no choice but to smoke himself to death, and the evidence shows that is just not true. an addictive smoker can stop smoking, and you trial day 8 4/17/13 80 heard a lot of evidence in this case about how many that have from drs. burns and cummings. 60 million people stopped smoking. and dr. cummings told you 80 to 95 percent of them were addicted. in 1965, one year after the surgeon general's report, 17.6 million people quit. by 1985, that was 40.9 million people. and according to dr. cummings, these folks were addicted. they were not casual smokers. and this was a period of time that dr. burns and cummings claimed that rjr and other tobacco companies were preventing people from stopping smoking because they were giving them a psychological crutch or they were advertising. but that did not stop people who wanted to quit from quitting. now, dr. cummings admitted the 60 million people who have quit would have had the same brain changes that buck aycock supposedly had. they would have seen the same advertising that he saw. they would have heard the same tobacco company messages that he saw, but they were able to put their cigarettes down and quit. and the evidence is not that he was a tortured smoker who could not quit, who was trying and trying and trying and just failed. that is not the evidence here. the evidence is that he never quit. when we were in jury selection, on that monday, there was a man that stood up and said he was biased against trial day 8 4/17/13 81 the tobacco companies and his problem was -- mr. wilner: excuse me, your honor. the jury selection is not -- the court: i'll sustain the objection. move on. the jury will disregard the reference to jury selection. mr. williams: the question you have to ask yourself is why was not buck aycock one of the 60 million people who quit. the plaintiffs have the burden to prove that to you. they need to show you a reason why he was different than those 60 million people. were the cigarettes he was smoking more addictive? no. there is no evidence of that. was his brain affected differently than theirs was? no. there was not any evidence of that. was he exposed to different advertising? no. there is no evidence of that. was he exposed to different companies' statements? no. there is no evidence of that. did he smoke more than other smokers who quit? there is no evidence of that. those 60 million smokers who quit wanted to try and did, and buck aycock, if he had wanted to, could have done the same thing. in order to be a legal cause of his death, buck aycock's addiction must substantially and directly cause his death. the evidence does not show that, ladies and gentlemen. buck aycock's desire to smoke and failure to try trial day 8 4/17/13 82 to quit were the causes of his death. once you sort through all the information, you should answer no to this third question, and if you do, that is the end of our case. buck aycock is not a member of the engle class. you sign the verdict form, and you bring it back to us and the case is over, and the evidence supports that result. but if you do find that buck aycock is a member of the engle class, we have other issues to talk about. and although obviously i do not think the evidence supports you getting there, it is clearly and certainly your decision and not mine, and we understand that. if buck aycock is a member of the class, one of the things that you have to -- that comes into play of the engle findings -- and here is an instruction that is really important, it is no. 8, and you will see that the engle findings do not, as the judge said, establish whether buck aycock was injured by the conduct of rjr to any degree. and the engle findings also, even though they have a role in the case now, they do not decide any liability of rjr, and they do not decide whether rjr's actions were a legal cause of buck aycock's death. the plaintiff has to establish legal cause, and that means they have to offer proof that demonstrates that the conduct embodied in the engle findings had a direct and continuous sequence that contributed trial day 8 4/17/13 83 substantially to buck aycock's death, and you will not find the evidence of that here. now, question no. 4, and mr. wilner talked about this, about how addictive cigarettes are and how we design cigarettes to be addictive. you heard evidence to the contrary. if you went out and picked a piece of tobacco off a plant, it would have nicotine in it, it would be addictive, and if you smoked it, it would be dangerous and could cause cancer. nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. tobacco is naturally addictive. it naturally causes disease. dr. cummings said no cigarettes in the world are less addictive or dangerous than those that buck aycock smoked. rjr cigarettes are not a legal cause of buck aycock's death. the reason is that buck aycock's choices about smoking and him not quitting, his failing to try to quit, that is the legal cause of his death. so the evidence supports a no vote as to question no. 4. i'm going to address questions 5, 6, 7, and 8 together because they are all about concealment. these are the questions on the verdict form. 6 and 8 ask you about reliance. questions 5 through 8 require plaintiff to prove to you that buck aycock relied to his detriment after may 5th, 1982 -- that is an important date -- on concealment or omission of material information by rjr. trial day 8 4/17/13 84 statements by rjr, not cigarettes like mr. wilner told you. it is about statements and information. and that buck aycock's reliance must be a legal cause of his death. and the judge is going to give you an instruction on that. he has already. it is instruction no. 10. and you will have that with you. the bottom line is that the plaintiffs have to prove that but for the wrongful conduct of rjr, buck aycock would not have died of lung cancer caused by smoking. now, mr. wilner said that rjr knew and hid information about the health risks and addictiveness of smoking. he said internal company documents marked secret kept in the company files prevented buck aycock from making an informed decision to smoke or not to smoke and that the tobacco companies kept him smoking by a campaign of doubt and deception. well, the evidence in this case has shown you that no concealment by rjr prevented buck aycock from making an informed decision to smoke. and here's the reason why, ladies and gentlemen. you cannot conceal information that is already known and that somebody knows. you cannot conceal public knowledge. the evidence has shown that buck aycock was fully aware of the dangers of smoking and the addictiveness of smoking long before may 5th, 1982. and he chose to smoke, trial day 8 4/17/13 85 and he liked it, but that was his decision and his choice and not due to any wrongdoing on the part of r.j. reynolds or any other tobacco company. the effects of nicotine and the health effects of smoking were well-known and no secret to buck aycock. that is what the information and the evidence shows, and that is why your vote should be no on questions 5 through 8. the bottom line is going to be whether buck aycock knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive or whether it was a secret. and it was no secret to him. dr. cummings admitted -- and you got a history lesson while this trial was going on about columbus seeing his sailors could not quit smoking when they were heading back and mark twain talking about he quit smoking a thousand times. he acknowledged that scientists -- this is dr. cummings -- acknowledged that scientists in the 1920s observed that nicotine had compulsive effects. but more importantly, he admitted under oath, dr. cummings did, that it is been common knowledge for over a hundred years that smoking is hard to quit, addicting, habituating, whatever word you want to use. and you remember dr. cummings showed you a secret document from claude teague of reynolds in the 1970s. he said this was a hidden document. and it says, nicotine is trial day 8 4/17/13 86 the sine qua non of smoking. now, we had to show you that the same information was in reader's digest without the fancy latin, that nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco. it was common knowledge. it was common information. it was no secret to buck aycock. and you remember that plaintiff's counsel never showed you a document, not a single document from reynolds, where reynolds is denying that it could be difficult for smokers to quit. reynolds did not do that. there is no evidence of that. now, they showed you the 1994 congressional hearings, but there is no evidence that buck aycock looked at those or saw those. and dr. cummings admitted that rjr's ceo on those hearings testified later in the day that smoking can be difficult to quit. you only saw a short part of the clip. so there is no secret about nicotine being addictive. and buck aycock certainly knew after may 5th, 1982, he was not relying on information from reynolds. you cannot conceal what somebody knows, and the jury charge tells you that. it has to be otherwise unknown. buck aycock knew smoking was addictive. he knew smoking was dangerous, and he certainly knew that after may 5th, 1982. that is why the evidence indicates you should vote trial day 8 4/17/13 87 no on those questions. there is no concealment here. there is no proof that the concealment of reynolds, of any information about the addictiveness or harm of smoking was in any way the legal cause of buck aycock's death. because he knew it already. you cannot conceal what is known. you will hear -- you did not hear any evidence that buck aycock relied to his detriment on anything of reynolds, any information concealed by reynolds, brown & williamson, or the american tobacco company, any of them. you should find for plaintiff only if they prove that buck aycock would not have died if reynolds had done something differently or had said something more or different on the subject. but there is no evidence of that. there is no evidence if reynolds had done something differently, that the result would not have been the same. you heard mr. wilner say, if reynolds had not made its cigarettes, if reynolds was not in business, buck aycock would have just been smoking philip morris cigarettes. let us talk about the health effects. and i talked about some of this already. the bottom line is that buck aycock certainly knew the dangers of smoking well before may 5th, 1982. and that date is important. it is in your instructions. it is in the jury form. trial day 8 4/17/13 88 they have to show you that he relied to his detriment on some concealment or omission by reynolds after may 5th, 1982, and there is absolutely no evidence of that. none. you saw the reports and report after report detailing the growing evidence about the health risks of smoking. well before 1982. this is 1957. the surgeon general telling about the information that is in the press and the radio and tv about smoking being dangerous. you saw a clip from the orlando paper. and ms. aycock said they got the sunday paper. this is the sunday paper. sunday, january 12th, 1964, when the surgeon general's report came out. clearly, it says smoking causes lung cancer. in 1959, the aycocks get a television, and buck becomes a big news watcher. ms. aycock says walter cronkite was his man. and dr. schaller talked to you about the news reports about the health effects of smoking in the late 1950s. ladies and gentlemen, buck aycock got the message from multiple sources for many years that smoking was dangerous. what he did with that message, though, he termed it his business. those were his words, that it is my business. trial day 8 4/17/13 89 plaintiff has to show you with evidence that buck died because the dangers of smoking were unknown to him, and the result would have been different if rjr had acted differently. and there is simply no evidence of that, ladies and gentlemen. the evidence in this case shows clearly that that is not buck aycock's story. that may be some smoker's story, but this is buck aycock's story, and that is not his story. he knew smoking was dangerous and addictive long before may 5th, 1982, and he did what he wanted to do. what about advertising? you saw all the advertisements that he was shown. but dr. cummings and burns admitted that the advertisements were legal. when cigarettes were advertised on tv, it was legal. when they were advertised in print, it was legal. when they advertised on billboards, it was legal. when cigarettes were advertised, it was legal. and no one has ever said that rjr did any illegal advertising. you need to remember it was perfectly legal. and you cannot find that any of that advertising changed buck aycock's conduct. nothing wrongful concealed from buck aycock. you cannot conceal what is already known. now, dr. burns and cummings told you about the frank statement. remember that? tirc, ctr, all these, the tobacco institute, all these tobacco entities. but the trial day 8 4/17/13 90 evidence is buck aycock did not deal with that. he was not tuned into the tobacco companies. there is no evidence whatsoever that he ever saw the frank statement, was influenced by it, changed his smoking habits because of it or anything like that. so the four questions, ladies and gentlemen, have to do with concealment and agreement to conceal and reliance. and as i've said, the plaintiffs do not provide the evidence, the link between that conduct and those findings and that causing buck aycock's death. that is the key here. it is not whether that happened. it is whether it caused buck aycock's death. and there is no evidence that it had any effect on buck aycock. i addressed the four together because the evidence of the four goes together. the four things, they rely on the same evidence. therefore, when you get to those four questions, the answer really needs to be the same for all four. and it should be no based on the evidence you heard in this case. there is absolutely no reliance after may 5th, 1982, on anything r.j. reynolds did or did not do. it had absolutely no effect on buck aycock's smoking, continuing to smoke, not trying to quit, or his death. now, allocation of fault. i obviously do not believe you should get this far, but if you do -- we think, trial day 8 4/17/13 91 if you do, then you should answer no; but if you get to this question, there are some things that you should think about. the first is it is not a question of comparing the conduct of how you feel about rjr versus buck aycock's conduct. it is a question about whose actions were a legal cause of his death. that is what the question says. and as i told you, the plaintiff has already admitted that buck aycock was a partial legal cause of his own death. and we have shown you evidence of why he is the sole, one hundred percent cause of his own death if his death was caused by cigarette smoking. now, a lot of times when people think about allocating things, they say it is okay to go 50/50 or something like that. but that is not okay under the law, because the law says plaintiff must prove to you that reynolds has some measure of fault. each percentage point of liability that you assign to reynolds must be based on proof. plaintiff has admitted some fault. rjr says it is not at fault for buck aycock's death. the plaintiffs have to prove that with proof. let us look -- we have looked at some of buck aycock's fault. he did not start smoking cigarettes because of any wrongdoing of reynolds. he did not continue smoking any cigarettes because of any wrongdoing of reynolds. it is trial day 8 4/17/13 92 not wrong to manufacture cigarettes. winstons were legal. camels were legal. and as you know, he smoked other cigarettes. we know that buck aycock chose to smoke and continued to smoke when millions of other people were quitting, and we know he chose to ignore the warnings from the media, the public health community, and that he never tried to quit. we know that every day for 30 years he chose to smoke there were warnings on each pack of cigarettes. and we know that warning eventually told him that smoking will cause lung cancer, long before he was diagnosed with lung cancer in the mid-1980s, but he continued to smoke. if you get to the fault question, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence shows that the proper response is that buck aycock was responsible. he was responsible for his choices, for his decisions, for not quitting. and he was responsible. he was the legal cause of his death if his death was caused by cigarette smoking. another way to think about it is if rjr had done something different, if it had never been in business, would the result be different? and answer is no, because he would have been smoking someone else's cigarettes. i'm rushing along because my partner has told me i'm running out of time. trial day 8 4/17/13 93 damages. we do not think you should get this far, but i have an obligation to talk to you about it if you do. the plaintiff asked you for a lot of money. more money than we believe defies common sense and justice. and all i can ask is that if you get to this question, that you be fair, that you be fair to reynolds just like you would be fair to an individual. they are seeking damages for loss of support and for pain and suffering, but the amount they are seeking defies logic, and this is because this case is about buck aycock smoking. it is about buck aycock's choices. and buck aycock, as we have shown, those choices were not made because of any wrongdoing. it has to be wrongdoing of reynolds. and there is no evidence that any wrongdoing of reynolds affected buck aycock's smoking decisions. and that is why the amount of money that is being asked in this case defies common sense and fairness and the justice that you are going to be asked to do. i want to say a word about punitive damages. i know i'm running out of time. first of all, they can only be awarded for concealment or agreement to conceal if you answer yes to those questions, 6 and 8. and as i have shown you and argued and the evidence in the case, which is important, has shown you, buck aycock did not rely on any wrongdoing, any trial day 8 4/17/13 94 concealment of rjr after may 5th, 1982. there is no evidence of it. it did not happen. so you should only answer this question if you answer yes to questions 6 or 8 and the evidence supports a no answer to both questions 6 and 8. secondly, you need to understand that punitive damages are extra damages above compensation to mrs. aycock. her lawyers are asking you to compensate her for her loss, and then they are saying, give us extra money. we want to award mrs. aycock additional money above and beyond what compensated her, and that is what you are being asked to do here. plaintiff has to prove the concealment, as i told you about, and it has to be by clear and convincing evidence, and that is evidence that is more compelling and much more persuasive than by a preponderance of evidence. it is a much higher standard than the preponderance of evidence. it is the highest standard in a civil case. some of the evidence on the issue of punitive damages -- and once again, it is only about concealment -- if you find rjr's concealment was a legal cause of buck aycock's death, that is the only way you get to this question, and there is simply no evidence of that. but i need to let you know that the engle findings, just like they do not establish liability for trial day 8 4/17/13 95 reynolds, they do not establish liability for punitive damages either. it has to be done with evidence. now, you may think reynolds should have changed its position on causation earlier and done things like that. no debate about that, but the evidence establishes that that did not cause buck aycock's death. the evidence establishes that the overall information available to people was enough to motivate millions and millions to quit. buck aycock did not, and you know that he was not tuned into the tobacco companies. he was not waiting on reynolds to make a statement about whether cigarettes were addictive or whether they were dangerous. no. 1, he knew that already. his wife knew that back in the '50s. he did as well. there is absolutely no evidence of him relying to his detriment on anything reynolds did or did not do after may 5th, 1982. that is a very important date. and reynolds did some things, and they certainly were not perfect; but you have to look at all of the evidence, and you get a chance to do that. you heard about them funding ctr research, and the articles that the surgeon general used to make the surgeon general's report was based in part on tobacco money through ctr. and you heard about the knapp study that they sponsored that said tobacco was addictive before the 1963 surgeon general's report. and you need to know that awarding trial day 8 4/17/13 96 punitive damages will not change anything because all the change has been done at reynolds. all these documents that you see are on their website. they have been there for 10, 12 years. they have been admitted that cigarettes are addictive, cause disease. it is been on their website for 10 or 12 years. on the verdict form, if you get to that question, i ask that you say no, that you are not going to go forward and award the family more money if you decide to compensate them. if you answer yes, we will come back for another short phase of trial and you will hear additional evidence about whether punitive damages should be awarded, and if so, how much. but as i said, the evidence does not support getting that far, but it is, of course, your decision. ladies and gentlemen, i'm summing up here. from the beginning, this trial has really been about personal responsibility. in the united states we have the freedom to choose how to live. with that freedom comes the requirement that you take personal responsibility for your actions. that is the way our society has always viewed the issue of smoking and not smoking. buck aycock took personal responsibility for his personal -- his smoking decisions. and in this lawsuit, they are trying to turn him into a victim, but the evidence does not support that. mr. wilner gets the last word with trial day 8 4/17/13 97 you. i do not get a chance to get up and speak to you, but see if he answers these questions with proof, not argument, not debate, but proof. that buck aycock never knew smoking was dangerous, that buck aycock could not quit and had no choice but to smoke himself to death, and that reynolds cigarettes that buck aycock smoked are more dangerous or addictive than other cigarettes out there on the market. i do not think he is going to be able to prove that to you, and without proof, there is no link between rjr's conduct and buck aycock's death, and that is the reason your verdict should be for rjr. i thank you for your attention.