mr. wilner: thank you, your honor. trial day 8 4/17/13 35 it is a pleasure. i've been looking forward to it. most of the time during the trial, we cannot address you directly. i do not have a lot of slogans and do not have a lot of time. i'm going to speak for 40 minutes to you, and then my adversary over there will have an hour and i'll have 20 minutes. if i start going too fast, it is not because i want to do that; but we are limited to time. but we will do it. i want to start -- i'm going to go through the jury instructions and the verdict because that really is what you will be asked to do. and you know what: i'm going to start at the end, because that is where the rubber meets the road in this case. and the end is punitive damages, punishment to the tobacco company. and i'm going to tell you why this case is about punishing reynolds. and here it is: you will be asked -- you will be instructed -- and you will have a copy of these. we will go over them a little more. but instruction no. 16, you will be told by his honor, punitive damages -- that means punishment, are warranted if you find that mrs. aycock has proved by clear and convincing evidence that reynolds had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of its conduct and there was a high probability of injury or damage to richard aycock, and despite that knowledge, intentionally pursued that course of conduct resulting in mr. aycock's death. well, we are here to talk only about mr. aycock, trial day 8 4/17/13 36 but then we are not. the circumstances that killed mr. aycock are the largest public health disaster that this country has seen, the largest preventable public health disaster in history. but we are dealing with a horrendous amount of death and disability. this graph here from the 1989 surgeon general's report, which you will have in evidence, shows how lung cancer started out almost nonexistent before cigarettes became important and how it, contrary to these other cancers graphed here, climbed like a meteor, like a deadly meteor, to a point where it far surpassed all other cancer deaths. and richard aycock was right in the middle of it. he was a contributor to this horrendous event. so we are here today really to understand why that happened and who is responsible in part. who is responsible for his -- in other words what does reynolds do -- how important is reynolds' contribution to this? i think you will see from what we have said before and what we are going to say again, reynolds and the other conspirators that it worked with in unity, lockstep in the cigarette industry in america did this. they produced products which were deliberately designed to be addictive. they produced products which were deadly. they produced a fog that made it hard to understand that. though there was evidence to the contrary, they continued to do that. and they marketed them like crazy. trial day 8 4/17/13 37 and they marketed them like crazy and they pushed their product and they pushed the safety of their product and they concealed the addictive nature of it up until today. they still are concealing it. i'll tell you about that. and the products were used, became addictive and killed, and richard aycock was in the middle of that. that is it in the nutshell. that is what we are talking about. we are here to ask for punishment -- to ask for compensation for mr. aycock but punishment to reynolds for doing -- for being a prime mover in this public health disaster. and every bit of it was preventable, every single bit. it never should have started. i want to start with the beginning because i started with the end. so now i'm going to go back to the beginning real quick. i'm going to go over here where i can put something up. so you will be given a few preliminary instructions, and then you will be taking -- your instructions will take you through the verdict form. one of the preliminary instructions i want to emphasize is you use your common sense. you may make deductions and reach conclusions, and you can use your common sense. and another important part of this instruction -- and i'll get to why it is important -- is that circumstantial evidence is proof of a chain of facts and circumstances and trial day 8 4/17/13 38 it is just as important as direct evidence. why is that important here? because richard aycock was never interviewed prior to his death. he was never -- no one had a chance to go to him and say, now, let us see, exactly what advertisements did you see? we do not care. we will show to you that richard aycock was caught in the net, like everybody else, and he was part of the fabric of society at the time. and that society promoted cigarettes, and he was no different. and this is what we are talking about as part of a chain of events. it is circumstantial evidence, just as good as any other evidence. you will also be asked about -- you will be given an instruction about who to believe and whether you should believe a particular witness or not. and let me give you a comment on that, because it is important. we do not really ask you to believe anybody, from -- any expert based on just the fact that they raised their hand. we will submit to you that every single thing that came out of dr. burns or dr. cummings is not subject to just, you know, you have got to believe them, but it is proven. it is proven in the scientific literature; it is proven beyond a doubt in everything that you will have before you. now, for instance, you will have exhibit 123, but it will not be in a book form because we did not have enough books, trial day 8 4/17/13 39 so it is photocopied. and it is called risks associated with smoking cigarettes with low machine yields of tar and nicotine. and you will see -- and this is by the national institute of health, national cancer institute. and in it, you will have a chance to read it, and i'll point out a couple of chapters or a couple of pages that i think are interesting to read. but the senior editor on this is dr. burns. he wrote it. endorsed by the national cancer institute. i mean, it is not bologna. the list of contributors here are a long history of renowned people. and what dr. burns is saying is not something we dreamed up. this is reality. this is what is happened. this is why we had cancer shooting through the roof. another interesting part of this, and i'll talk to you about it later, in the preface of this book, it says, this monograph is unique in other important aspects. for the first time, the authors who prepared the various chapters have had extensive access to the information gleaned from the internal documents of the tobacco companies. the national cancer institute is saying this. it is not -- we are not making this stuff up. the information gleaned from the internal documents of the tobacco institute files, now open to the public -- this is early 2000 -- available on the internet, millions of pages, and they explain the importance of that trial day 8 4/17/13 40 because, up to this time, it had been concealed what the cigarettes were doing to people, how they were being designed to be as addictive as is necessary to cause that kind of cancer. and when those documents came out -- you have seen a tiny bit of it, just the tip of the iceberg of what is out there, but you have heard from dr. burns and dr. cummings who have been tasked by the national cancer institute and others to review these things and to make conclusions. so we do not say that. dr. burns contributed and dr. cummings are both in this book, the 2010 surgeon general's report. you cannot get more mainstream than that. this is mainstream science. we stand by a hundred percent of it. i'd like to see what reynolds stands behind, and you will see almost nothing. and to come back to punitive damages for a minute, we say, and along with all the other scientific -- all the other science of the -- the mainstream of science, and you will see on page 105, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason why individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report. addiction is the key to disease because one cigarette provides only a tiny amount of carcinogens and you have to keep hitting the cells, bam, bam, bam, a million times during your life. that is why you die. trial day 8 4/17/13 41 so addiction drives it. they have put on nothing to contradict that. addiction drives this. now, why is this important? why do i say punish reynolds? well, because if you will remember, dr. gentry was on film. i was questioning him. and i said, do you agree that nicotine addiction is -- well, it is a reason -- here's the point. the -- reynolds did, in the '50s and in the '60s and continuing, try to design a cigarette that produced less cancer. sure they did. i mean, as long as they could sell it, it would be great if they could make one that did not kill you. that would be great. that is not a problem. they could not. they did not. but here's what they did not try to do and they will not. they never tried to treat addiction. why, you wonder, if they will try to treat cancer? why in their cigarettes, why would not they treat addiction? well, the reason is obvious. addiction equals sales. cancer does not equal sales. addiction equals sales. so no right-minded person in reynolds -- well, i say that with quotes -- yes, right-minded people should do it -- can ever say that addiction causes disease because then they are forced to answer the question, well, why do not you treat addiction in your product? why do you -- why do not you use your powerful facilities to produce the product that people can use -- can stop using if they want to? not are just driven to use pack after pack after pack. why cannot you do that? and there are trial day 8 4/17/13 42 many leads. there are many scientific leads, and you will see in this chapter that it discusses them. and up until -- up until 2000 or 1999, the public health community did not know what was going on inside these reynolds factories that was designing the cigarette, not to reduce addiction, but to increase it. if that is true, if it is true, if we prove it, then that is terrible. that is a terrible, terrible thing, and the one reason it was done is to drive sales. and that is the equation. addiction equals sales. unfortunately, addiction equals death. how do we break out of this cycle? we have to tell them. how do we tell them? it is up to juries such as yourself. tell them. you cannot -- mr. williams: objection. send a message, your honor. mr. wilner: it is valid. punitive damages. the court: i'll sustain the objection. mr. wilner: reynolds has got to understand that addiction is not acceptable and they must confront it with modern scientific methods and not deny it. mr. williams: request that the jury be asked to disregard that comment, your honor. the court: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, when i sustain the objection, that means you are to not consider trial day 8 4/17/13 43 the comment made by mr. wilner. mr. wilner: we next go to the beginning of the case, which is you will be asked whether mr. aycock was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that cigarette smoking, because of such addiction, was the legal cause of death. so the first question is: did richard aycock have lung cancer? and there was a lot of discussion about this -- and could we get the death certificate pulled out real quick? thanks. this is a recent -- this is a recent thing in this trial, and so we do not -- mr. williams: your honor, we are not supposed to be using demonstratives. mr. wilner: this demonstrative was exactly what was worked on with the witness. so we believe we can use it. this was shown to the jury in its exact form. mr. williams: still not proper to use it like this. we were told we could not do that. mr. wilner: you did not tell them. the court: no, i'm sorry. mr. wilner, it is not proper. sustain the objection. the jury disregard it. mr. wilner: well, you will recall that we did a chart with this last witness, and we went through the various tests. the head ct, the chest x-ray, the bone scan, whether trial day 8 4/17/13 44 there was a white blood cell increase, the tumor marker, cea, and we lined them all up. and the only one that made sense was the cancer. that was it. then that checked every one. i mean, that is reality. and the death certificate, of course, totally agrees with it, and all the doctors that treated richard aycock agreed with it, all the treating physicians agreed with it, every single one. all the radiologists, all -- and the general practitioner who treated him, dr. gleason, who signed it, who is the same doctor who had been seeing him at least since 1991. big surprise. so in response, we get a physician from reynolds who has his own opinion about what is necessary. and his own opinion -- mr. williams: misrepresentation. he is not from reynolds, your honor. mr. wilner: your honor, i think that is an interruption and not really an -- the court: i'll overrule the objection. mr. williams, unless you are being wounded, do not get up. mr. wilner: the physician came in here and said you have to have this, you have to have that. where was the law? there was no law. the physicians who treated mr. aycock treated him correctly. the idea that he was sent home with an infection trial day 8 4/17/13 45 and never treated for an infection and an infection is treatable is crazy, of course. he had no index of infection. his white blood cells were normal. his neutrophils were normal. his leukocytes were normal. he did not have a fever. to create an infection out of that, when no treating physician even mentioned infection, is crazy. and if they had sent him home with an infection to die when he -- and as we know, he had inoperable brain cancer with at least five tumors in his brain, and the way that happens is metastatic disease from the lung, and everybody got it right. and to think that because they did not want to do a cell type, which gives you treatment options -- and there were no treatment because the brain cancer was killing him. you cannot treat it. and you cannot biopsy it. so that is bologna. it was easy to see that it was a metastatic. it had multiple seedings, whereas a growth that starts somewhere has one. the bone, if you remember, had multiple. the head had multiple. the lung had one. so it is bologna that it came from some organ other than the lung because it would have seeded in the lung in multiple places, but it did not. of course, it started in the lung, and that is what happens when you smoke addictively for year after year after year. and next question is: was addiction a cause? well, this is an interesting point, so let me get to that. then i'll go back to that. trial day 8 4/17/13 46 the question is: was addiction a contributing cause of mr. aycock's death? well, first of all, we have heard nothing from any of the reynolds witnesses that mr. aycock was not addicted. they did not call any expert to explain to you why mr. aycock did not meet every medical definition of addiction. all they will say is that mr. aycock was not addicted because he chose to smoke. this is my comment to that: everybody who smokes chooses to smoke, in a way, because the human will is free. i mean, we all get up. we are not total robots, but that does not mean -- to say that addiction does not influence us and is not a cause of what we do, that is crazy. because that would be turning back the clock on all science of psychiatry, psychology, all understanding of the human brain. that would be turning that back 200 years. we know that we are both free and also part of nature. we know that we have brains as well as minds. we know that our brains are affected by drugs. we know that nicotine affects the brain in a dangerous way because it affects the centers of the brain that make you want things. and when you get those brain changes in your brain from addiction, it changes you, and it becomes a force inside you that compels you to smoke. does that mean you choose to smoke? yeah, sure. does that mean you are not addicted, the fact that you choose something? no. trial day 8 4/17/13 47 because what is affecting your choice? the addiction is loading the deck. it is affecting you at a level that you have a very hard time even understanding. that is why it is so dangerous. you can say to yourself, i'm not going to smoke. i'm not going to smoke. and another cigarettes comes right out. why? because you love it? it is so great for the next one? no. because your brain is driving it. we do not say that people do not have free will. never said that. we say free will is always affected by things that go on in your brain. and when you have a drug, you have a permanent brain change, drugs in your brain, then it affects you. so, of course, nicotine addiction played a role in putting these carcinogens into mr. aycock's body, once his brain will be changed early on. the third question will be: was it reynolds? well, okay, yes, reynolds' brands were his premier brand. did he smoke marlboro? yes. but that is not the question, whether there was some other brand that also contributed. your question is: did reynolds' brands contribute? and the answer is: they did. you will then be asked -- so if you finish -- if you answer to those three questions -- and you will see them at the beginning. did mr. aycock die of a cigarette related -- was his lung cancer due to smoking? yes. did he have lung trial day 8 4/17/13 48 cancer due to smoking? was it due to addiction? was it due to reynolds cigarettes? then he becomes in our -- in this lawsuit, a class member. and when he becomes a class member, he then has a series of important -- of important findings that have already been determined that are now part of this case. and here they are real quick. i put them up before. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. we know that. nicotine and cigarettes is addictive. the engle defendants, including reynolds, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that is done. that cannot be challenged. what is the defect in them? we know. we know what it is. they are highly addictive and cause cancer. no. 4, these are more interesting. that the engle defendants concealed or omitted the -- the engle defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. we totally -- that has already been found. we put on even more proof of that, but even if we had not put on anything, the previous case found that and that is part of this case if mr. aycock is a class member, trial day 8 4/17/13 49 which he obviously is. next, that the engle defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers in the public would rely on this information to their detriment. they say that is what they -- that is binding. they agree. we know they agree. we got the document. we even showed it to you. philip morris, reynolds, american, all those guys, got together and they said, this is what we are going to do. that conspiracy lasted until at least 1999. you will be asked later, was there a reliance on things after '82? well, if it started in the '50s and went to '99, '82 was part of that. that is just a statute of limitations technical issue. it has nothing to do with anything okay. that all the engle defendants were negligent. that is another finding that you cannot dispute. and that is -- so -- all right. so what do you do with that going forward? okay. instruction no. 9 says, r.j. reynolds is legally responsible for the conduct of both the american tobacco company and brown & williamson. that is a given in this case. there was some buzz about whether reynolds was the same and -- because there are lots of documents. they all come from reynolds. they come from brown & williamson. they trial day 8 4/17/13 50 come from american, and they come from philip morris. of course, they have all conspired. they were all there together. they have stood as a unit. they have got benefit from the unit. that is the key to the conspiracy. so you will also be asked in question no. 4 -- let me put this up. instruction no. 11, if you find that mr. aycock -- if you find that it happened as we suggest, you will be asked, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds a legal cause of richard aycock's death? well, you already answered that. i do not know why it is there. i do not know. but smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds. yes. i mean, there may be some others, but cigarettes manufactured by reynolds. and, incidentally, we do not care -- we are not talking about the roll-your-owns. roll-your-owns are -- were the prince albert stuff. if he had stuck with roll-your-owns, he would not be dead because -- mr. williams: objection, your honor. the court: mr. wilner, we have been through this. that is sustained. and the jury will disregard the conversation of roll-your-own. mr. williams: i ask for a fair response in my time. mr. wilner: your honor, we are saying we are not basing any case on roll-your-owns. trial day 8 4/17/13 the court: mr. wilner, i sustained the objection. move on. mr. wilner: right. so we are talking about cigarettes. we are talking about manufactured cigarettes. they are the addictive product. camels, winstons, and marlboros, we will agree are addictive cigarettes, and that is what we are here for. so smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds was a legal cause of richard aycock's death. we totally agree. now, we get to another part of the verdict form which asks you about fraudulent concealment. the third claim is for fraudulent concealment. another one of the engle findings was that reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. well, we have seen how -- tracing these documents, we have seen how reynolds knew darn well that the cigarettes were harmful and that they were addictive, and further tracing the documents, we have seen how they have designed the addiction into the product. so what have they failed to say? they have failed to disclose to people that it is critical that they know that trial day 8 4/17/13 that has been done. so they will see what it is that has been controlling them and have some way out. now, let me play for you -- if we could have that switched -- no. 68. this is 1988. (video played.) mr. wilner: thank you. sound familiar? denying addiction because some people quit. that is like saying that -- i guess if addiction does not cause disease, there would be no engle class, no one would be in it, because one of the requirements is that addiction have caused the disease of the person. none of these -- the surgeon general's report would not exist. there would be no medical science about addiction. and the tobacco institute stands alone in saying what it says, even up to today. this is from '88. and they have not changed their stance on addiction. they say, well, yes, nicotine is addicting, but because anyone can quit, it does not really matter. it matters a whole lot. and how the cigarette was designed matters a whole lot. here's the point here. you are going to be asked, did richard aycock rely to his detriment on reynolds' concealment or omission of material information after may 5th, 1982, concerning the effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes? trial day 8 4/17/13 53 now, let us think. here's -- i'll take it out of cigarettes for a minute. let us say that we had a case where we found that the brakes in ford automobiles -- i just picked fords. i like fords, but i just picked it -- was defectively designed and that it was put in -- it was such a cheap brake that it was going to break after a certain -- in a very high probability. let us assume that to be the case. and we went back and we found that the ford engineers had known about it. mr. williams: objection, your honor. judge corrigan's orders specifically address this. mr. wilner: address what? the court: you have got to state a little more than that. mr. williams: comparing conduct of one company to another. it is in there explicitly. mr. wilner: i'm not comparing it to any other -- there is no conduct of ford. it is a hypothetical. it has nothing to do with any other conduct. the court: i think it is improper, mr. wilner, so move on. jury disregard the ford motor company. mr. wilner: if a company produces a product and in that product it designs a defect for its own gain, whether it be whatever -- i use brakes, whatever you want to say, it trial day 8 4/17/13 54 was cheaper, or it produced sales, and in this case, it produced sales, to design this addiction into the product produced sales -- in fact, they all got to do it. but let us pick one at a time. every time that you smoke that product, you are relying on that design. every time you drive your car, you are relying on the design of that vehicle. if there are defects designed into that vehicle, your driving a car every day is a new reliance. you rely on the brakes. you rely on the steering. you rely on things being designed correctly. in the cigarettes that he smoked, in the winston, in the camel, they were designed to addict you. they were designed in a way that he would not know. there was never a release of the information that they were designed in that way. by lighting up every day is a reliance. so the question is, did that occur prior to 1982? of course. did that occur after 1982? of course. he did not stop smoking until the '90s. we have heard lots of information that every cigarette contributed to his death. up until the very end. the carcinogens keep pouring in. the cigarettes -- the carcinogens in the cigarettes keep promoting the cancer, and that stopping cigarette smoking at any time is very beneficial. so we have learned that, and we agree with that. trial day 8 4/17/13 55 the issue of reliance has nothing to do with whether richard aycock alone remembers somebody saying something. the issue of reliance is, first, that he lived in the world and the world believed in cigarettes. why did that world believe in cigarettes? because it was recharged daily by marketing, a billion dollars a year. secondly, he relied on it every time he lighted up. he relied on that cigarette being what he thought it was, which was at least nonaddictive. nobody ever put a warning on the product that said addiction. there was never a warning on the product. oh, it might be hard to quit, but nobody ever said, this product has been designed by various design features to addict you and keep you smoking for our benefit because we make a lot of money doing it. if you find for richard aycock on any of the class membership, you will be asked about what are the compensatory damages. compensatory damages are a way to compensate -- and you will see from the jury instructions, there are no exact standard and intangibles -- read the instructions, you will see intangibles are permissible. you can use intangibles, including pain and suffering. for this horrible watching her husband die of brain cancer, what that must be like, and then having the time since then to reflect on it, it is less -- it is more trial day 8 4/17/13 56 than -- more than 3 million and less than 8-, we would suggest. how do we come to that? you think about it. you think about that kind of horror and what it means. the last question is a punitive damage question, which i talked about earlier. until there is a change, there will be no change. and we ask you to think about that when you deliberate on punitive damages. then i will speak to you again following the remarks of reynolds' attorneys. okay. mr. wilner: you bet we can answer, bet we can answer, could answer for hours. we are going to point in the direction of some of these answers. craziest thing we heard was that -- two things: reynolds says -- gets up here and says, well, prove to us that our cigarettes are different, more dangerous than another company's cigarettes. it is astonishing that they would make that argument. it is not the law. they have to stand behind their cigarettes. they trial day 8 4/17/13 102 stand behind the products they make. we do not have to show -- we do not have to go out and show some other company makes a different kind of a product or go into that. there is no evidence of that whatsoever. reynolds gets up here and says -- the biggest company, the biggest cigarette company gets up there and says, oh, well, we just do what everybody else does? well, true, they do because they all got together. so that is like saying, well, i did not -- you know, we all got together, we all robbed the bank together. i was not any worse than anybody else. that is not the law at all. of course, they have to stand behind it. the other crazy thing they said was that, if he did not smoke reynolds, he would have smoked something else. well, what does that have to do with it? that has nothing to do -- reynolds has to stand behind it -- reynolds makes the billions it makes from selling its product. mr. williams: improper, your honor. the court: mr. wilner, i think you can probably use some more temperate words. mr. wilner: temperate? okay. reynolds makes money from its products. reynolds is the one who has to stand behind its product. you will not find a single instruction in the instructions that his honor gives that says that reynolds is somehow relieved of trial day 8 4/17/13 103 liability because some other company makes cigarettes. that is a crazy comment. i cannot believe they said that. another thing, okay, what about, well, other people quit. why did not mr. aycock quit? other people quit. well, very interesting. here's why: if i were to release a -- like an influenza virus into this room, into the air, let us say there is a hundred people here, maybe 50 would come down with it and 50 would not. why? nobody really knows. i mean, that is the way humans are. they are different. so 50 people might get it; 50 might not. when the plague came through europe, it killed a third of the population. everybody was exposed. why did it kill that third and not another third? no one knows. probably genetics. nobody really knows, but that is what happened. somebody gets it worse than others. of the people who get influenza, in my hypothetical here, maybe half would live and maybe half would die. why is that? well, we do not know exactly. but that is not a defense to anything. the fact that some people were able to swim upstream against this current that was pulling them, this addiction that was pulling them, and all the other things in the marketplace that were suggesting to them they ought to smoke, the fact that some people could get out of that, fine. and if you want to blame mr. aycock for not being able to do that, then that is the section in the verdict trial day 8 4/17/13 104 form where you allocate blame between reynolds and mr. aycock. and if you think mr. aycock did not try hard enough, you know, what about this? so the challenge is, well, why did not he try? why did not he try? why is not there evidence of it? well, we do not know exactly because he was not interviewed during his life. but nicotine affects the brain, and we have heard this, in a way in some people that means that they do not want to quit. people do not want to quit. if they are heavily addicted, they do enjoy it. there is no question. that is not the question in this case. that is the problem with things that affect your brain. it would be really nice if you could say, well, everybody just retains the same reasoning capability as they had before. but we have learned that, if your nicotine receptors have grown in response to this nicotine and you do not have it, that you are not normal anymore. you are not normal until you get it again. and what you can endure before you get it again, that is an individual thing. that is probably genetic. but here's the third thing. here's the third thing. you cannot -- you cannot tell people what -- that they should smoke, which reynolds did. we will show you that. that is the marketing. a billion dollars a year to market. you cannot tell people, do it. smoke it. buy our cigarettes. trial day 8 4/17/13 105 light them up and smoke it. and remember, you heard the first witness in the case, heimann, from the american tobacco company, that reynolds responsible. he said we want people to follow our advertising. we want people to buy our product. we say buy as much as you can. we do not put any limits on it. we do not tell you one pack, two packs, whatever. you buy them, that is what we are in business for. well, here's what i say. here's what i said: you cannot tell people, do something, and then blame them when they do it. it is crazy. you cannot tell somebody, you do this. this is our position, you do it. and then what, when they do it, they do it, okay. and then come around later and say, well, you should not have listened to us. you should have listened to somebody else. what kind of nutty, improper logic is that? of all the people in the world who cannot blame mr. aycock or any of the other hundreds of thousands of people who died from their products, if there is anybody in the world who cannot blame them, it is them. because they said do it. now, maybe -- i mean, they come in and say, well, the public health authorities told them. well, really? really? and what did you say? and so, if you remember -- let me get this real quick. trial day 8 4/17/13 106 let us get the elmo. they said, oh, he did not hear us when we said it. he did not hear us. we said it, but he did not hear us. but somehow he heard everybody else. he heard the surgeon general, but he never heard us when we came on and said the surgeon general was wrong. how do we know that? well, nobody knows that, how silly that is. but i'll tell you, i do not even care. i do not think that is the issue. because the big issue is really, what i drew before, i did not put on earlier the tug-of-war for the hearts and minds of america, and if you remember, we had all the marketing here, which is a billion a year, and then where did it go? well, it just did not go to the one consumer, mr. aycock. it went to the public. it went to doctors. military. it went to his friends. it went everywhere it could. so, you know, they are saying, well, you cannot tell us what advertising he saw. well, i do not care, because you know what? when you put -- let me show you one. this is so typical. i mean, it is not even that unusual. let us say this: because it hits the military where he was in the military. so here you go. here's ads -- advertising and marketing all over the place, a billion dollars a year, directed to military people. now, this is one out of a -- i trial day 8 4/17/13 107 do not know -- a thousand. so let us say that mr. aycock did not see that one. but the guy next to him saw it or the guy next to him saw it, and it created the flavor that it is acceptable to smoke, especially in the military. so when you are -- all your friends -- let us say mr. aycock had earplugs and sunglasses on and never could see a single advertisement or hear it. let us just say that. he walks into the military. he goes through basic training. and everybody else is smoking. why are they smoking? well, one reason is reynolds and the companies with it made it acceptable to smoke by pushing cigarettes, a billion dollars a year, a billion to make people smoke, to tell them it was okay. and now they come in and they say, oh, no, no, no, you should listen to the fake voice of reader's digest or the fake voice of the surgeon general, even though we spend more in a day than they spend in a year to do this. then they say, well, he never heard us say anything. well, okay. how about this? i submit for your consideration that this is a statement -- and i'm sorry the lights are bad. but what this says, for digestion sake. i do not care about digestion sake. that does not mean anything. what it means is that this is a picture that stays in your brain for your whole life that cigarette smoking is trial day 8 4/17/13 108 an okay thing to do. these people are sitting around a beautiful table. they are healthy people. they are smiling with one another. they look like they are on top of the world, and on top of the world means they had a cigarette with them. you can see this when you are ten years old and never forget it. and, you know, if it were true, if it is true, the way they tell us, the way we have heard from this company, if it is true, that, oh, everybody really knew that this was so bad, they knew, too. all right? and yet they do that. criminal. and if you do not think -- mr. williams: move to strike criminal, your honor. mr. wilner: it is part of the instruction. the court: why? mr. wilner: we will withdraw. bad, bad, bad. mr. williams: move that the jury be asked to disregard it. the court: all right. disregard it. mr. wilner: bad, bad, bad. really bad. intentionally bad. so if you do not think that modern advertising -- which this really was the leading edge, and this was the trial day 8 4/17/13 109 latest, this was the most expensive, the best you can buy, that the images told more than any words could ever tell. if that is not clear, then nothing is clear, because we live in a world of advertising. and they go right in. it is kind of like -- it is a little like the nicotine, they go right into your brain. you cannot forget them. people buy things because, one thing, of the images that are presented to them. they do. they might not remember they do. they might not like to admit it. they might not want to walk in and say, hey, i bought a vacuum cleaner today because i saw an image of a beautiful woman pushing it. but you know what, why would you spend billions, billions, to put those images in front of people if they did not work? well, we know they do not do anything that is not profitable. it is profitable to buy a billion dollars worth of advertising because you get more than a billion dollars in sales. it is got to be. so that is baloney. you have got -- yeah, oh, did the ads extend past 1982, this thing about '82? of course. they continued through the '90s. today they are restricted. but, you know, at times when mr. aycock was driving after '82, one out of every two billboards in the country was cigarettes. it is insane to think of that. trial day 8 4/17/13 110 and, you know, we barely heard a word out of them. they all want to talk about, well, the surgeon general in 1960 -- who cares? why does this -- if -- you know, if you look at this -- oh, how about this. this is really something. oh, there was a school book. there was a school book that said, tobacco can be harmful. and, in fact, if you went on and read it, which i hope you get it, it says, wait until you are grown up. okay. big warning. anyway, i want you to just think about this for a second. you just sat in school, you know, and the school book said, if you even read it, cigarettes will hurt your wind, for instance. and then you come home, and in the magazine sitting on the counter jumpin' joe dimaggio, your hero, is sitting staring at you with a cigarette in his hand. well, i guess whatever you read in school, if it is good enough for joe, it is got to be good enough for you. if that is not a statement that says, well, you know, you can take your school books -- just like you saw in the beverly hillbillies, you can take your school books, but this is where it is at. and that is wrong. that is a terrible thing. and did it continue? well, obviously it continued -- it continues today. it is not exactly the same. now they sponsor nascar and everything else. it is not as overt as trial day 8 4/17/13 111 calling joe dimaggio, but this certainly went on and on. i like the picture, actually. let me put it up. i mean, he says, mildness -- i cannot read the whole thing -- 28 percent less nicotine, whatever that is supposed to mean. so you think, i'll get my camel. it is good enough for him. they did the same thing with filters. okay. so there is stuff out there that hurts. there is. but if you buy the filters, well, you know, your problem may be solved. now, also, reynolds says -- i want to say we have had our moments of levity. and i do not want to overemphasize this, but in the end, this is serious stuff. in the end, it is. i mean, this is not -- we have been a little lighthearted at times, but it is not all smiles, because you are talking about an insane epidemic. we are just so -- it is almost like we are, like, immune to it. i mean, we can talk about it as, oh, well, yeah, all these people wanted to smoke. and that is not the way human behavior is. human behavior is influenced, and it has been influenced. oh, okay. i'm sorry, i forgot. let me get back to it. they want to say, oh, nicotine in our cigarettes is just part of the plant. and, oh, oh, we did not do anything to it. it is just part of the deal. really? let us forget about your marketing with joe dimaggio, because that is how you push this nicotine on people. trial day 8 4/17/13 112 but let us go to the science for a second and see whether anybody stands with reynolds on the science or not. because, you know, reynolds stands alone. the cigarette industry stands alone when modern science appears. and you have seen it. you will see it. it is all over these documents. so, here's what i suggest, if you have the chance and the inclination, i beg you to consider exhibit 237, the 2010 surgeon general's report, in evidence. it will be just like this. we actually had a couple of extra books. read anything you want. there is a great chapter on nicotine addiction. it says, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason. they do not like that. and here is a great chapter on what they did, cigarette design changes over the years. fascinating. and here, i'll read one paragraph because time presses. it says -- it goes on to talk about how the documents -- the formerly secret documents, when they were put out, how the science people looked at them and said, golly, that is bad, and we did not know what they were doing inside. it says it in here. it is page -- starts at page 15 and 16. and here on page 17, it says, other changes, talking about how they engineered the cigarette to be addictive. i did not make it up. it is the surgeon general of trial day 8 4/17/13 113 the united states. other changes during the last 50 years have included efforts to potentially have made cigarettes more addictive through the use of flavors, chemical treatments to alter the smell and appearance of cigarette smoke. methods to mask noxious sensory effects and control of the nicotine dose. and there is more to it. but in the interest of time, i'll let you read it, if you wish. because this is the modern science. there is no better textbook on earth than this entire textbook on tobacco. and we are standing behind this. reynolds is going, well, we like some of it. we do not like all of it. and, also, this national cancer institute publication that we talked about, this will be in evidence, but it will be photocopies. the most fascinating chapter is the first one called "public health implications of changes in cigarette design." it is the introduction to the chapter. and who is it by? david burns and neal benowitz. and this first chapter, which starts at page 1, goes through the whole thing. it talks about how they found the documents. it ends at page 10. so i suggest -- we do not have time to go through this now, but what we are saying is not bologna. it is what the scientific community has concluded. and you bet dr. burns is busy, because he is in huge demand because he is one of the people who authored the cancer institute books and trial day 8 4/17/13 114 the surgeon general books. and he is not making up any of it. as unbelievable as this story is in a sense, and i do not mean it is unbelievable that you do not believe it, i mean, it is so big. it is such a long-reaching conspiracy, it has such enormous implications that you almost throw up your hands and say, how did that happen? i want to give to you real quick some document numbers that in the interest of time you can actually look at these documents yourself. i'll read the numbers off. 71, 163. 71 talks about the psychological crutch. these are plaintiff's exhibits. 163, an unbelievable memorandum from 1963 by a guy named addison yeaman of brown & williamson, where he says nicotine is addictive, in '63. unbelievable. really there. no. 3, the original frank statement. fascinating reading. they all got together. conspiracy. lasted until '99. 889, a whole group of press releases. that is what they are sending out. pumping out. remember, i drew it. it is the tug-of-war. here's the ads. here's the public health authorities trying to get to people. here's the counter stuff trying to block the public health authorities. was it perfect? no. some of the public health stuff got through, but they tried everything to block it. and the overwhelming power was the marketing. and they had a trial day 8 4/17/13 115 secret weapon. and that was addiction. that greased the rope of the tug-of-war, because when you are an addicted brain, you need it. and a little disinformation, a little doubt, goes a long way to an addicted brain. you want to hear that doubt. oh, it could be. it just could be. and joe, it is good enough for joe. it is good enough for my buddy. it is good enough for my girlfriend. it is good enough for whatever. and you want to hear it. and that is what keeps you smoking. and they knew it. so, okay, 72. this is the famous document from 1982. after this '82 cutoff date, that says -- it says, how can -- if the exit gate from our market were ever opened, we would be out of business. guess what the exit gate is? the nicotine addiction is designed in. if it were out, we would go out of business. that is connecting the circle. they did it in their own document. if they cure the nicotine addiction, they are out of business. so they are never going to do it unless they are made to do it. 377, document destruction. whole subject itself. 450, the anti-surgeon general report. called the continuing controversy. what baloney that is. no. 27, doubt is our product. how crazy is that? company makes -- has an internal memorandum that says that is what they are doing. doubt is our product. punitive damages. trial day 8 4/17/13 116 no. 2, can we have an open debate on smoking -- courtroom deputy: mr. wilner, your time is up. mr. wilner: thank you. and no. 210, structured creativity. the medical is certain, and i will not go into it. thank you very much.