mr. shevin: may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury: first of all, i'd like to thank everybody for their time and attention in this matter. there was a -- thomas jefferson, in 1823, once said that trial by jury is the best of all safeguards for the person and property of every individual. i think we all remember back in jury selection when judge crow said, i think more eloquently than i could ever say, which is, next to serving in our country's military, jury service is one of the highest callings. for that very reason that our fore founders thought -- fought for, and what our military fights for, which is our system of justice. and we live in a system of justice in which all people are seen equal under the law. and it does not matter if you are the president of the united states, a u.s. senator, or if you are a large multibillion-dollar corporation or you are a small person like shirley baker, everybody is entitled to justice under the law. and what you jurors have here is a fantastic, incredible opportunity to do something. and that opportunity is to right a wrong. and it does not matter the disparity of the parties. it does not matter. everyone is seen equal under the law. and you have that incredible opportunity in this case to right a horrific wrong, a wrong that you will hear, as you heard, you will be instructed, that this defendant committed fraud, conspiracy, they made a defective product, and they knew it. they knew they were going to kill millions of people, and they did not give a darn. they did not care. they were callus. they were indifferent, because it was all about the money. when i started this case, i told you this is a case about sales over safety and about profits over persons. and what they want to tell you is, perry baker, he was smarter than us. it was everywhere. perry baker knew cigarettes were bad for him. everyone told him. and you know what? we lied, we spent billions, $250 billion this industry spent pushing lies, deceit, selling doubt. but you know what? perry baker was smarter than that. but the evidence shows differently. the evidence shows that their scheme worked, that they created -- millions and millions of deaths were caused by their scheme. and you have an opportunity to right that wrong today in this courtroom. now, what i want to talk about is some of the questions you are going to be asked to answer. the first question on the jury form is whether elmer baker was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, whether his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death, what you see. we are going to ask you to check yes to that question. and it is very simple here. you know, you do not have to be a rhodes scholar or a board certified addiction expert to understand that when somebody smokes for 500 minutes a day, when somebody exposes their brain to millions and millions of doses of nicotine, when somebody begs for cigarettes when they already have lung cancer, that that person is addicted. you know, dr. eth came in here, and he had been on their payroll since 1998, which is very interesting, because you learn a lot about people by who they associate with. and who did dr. eth decide to associate with in 1998? the r.j. reynolds company. he was cultivated by the same lawyers that follow him around the country to handle him. you saw the same lawyers that took him in and wined him and dined him at dinner -mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. shevin: you heard that the people that took him out to dinner, that cultivated that relationship -mr. belasic: objection, your honor. same objection. the court: overruled. this is -mr. shevin: they met with him the night before he testified. they are staying on top of him. and it is okay that they have a lot of lawyers. that is not a reason why you should find for the plaintiff. we do not care about that. but you learn a lot by who he associates with. and when he came to them in 1998, did he have any background in nicotine addiction? no. did he do any research in it? no. mr. belasic said, oh, you are a guy in the field. you are not this academic. he said, well, actually, no, i am the academic. i wrote four books. i wrote a million articles. none of them had to do with nicotine addiction. so he did not pick up on that. but he associated with them in 1998. what do we know about the tobacco industry in 1998? they were still lying. they were still denying. they were still pushing doubt. they did not admit that cigarettes were even injurious to the health. that is who he chose to associate with. and it kind of leaked out, because when mr. domnick asked him, he said, cigarette smoking kills over 430,000 people, does not it? what did he say before he got impeached with his deposition? he said, it is associated. where have we heard that language before? it is just associated, just a statistical association. and then he admitted it is caused by it. there is another portion of his testimony i'm going to refer you to, when he is talking about addiction, the dsm-iv, and he is talking about a criteria that i'm going to go to. he says, oh, that trivializes addiction to say that a person, when they smoke at age 17, may have not considered smoking for 40 years, up to two packs a day. and the way he was asked the questions by mr. belasic, he goes, well, would not every smoker who originally just has a few cigarettes and becomes a two-pack-a-day smoker, would not they all fit that criteria for addiction? the answer is yes. and what does dr. eth say? he goes, that trivializes addiction. that trivializes addiction. see, he got the memo. he was on their team in 1998. and he said, that trivializes addiction? where have we heard that language before? we heard it from the lies of the tobacco industry when the tobacco institute lambasted the surgeon general in 1988 and said, addictive as heroin and cocaine? that is a terrible disservice. that trivializes the question. that is going to make a bunch of kids go do heroin and cocaine. we are hearing that same verbiage from that witness. and that is their only witness on this issue. and they want to say, well, he is the only one that can answer this question, because he is the smartest guy in the room. well, i would suggest to you that each one of you in the jury have common sense. and you are smart enough to understand that perry baker was certainly addicted to cigarettes. and the evidence in this case is very clear about that. i'm going to go through some of it. okay. before i do that, i want to talk about some of the undisputed facts in this case. and you will see these in various instructions, and its based upon what is going on in the evidence. he smoked cigarettes by r.j. reynolds and american tobacco. the judge has instructed you that they are legally responsible for american tobacco company and brown & williamson. why is that important? because they have purchased their assets and liability. you heard that by mr. belasic. they are responsible for three persons in this conspiracy. and the only evidence of any cigarettes he smoked were cigarettes that they are responsible for. they contain nicotine in cigarettes. the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. even dr. eth had to admit that. the cigarettes smoked by perry baker were manufactured, caused his lung cancer and caused his death, the cigarette smoke. those are the undisputed facts in this case. i want to talk briefly about his various quit attempts, which is very strong evidence of his addiction. he tried to quit. he used nicotine gum, the patch, ginger herbal remedies, hypnosis. he spent hard-earned money on these attempts. he tried to switch to a filter, which he did like the rest of the country that was bamboozled by the filters fraud that i'm going to talk about in a bit. and he went to his church, and they laid hands on him. i think those are very important evidence of his, of his attempts to quit. now, his evidence of addiction. he was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. he smoked cigarettes due to nicotine addiction. his lung cancer was caused by it, and he died from smoking cigarettes. next slide. he started at age 17 or 18, in the military. you saw the picture. dr. eth -- they make a big deal. dr. eth read so many depositions. one of the pictures that was in one of those depositions was him smoking. that was in shirley baker's deposition. he did not see that. but he admits, yes, he was smoking in the military. and what did we hear about that? what did we hear about what the tobacco companies did? they addicted generations by giving free cigarettes in world war i to the doughboys. they did the same thing in world war ii. what went from a nonexistent disease, lung cancer, to a mass production of a product that they manipulated, that they did put additives in, that they made it deeply inhalable so it could be consumed rapidly, knowing it was addictive and knowing it harmed people -and they did that in world war i and they did that in world war ii, with perry baker, who got cigarettes in the military, like everyone else in the military. he had an extreme history of smoking. his family members said he smoked all the time. they put on the deposition of the grandson. the grandson said he was a big smoker. he was a chain smoker. they are the ones that put in that evidence. his clothes and hair smelled of it. you heard evidence that he did chain smoke at times. first thing he did in the morning was smoke. he smoked throughout the day. he always had a cigarette, when you see some of the photographs in evidence that mr. domnick will talk about. first thing he did in the morning. he would wake up in the middle of night. and he even smoked after he had lung cancer. and we will talk about some of this testimony later. next slide. i want to talk about the burden of proof. the burden of proof is the greater weight of the evidence, which is the more convincing force and effect of the evidence. so at the end you are looking at the evidence and what is the more convincing in force and effect. a good way of looking at it is a scale. we talked about this in jury selection, that the burden of proof on these issues are not very high. we simply have to show more likely than not or by the greater weight of the evidence. in this case, the evidence is so overwhelming, and that is why i spent a lot of time talking about dr. eth. because, really, when you break down dr. eth's testimony, he is basically towing the tobacco party line. because according to him, you cannot be addicted to cigarettes unless you cannot hold down a job, you cannot have interpersonal relationships. does that make any sense? he says that on one hand, but his own criteria that he is relying on says 80, ninety percent of regular daily smokers are addicted. we heard from -- that there are 50 million smokers. so what dr. eth is saying is, according to the dsm -- i'm not that great at math -- but i guess you just half it -according to the dsm, 15 -- what is 80 to ninety percent of -- i'm sorry -- 80 to ninety percent of 50 million is 40 to 45 million people -- i'm sorry -40 to 45 million people who his own dsm refers to as addicted smokers, they cannot hold down a job because of their smoking. they cannot have interpersonal relationships. it is got to be like a crack addict or a heroin addict for dr. eth to say someone is addicted. and that just does not make any sense. how can that be a correct interpretation? i do not care if you are a rhodes scholar. i do not care if you got a perfect grade on your sat. it does not make any darn sense. how could the same criteria say ninety percent of smokers are addicted, but say -- but him saying, well, you have to be in a position where you cannot hold down a job or have a family life. that is patently absurd. it goes against the surgeon general, it goes against every health organization, and it goes against your own common sense. but, remember, the burden of proof is greater weight of the evidence. so if that puts a little bit on the scale of dr. eth, which i think it would put very little, it would be very little convincing in force and effect of the evidence. when you compare that to the mountain of evidence, this is an easy question for you as a jury. so definition of addiction. let us talk about addiction. this is a definition -- dr. eth recognized that there are many definitions of addiction. we are not limited to this dsm-iv. one of those that he recognized was the national institute of drug abuse. and what it defines addiction as is a chronic, relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. is not that exactly what a cigarette smoker does, who smokes one to two packs a day, whose family is telling them, hey, you should cut down, et cetera? is not that what drug addiction is? clearly, he meets that definition of addiction. and even dr. eth had to admit, well, there are other definitions out there. i want to talk very briefly about dr. eth's criteria that he uses, this dsm-iv. and of course, they read you the language that says, oh, by the way, only dr. eth can give opinions on this. he is the only guy smart enough to understand that. i suggest to you that does not make any sense. if someone says something that does not make any sense, the judge is going to instruct you, you do not have to accept that testimony. but he talked about these criteria. and dr. eth -- it said in the language of it, and i'm not going to go through it. i'm going to skip it -- but it said, well, if you meet three of these criteria, that could be evidence that you are addicted. but he throws in this caveat, well, it has to mean, so you cannot hold down a job, and you cannot have a family. as i said, that is a perfect line for the tobacco company. now, you know why dr. eth has been on the payroll of the tobacco -- of r.j. reynolds since 1998, because his opinion basically absolves anyone of responsibility under any circumstances, because you do not see many cigarette smokers that cannot hold down a job or have a family life. and that is this tautology, this, heads, we win; tails, you lose message that he gives. but let us talk about this criteria. even dr. eth says, well, yes, there is tolerance. if he goes to smoking two packs a day of cigarettes, you are developing a tolerance for cigarettes. he did not suddenly smoke two packs. you hear the story about, you smoke a pack and you get sick as hell, and that is what would happen. but to be able to smoke two packs comfortably, that requires tolerance. that is a sign of addiction. let us talk about withdrawal. he will not give us withdrawal, but he testified in his -- the cross-examination that there was evidence consistent with withdrawal. he testified that, you know -- and as i said, we are getting a lot of scientific terms. you know, we have all learned scientific terms like "addiction" and "brain receptors" and "hebejebes," right? that is a scientific term we have been talking about in this case, right? and what we heard was, when he is in church, the only time the defense says he does not smoke, he is restless, he has the hebejebes. he is pacing. and what dr. eth said is, oh, that is consistent with withdrawal. what about the fact that he never stopped smoking? is not that consistent with withdrawal? the fact that he keeps going back to cigarettes, the fact that he tells his family, i cannot kick the damn thing, i'm addicted, is not that evidence of withdrawal? of course it is. and you heard that several times a week, he wakes up in the middle of the night. dr. eth has an explanation. well, that is consistent, but it is not diagnostic. i'm saying that does not diagnose anything. nobody can be addicted under his definition, because it has to make you an invalid if you smoke cigarettes, which makes no sense. this is the other thing. so we had plenty of evidence of withdrawal, and that can be checked. but this one is the most incredible one: larger amounts, longer periods than intended. if we can go to the picture of perry baker. here is perry, 17, 18 years old, smoking with his buddies in the military because they give it to him with his rations. according to dr. eth, perry baker must have envisioned that he was going to become a one to two pack a day smoker for over 40 years when he had just a few cigarettes when he started off, and built that up. does that make any sense at all? and i want to talk about the testimony in this case, because mr. belasic asked him these questions and kind of pointed out the obvious: well, would not every regular smoker, anyone who starts smoking, hey, i'm going to start cigarettes, this looks cool, everyone is doing it -- whatever the reason -- joe dimaggio is doing it, ronald reagan is doing it, bob hope -- whatever the reason, whoever starts smoking to fit in to be part of the in crowd, do they ever envision becoming a one to two pack a day smoker? of course not. and i think that is why mr. belasic asked those questions. so you can rely on your own recollection of the testimony. do you have the testimony? page 3. videographer: what page was it? i'm sorry? mr. shevin: it was on page 3. videographer: here you go. mr. shevin: okay. he says -- what is this third criteria? you can rely on your recollection, but i believe this is what the testimony was. this is -- mr. belasic, what is this third criteria, larger amounts, longer periods than intended? he says, oh, these are general like criteria. some of these work better for more serious drugs, more serious substances than they do for nicotine, so that the larger amounts does not -- these two criteria, this criteria does not work well for nicotine. but you would have to show a smoker is really escalating their use, using much larger amounts or using it for longer periods than they really intended to, than they really wanted to, and there has to be some evidence that would support that finding. and then mr. belasic says: "well, is not it true a person, when they start out, may not intend, i'm going to smoke for 40 years? that may be true, right?" answer: "correct." "so would not every smoker then, they do not know how long they are going to smoke, would not they just satisfy this criteria?" he says: "no, because that trivializes this criteria. it is not what we use. again, it is a criteria that works for other types of substance abuse, like serious drugs." well, why would this criteria not apply when it makes sense? everyone who starts smoking does not imagine they are going to become a two pack a day smoker, that they are going to be begging for cigarettes after they went through their radiation treatments. why does dr. eth say that one does not apply? i think we all know why. the reason is common sense, because it would apply, and it does apply to every person who smokes on a daily basis in a large amount. he knows that the person that he is been working with, the company he is been supporting and teaching their experts how to testify since 1998, he knows that that criteria sinks them, that that is the third check. easy. because every person that smokes does not say, gee, i want to smoke for two packs a day. that is the evidence in this case. you heard him say, i cannot kick the damn things, i want to stop, but i'm addicted. he is smoking through his lung cancer. do you think he really envisioned that when he was -- let us go back to the picture -- when it was perry baker, the 17-year-old kid? of course not. did this man say, gee, i hope i become a two pack a day smoker? i hope that i get -- smoke through lung cancer? of course not. we are not trying to be absurd. the point is this: he ignores the criteria and says, it trivializes it. why does it trivialize it? because every regular smoker meets that criteria. okay. and what does the dsm-iv say themselves in their own language about regular, every day smokers? up to ninety percent are addicted. so there must be some give-mes there if nine out of 10, or eight to nine out of 10 are addicted, then that one probably applies to everyone that smokes compulsively. of course it does. that is common sense. and when we are talking about greater weight of the evidence, when their entire expert rests all his hopes on, i'm smarter than everyone else and i'm the only one that can do this and i'm using this dsm because it is all we can diagnose by, you are not going to see a definition of addiction that says, you must find the dsm-iv. that is not the only definition of addiction. and the way he interprets it, everybody in the world is wrong. nobody can be right. and that is why he strains through that. and that is why i point out this point about trivializes. because i would suggest to you that dr. eth, in coming in here and espousing to be this intellect, this rhodes scholar who can only be the one that can interpret this criteria, when he says, we will disregard this one, because i've got to answer yes to it, if i use my common sense. every one, every regular smoker, i have to answer yes, so i'm just disregarding that. and he says that trivializes addiction. what he is saying is, unless it is like heroin or cocaine, and you are strung out and you cannot hold down a job and whatnot, it is not addiction. it is the same party line. the defense has not changed its position. dr. eth is just parroting the same tobacco lies, the same thing that is totally inconsistent with common sense and the evidence in this case. so going back to that criteria, so this one is obviously a yes. not that we want you to focus on this alone, because this is not the end all. persistent, unsuccessful efforts to cut down. you heard he could not stop using the patch, using nicotine, using hypnosis. a lot of time spent on this procedure. now, i think we wrote it down here, but we went through this with dr. eth. basically, at some point in time perry had become a two pack a day smoker. we did the math. and it was 500 minutes a day. that is eight hours and 20 minutes. if you sleep for eight hours, that means half of your waking time is with a cigarette. what does dr. eth say? well, he was not inhaling the whole time? do you remember that? that is not a lot of time doing something. and it says in the criteria, here it is, that is a lot of time, is not it? there is no consistent testimony he was chain smoking. there was no testimony he was not able to work because he was too busy to work or not able to relate to his friends or engage in regular activity. so during the time that he was a regular every day smoker, which the dsm-iv says up to four -- ninety percent are addicted, well, the fact that he could go on an airplane and go to job and smoke inside people's houses and live life or he can go castigate out to his porch or to the smoking sections as years went on, he cannot be addicted. and so he will say 500 minutes is not a lot of time. having to be taken away from your family to go away 10 minutes at a time to be segregated when you finally -- when she says, i do not want you smoking in the house anymore, that is not a lot of time. once again, he ignores common sense and he says, well, i'm the smartest guy in the room. and once again, forget the fact it says a lot of time, it did not interfere with his activities. his wife is going to suck it up. she still wants to hug him when he smells like smoke. yeah, he is got to run away from his family now and then, but that is not important. once again, it defies common sense and logic. let us go back to the criteria. it is another one that dr. difranza told you, you would answer yes to. missed or reduced activities. once again, we heard he had to be segregated. according to him, you could never fill that criteria at an open society in the '50s, '60s and '70s. nobody could have ever been addicted because it was an open society. and that just does not make any sense because addiction is a brain disease. and finally, he agrees he continued despite negative consequences. but he says, that is only a short period of time. no, we have heard that his wife was saying, you should try to stop. and yes, he had these psychological crutches, but clearly he gives us that criteria. three of those, according to the dsm-iv can be diagnostic, but i would suggest to you that that is not really the most important thing. there is no -- there is not going to be an instruction saying you have to find something under the dsm-iv. if we can go -- i want to go to dr. eth's slide on reasons why people smoke, number 13. you know, dr. eth -- and we took this from his slide and we added this, dr. eth. reasons why people smoke. and he went through this whole litany. i've got to tell you, it was so compelling, i almost went and bought a pack of cigarettes. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. shevin: dr. eth extolled all these wonderful things of smoking. it does all of these great things. i was, like, the evidence is almost like dr. eth was the best pitch man in the room for going to smoke some cigarettes. that is what we heard. and it is very amazing, he said, oh, these are the reasons people smoke. what was missing? oh, mr. domnick asked him, where is the nicotine? is that a reason people smoke? and he said, oh, what i really meant was, parentheses, other than nicotine. you know, and that tells you a lot about the credibility of dr. eth in this case. now, if we can go on to the slide number 16. and so we asked dr. eth, because we heard he is a man in the field, he is at the va. i'm glad that he works at the va. he does not work on nicotine addiction, but other things. i'm not saying they are not important things. we heard about them, but they do not have to do with this expertise like dr. difranza did. and he was asked: "are you familiar with the guidelines for substance abuse and disorders?" he said: "i'm not sure of the document you are referring to." and this was talking about the va. "what is the va's position?" "the va cites the surgeon general report that says, nearly all daily nicotine users are nicotine dependent." remember, we heard dependence and addiction are interwoven, that is not an issue in this case. so the va's own practice guidelines says, nearly all are addicted. once again, when we are talking about the scales, his whole thing is based on a dsm-iv, 80 to ninety percent are addicted. he is in the va. their practice guidelines say nearly all are addicted. the surgeon general says it is addictive. we are going to talk about the tobacco documents because what is very interesting about dr. eth, he insulates himself. he is been working with them and here goes the math again for the last 15 years. and he is never had the curiosity when these tobacco documents became public in the year 2000, they became searchable to the world, he never had the intellectual curiosity to say, what do these guys know? they must know more than everyone, because they make it. they made billions of dollars selling this addictive product. what did they know? what did they think? because when you look at the tobacco documents, they fly in the face of dr. eth's logic that you have got to be a strung-out drug addict to be addicted to nicotine. so let us talk about that. i want to talk about believability of witnesses, okay? the judge has instructed you on this and you can look at the demeanor of the witness. i'd suggest that dr. eth's demeanor changed quite a bit. i think he started coughing when mr. domnick asked him questions. and that may have not been because he was under the pressure of the question, but he changed. he got a little bit more hot-headed. but more importantly, what he said did not ring true and make sense. the interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case. we are going to talk about that because, you know, we have heard a lot about experts. dr. difranza is a pioneer in nicotine addiction. he told you why he got involved. he got involved because he sent his daughter out to buy cigarettes. not too long ago, 71 out of a hundred shopkeepers sold cigarettes. he told me he was part of the reason they got their joe camel off the air. he knows about addiction. he studied it. he is published. he is written about it. he is in the surgeon general's report, some of that are in evidence, cited more than 20 times. dr. eth just got involved. he became board certified because they told him, hey, if you want to grandfather in, now is the time. and they kept him on ice and he continued to work for them for all these years. and think about this -- i think this is important. you know, let us face it. the experts probably want their side to win, okay? but when they are asked, do you think your testimony is objective? dr. difranza said, yes, on nicotine addiction, i think that when someone smokes this amount, they are compulsively drug seeking. they are addicted. and i've published on it. i'm cited. he is even cited in one of the coconspirator, philip morris' own documents as a resource. he is cited by the surgeon general more than 20 times. he goes, yes, i think my testimony is objective. he is clearly addicted. that is supported by other witnesses that we are going to talk about in a bit, and supported by common sense. then they say, well, you said you want to be objective, but, look, you want the tobacco companies to lose lawsuits so that they change their ways, so that it becomes more expensive to buy cigarettes? and he is like, yes. deputy clerk: counselor, 30 minutes. mr. shevin: i've used 30? deputy clerk: uh-huh. mr. shevin: thank you. so then he said, well, you lied when you said you did not want him to win, did not you? and he said, no, i think my testimony is objective on addiction. but we have all of these expert witnesses. dr. eth, he creates this tautology that nobody could be addicted and we talked a lot about his testimony. think about this: when we talk about the demeanor of the witnesses, you heard in opening statement from mr. belasic that dr. eth is a board certified forensic psychiatrist. he says, he actually comes in to courtrooms and testifies and he practices on this legal stuff. he instructs expert witnesses how to testify. and he is been doing this legal stuff for over 15 years or whatever, but certainly more than 10 years, whatever it is. forgive my math. he is been doing this for over a decade. what did he tell you? mr. belasic said, well, dr. eth, what is an interrogatory? and he goes, well, you know, he looked -- he does a good job, he looks at the witness and looks at you guys and he says, interrogatory is when one of the parties answers a question, and i hope i got that right because i'm really more used to the medical records. i do not know if you remember when he said that. and i'm thinking, here is a guy that is been testifying and reviewing interrogatories for over a decade and he is like, oh, shucks, i hope i did not get that wrong. he trains people how to testify. but the bottom line is, it does not make sense and it is not credible. he obviously has that interest in the case. when we talk about interest that we have in the outcome of the case, we are going to go through each of the witnesses that said there was addiction. and who had no interest in this case? well, there was a pulmonary doctor that was doing his job and his name was dr. alan rosen. before there was any reference to any lawsuit in this case, dr. alan rosen, the treating pulmonary doctor who you saw by deposition, i know the judge said back in the old days -- we went back in the old days, because his deposition was not videotaped -- but he told you to -- it is any evidence treated like any other witness in this case, is dr. alan rosen, when you saw mr. brevda, the younger man, reading the testimony of dr. rosen, and me asking the questions. dr. rosen told you back in -- that this person, that perry baker died of squamous cell lung cancer due to cigarette smoking. and he testified under oath in his deposition that it was his opinion, based on the history given of just a pack a day for over 40 years -- and we heard testimony that it was much more than that -- but a pack a day from age 19 up until three weeks, when he was too darn sick to smoke anymore, when he had the vena cava, swollen neck and face -- that it was his opinion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that perry baker was addicted to cigarettes. this was a fellow -- there is been no evidence that anybody paid him a dime in this case, not a shred of evidence. so we have heard about dr. eth and his working for the tobacco companies since 1998. you have heard that dr. difranza has taken an interest in the public health. and he told you he did it because millions of people are dying because of what these guys did. millions are dying. mr. belasic: objection to the pointing and you guys. i'm a lawyer. the court: sustained. talk about the defendant. mr. shevin: what r.j. reynolds did -- there is an instruction that you treat them like a person, so i apologize. however you want to characterize them. this tobacco industry and dr. difranza knew it. they killed millions of people on purpose, knowing they were going to die, lying and deceiving with the intent to addict new and new generations. so, yes, he understood that. but his testimony about addiction makes sense. what about dr. rosen? he was not paid by anybody for his testimony. he was not retained as an expert. yes, he was listed as an expert because experts are people that give technical opinions. but he gave a deposition and he told you it was his opinion he was addicted. he is a pulmonologist. pulmonologists treat people with lung cancer, emphysema. that is what he told you. dr. feingold was asked, well, what do you think about free choice? dr. feingold is a pulmonologist. he told you he reviewed the medical records. and he said it was his opinion that perry baker was addicted. so we are going to talk about all of this evidence. now, as i said, you can review the reasonableness of this testimony in the light of the evidence in the case and in light of your own common experience and common sense. so let us talk about the evidence in this case very briefly about addiction, just to sum it up. dr. rosen, who has no interest in the case, said it was his opinion, he was addicted to cigarettes within a reasonable degree of medical certainty. that was the treating pulmonologist and that was his testimony. even though it was not by videotape, the judge said, you treat it like any other testimony. think about it. he had the least amount of interest in this case. dr. allen feingold, a pulmonologist, when he was asked questions on cross-examination on redirect, he said, how does free choice enter into perry baker? he told you that perry baker's free choice was affected because it was his opinion he was addicted within a reasonable degree of medical probability. you heard dr. difranza, that not only said it met the dsm-iv criteria, but actually is cited for his own criteria. and he told you, as a pioneer in this field, that perry baker was addicted. you heard that perry baker had told his family members, and this was, dr. eth admitted this was important, he said, i'm addicted, i cannot kick the damn things. he knew it and he tried to quit and was unable to quit in the late '80s and early '90s. you heard from shirley baker, her testimony about it. you heard from todd baker, who told you that he was addicted. you heard from richard baker that told you, i guess it is an addiction. and we went through that testimony with dr. eth. and you heard from donald baker about how significantly he smoked. the surgeon general tells us that practically everyone who is an every day smoker is addicted. and that would make sense. that makes common sense. you heard about the apa, the cdc, the who, the nida, all of those definitions; but more importantly, r.j. reynolds' internal documents. if addiction is something that requires what they are saying it does, how come early in the '50s, the '60s, are they saying, what we do is, we sell an addictive product, nicotine. we are in the pharmaceutical business. how do you sort that? you know, they are going to spend a lot of time saying, gee, dr. difranza, he is some crazy guy that does not want kids to die from cigarettes. he is a zealot, right? dr. feingold, he gets paid a lot of money. dr. rosen, well, he does not really know what he is talking about. all of these guys are dumb. dsm-iv, 80 to ninety percent, no, that is not what our guy says. our guy says it is what i say that counts. how do they it get through this? what is the most compelling evidence in this case? their own documents. their own internal documents. they knew a heck of a lot more than the surgeon general about addiction. when the surgeon general came out with his first report in 1964, they knew they were addicting people. they marketed children because they knew that once they could hook them at a young age, they would have a customer for life. and that was their entire game plan, and they knew it. and that is why dr. eth has sterilized himself. while he has spent a great deal of time with r.j. reynolds and their lawyers, the ones from winston, these folks here from cleveland -- he is spent a great amount of time, he has spent no time looking at their documents. because, god forbid, if he did that -- because we know what would happen. he would realize, gee, they knew it was addictive. they knew it was addictive long before anybody else. that makes sense. because if you make a product that people consume, you want them to consume more and more of, you should know what is inside your product. you should know whether you are killing people and addicting people, and they knew it. and they aimed at it. one of those documents -- it is not about levulinic acid. i do not know what levulinic acid is, to be honest with you. i have no idea what it is. it is found in beer, it is found in coke. who gives a darn about levulinic acid? and the point is, this company is dissecting rat brains to look at nicotine receptors, which is something that did not exist until they produced cigarettes because it is a false thing. they are looking at rat brains and creating computer models on figuring out, how does this play into the nicotine hit? and they wanted, that same company wants to come up here and say perry baker's brain has nothing to do with his ability and choice to smoke. it is like he is a brainless person. let us talk about this. so we are going to go through some of these secret documents. you are going to use your common sense. what we have is dr. eth who says, no, you have got to be strung out. it is got to make you unable to function in society, which is that same apologism, that same argument that we are trivializing addiction. we are trivializing addiction. well, you know what? the evidence in this case is that r.j. reynolds, through their conspiracy, through their lies -- and it is continuing with dr. eth on the stand -they are the ones that are trivializing the 430,000 people that die every year from their addictive product. they are the ones that are trivializing. that is why he will not even look at a darn document that shows what they knew. dr. eth will not even acknowledge that the vadod, under substance disorder, says nearly everyone is addicted that smokes every day. and, of course, that makes sense. okay. so we can go to the next -- let us talk about some of these tobacco documents. i'm not going to go through all of them, but you have them in evidence. 1959, psychological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine, application of the optimum amount of nicotine extracted from tobacco. 1963, we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. why did not they tell the surgeon general in 1964, not only do we know it causes cancer, even though -- oh, look, they want a pat on the back, because they gave them a bunch of literature and said in the letters forwarding, oh, we can filter out anything bad, continuing their lies? they want a pat on the back. well, i would suggest to you that you will give them a pat on the back in your verdict, and it will not be a good pat on the back, because you will punish them. and mr. domnick will talk about that, because it is that is type of arrogance, that type of heads, we win; tails, you lose mentality: give us a pat on the back, we cooperated with the surgeon general. what? they knew, not only that it caused cancer, which their own studies you saw that rodgman, teague, 1952 -- not only did they know it caused cancer, they knew it was addictive in 1963, before they said anything to the surgeon general. is that cooperating with the public health? of course it is not. and they want a pat on the back? that is chutzpah. look at this 1972 document. we deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of psychological effects, a vehicle for delivering nicotine. we deliberately played down the role of nicotine. why? because they just want to sell the image. and then they have the customer for life for many of their people, if not most. 1980, we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. this is a memo that says, our lawyers remind us. remember, those white papers that they said, saying there is doubt, there is doubt? what it said, and this is in evidence, is the person writing the white paper was their general counsel. and here is their lawyer saying, we cannot admit things are addictive because then we will not have this free choice argument and we are selling a defective product that kills people. go to the next. 1935, american tobacco, this came out in the deposition -- of the deposition of the chemist, it said, it is quite possible to de-nicotinize a cigarette. this is 1935 of lucky strike, american tobacco, which is what he smoked. such removal can be secured without affecting adversely the desired restraint, such a removal produces an emasculated cigarette. they knew that in 1935. in the forwarding memo, which we are going talk about in a bit, 1953 when hill and knowlton got together, what did they say? they said, thank god it is a habit they cannot break. that is what they said back in 1953. they knew it was addicting. the surgeon general, you guys are very familiar with this, obviously. and what was he done? he was vilified. he was vilified. it was the same type of rhetoric dr. eth uses. oh, he is just trivializing it, saying cigarettes are as bad as heroin and cocaine. that is just trivializing it. what we heard is, more people die from cigarettes and the addiction to cigarettes than all of those diseases combined. so when they ask yourself, well, dr. eth says this did not interfere with perry baker's life? i think shirley baker would say otherwise. i think it interfered with his life plenty. and they knew it was going to interfere with the lives of hundreds and hundreds of thousands and millions of people, but they did not care. all they cared about was the money. the surgeon general, if we can go to the next slide, as we said, the dsm-iv, you read this during the case, 80 to ninety percent of smokers are nicotine dependent. but not perry baker, not the guy that smoked after he had lung cancer. remember, we have to prove greater weight of the evidence. that is 80 to ninety percent they are saying. nicotine is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products and this persistence contributes to diseases described in this report. remember, we asked dr. eth about that. he says, it is not the fundamental reason. it is a fundamental reason. and remember when we talked about substantial contributing cause, because mr. belasic likes to come up here and say it is got to be continuous and natural and it is got to be blah, blah, blah. he talks about those three criteria. well, even dr. eth says, yes, it is a contributing factor. but he says it is not the fundamental reason, it is a fundamental reason. it is a fundamental reason i forgot to put on my slide show that i prepared, a psychiatrist preparing slide shows. i prepared this slide show but i forgot about that a fundamental reason. it slipped my mind. so all of these people agree that regular smokers are addicted. when we talk about the greater weight of the evidence, if we go to the next slide, we -deputy clerk: counsel, 45 minutes used. mr. shevin: thank you, ma'am. we talk about starting off even. and we have dr. rosen, the person with no interest, feingold, difranza, the family members. i'm addicted, i cannot beat the damn things, chain smoking. the surgeon general, practically everyone is addicted, his own veterans affairs, his own secret documents saying it is addictive. they do not know what addiction means? they are gearing it towards addiction. of course it is addictive. you have your common sense. what we are left here on an island is dr. eth who says, you know what? you guys cannot figure this out, i'm the only one that can. you can say what dr. eth says, i can count it a little bit, but when you compare the greater weight of the evidence, it is not even close that we met our burden, a burden we are glad to meet. let us talk about legal cause. addiction is a cause of disease. it is not whether he had free choice. we agree he had free choice. we even come here and admit, shirley baker, that he bears in some of the responsibility in conjunction with what they did, that he should be blamed in part. we are going to talk about that in connection with him. we accept some responsibility for him. but they have accepted no responsibility. and that is what we are here about. it is not about whether addiction prevented him from quitting. it is not whether he was unable to control himself, whether addiction took over. remember, they said dr. rosen, he said, not some tobacco shell, not me, but dr. rosen is going to tell you he could quit at any time. you heard the testimony that was read about dr. rosen. he said it is difficult to quit, i guess it is possible, most of them cannot quit but they try and it is theoretically possible they can quit. yeah, he did say that. all the witnesses said that. that is not the point. that does not mean that when you are addicted to something it does not play a role in why you smoke them. it is an absurd argument. the issue is not -- the issue is whether it is a substantial contributing factor, one among others. so even if dr. eth is right, even though they do not agree with him, that addiction is a fundamental reason, not the fundamental reason, he does not want to give the fundamental, but if dr. eth is right and he disagrees with r.j. reynolds because he admits that. mr. belasic: your honor -mr. shevin: this is argument. the court: please, counsel. mr. shevin: all right. mr. belasic: move to -- mr. shevin: he disagrees with the defendant in this case because the defendant has created this imaginary construct that we are going to talk about that. mr. belasic in his opening statement has this beautiful slide of the silhouette of this man. and he put over here, addiction, perry baker, and then he had these other things, perry baker likes to smoke and this and that and the other. and then whatever. do you remember that slide? the one thing he forgot was that addiction is in this brain inside this guy, perry baker. so it is really nice to say, oh, it is not natural, it is not continuous, it is not this. but his own expert does not follow that reason, okay? his own expert does not follow that reason. let me say one thing. i get excited. they have excellent lawyers. they are a lot more eloquent and organized than i am, but that redirect of dr. feingold, i apologize for. and i do not want you to take anything i say or do and how i do it against my client. i know we are all trying hard here. this is about the facts and the evidence. and so i'd ask that you do not hold anything against anyone on what any of the lawyers say because we are all trying to do our best on this important day because this is the only day shirley baker has in this case. but we are talking about this guy's brain. he is not a silhouette. he is not a paper. he is a person with a brain. and if they think it makes sense to go and do autopsies on rat brains to see how additives affect and create computer models? i'm guessing the brain has something to do with it. and for them to say him being addicted to smoking is not playing a role in why he smokes? it does not make any sense. it is ridiculous. so what we know is -- when we go -- if what we know, like it shows there, if you smoke and you deeply inhale a cigarette, the size of the blood flow in the lungs is like a tennis court compared to in the mouth, like when you smoke a cigar, which is like a tennis ball. within 10 seconds you get that hit to the brain. you have seen the slides -- i do not know if we have them there -- we will go to them later -- he had millions and millions of doses of highly powerfully addictive drug. they want to say, oh, his brain has nothing to do with his choice. and that makes no sense. nicotine receptors did not exist until they flooded the market with nicotine-containing cigarettes. lung cancer barely existed until they flooded and mass produced their cigarettes. and they made them so that they could be deeply inhaled. you heard that from the chemist, the thing. they put additives, they make it so you can inhale it all the way into your lungs and get that hit. and it is not just about, oh, we are putting more nicotine in it. every cigarette, you heard this from the testimony, they extract the nicotine and then they spray it back in. every camel, in all 20 cigarettes in that pack, has the 1.3 milligrams. everyone marlboro, 1.5. every lucky strike, 1.4. they have it to the t. they have the blends and additives to the t. it is not just, you have too little, too much. it is the exact amount to give the exact kick that they want. and the whole point is that is why this is a defective and unreasonably dangerous thing, because it is creating this addiction by going deep into the lungs and creating disease and they knew it for many years. we can go to the next. so addiction is -- this is the instruction. you have seen it a million times. but we are going to go over it again. addiction to smoking is a legal cause if it produces or substantially contributes, substantially, and it need not be the only cause. and you guys have these instructions and you heard them quite a bit. let us talk about dr. eth because he is their ace in the hole, right? he is the guy out there in the island that says, you have to be strung out on cigarettes and your life has to be in shambles to be addicted. even dr. eth does not agree with the defense case when it comes to this. that is how absurd it is. dr. eth said, question: "nicotine" -- this was on cross-examination of mr. domnick, and you can rely your own recollection but -- "nicotine is a significant contributing factor in the continuing use of tobacco products like cigarettes, true?" answer: "yes, it is an active ingredient and it is a reason." "a significant reason people smoke, yes?" "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason people persist in smoking. i would say it is a fundamental reason." this was the part i was telling you about. "it is a significant factor. it is an important factor. it is a fundamental reason." "nicotine is the drug that causes the addiction; you agree with that?" "that is a drug, it is not the tobacco addiction, but the nicotine addiction, yes." next slide. nicotine is a significant contributing -- i'm sorry. okay. so once again, when we look at this, he admits that the reason people who are addicted to nicotine smoke is their nicotine addiction. it is what is going on in their brain. and yes, we admit that he shares in some of the fault. so you can say, as i think the evidence clearly shows, he is part of this class, he is a person addicted to cigarettes that caused his death, that is a contributing factor. and you will be asked to compare his use of that defective product. their negligence, think misrepresentations. you will be asked to compare his fault, and there can be more than one person at fault. there can be multiple people at fault. in this case, they are at fault because of what american tobacco did. remember, they put this whole thing together. it was paul hahn, the president of american tobacco, that sent out the telegram. they are liable because of what r.j. reynolds did, they are liable for brown & williamson, they are liable for their coconspirator that they sent up. there are many different causes to this. is it a substantial contributing cause? clearly, being addicted to the substance is. it contributes substantially. but for the addiction, would he be smoking one to two packs a day? of course not. it would not make any sense. so as we said, it may not -- it may not be the only cause. it can be a combination with some other cause. and that is the law in this case. and the idea of separating the man from the brain when they know r.j. reynolds knows it is all about nicotine addiction in the brain and they are checking out rat tissue brains? it is absurd and it is insulting. as we talked about, addiction being a legal cause, once again, it does not have to be the only cause. so to use dr. eth's mantra, is it a fundamental reason? it is a reason, not the fundamental reason. it is a fundamental reason. this is from the surgeon general report that is in evidence. i do not think you need to be a surgeon general or a doctor to know nicotine addiction has you taking all of these carcinogens that they knew about since the '50s or even before they had their frank statement and that causes lung cancer. that is how the surgeon general explains it. but you do not have to be a surgeon general to understand it. it is the "a" versus "the" -- it is clear we have done that, so... so looking at the verdict form in this case -where is this? i'm sorry. so in looking at the verdict form in this case, was addiction to nicotine? if so, was it a legal cause? this is an easy one. the answer is yes. the next question you are going to be asked on the verdict form, if you answer no to that, it is over. the defense wins the case and it is over. we suggest the evidence is overwhelming as to these issues, certainly more than the greater weight of the evidence. the next question is, if you answer question one, then proceed to answer the following. and the next questions are about whether the negligence and the product defect was a legal cause, and as well as the other issues. i'm go to talk about some of the evidence in this case. if we can switch back to the other screen. okay. one quick thing, i want to go to slide 38, just for -- so we have an understanding of what is going on here. this is what a social smoker does and this is what perry baker did. we are talking about 3.2 to 6.5 lifetime exposures of carcinogens that they knew to be carcinogens in this case and lied about in a highly powerful addictive drug that changed the composition of his brain. we can go to the slide on legal cause, slide number 40. i jumped ahead a little bit. just to put it in perspective one more time, you have got dr. rosen who says he is addicted, says that cigarettes caused his disease on the death certificate. dr. feingold, dr. difranza, clearly said that was the addiction was the reason. you have all of these things that are internal documents. one of their internal documents we are going to talk about says, what we knew was nicotine, it is addictive, and we guess the surgeon general is going to say there is some adverse side effects, like it kills people. that is just kind of an afterthought to r.j. reynolds and these coconspirators, it is an adverse consequence. well, you, as jurors, have the right to evaluate what that adverse consequence is worth in a civil society with justice. and even dr. eth says when you are addicted to nicotine, that is why you smoke. he even says when you are not addicted, that is why you smoke. so the idea that addiction, if you find there is addiction, is not a legal cause. they want to ignore the location of the brain, ignore their own advocate, dr. eth, and they want to ignore their own secret documents. you are going to hear a lot about the all the witnesses. i suggest there is nothing against dr. rosen. they will just say he is a dumb pulmonologist just treating people dying of lung cancer. what does he know? mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. shevin: i do not know what they are going to say about dr. rosen. but the bottom line is, he treats people. he gives them cessation drugs for smoking -- he treats people with smoking-related diseases, treats people who are addicted. i do not know what they are going say, but their own secret documents are the most damning things on these issues, and they cannot run from them. you did not hear from any witness from r.j. reynolds who said, this does not say what it means. we did not mean that. that is out of context. you forgot all these other documents that said, oh, that guy teague is a lunatic. that guy rodgman is off his rocker. of course, we know they set a whole marketing plan aimed at youth based on this nicotine addiction model. they cannot run from the truth. and the truth became discovered in 1999, 2000 when they were forced, screaming and kicking, to tell the truth. so clearly that is by the greater weight of the evidence. i want to talk about the engle findings very briefly. the judge read these to you. you heard smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, nicotine is addictive. they placed it and they were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose the material concerning the health effects of addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. next. that they agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and that they sold or supplied defective cigarettes. and finally, that they were negligent. when we are talking about r.j. reynolds, the judge is going to give you an instruction that essentially they are legally responsible for the acts and statements of other companies that entered into this agreement to conceal or omit, including brown & williamson, which they are responsible for anyway because they purchased them, and american tobacco company, lorillard, the tobacco institute and research center and the tirc, which we talked about, as long as those acts and omissions are for purposes of concealing or omitting material information regarding the health effects of the addictive nature -- regarding the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. you are going to get that instruction from the judge. okay. deputy clerk: counsel, one hour used. mr. shevin: thank you. if we can go to number 44. i want to talk about very briefly about some of the conspiracy. i know you know the story. but this bears some repeating. the attitudes of these heads of the tobacco companies. one man said, it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. they knew it back then, the american tobacco, the company they purchased, knew it back in 1935. said another boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? what does that tell us? they know they are causing cancer. how did they market it? they said, more doctors smoke camels. i'm not going to go through all of those ads. they showed young, vivacious athletes, the joe dimaggios, the lucille balls, the beverly hillbillies, the flintstones -- the real grown-up cartoon, as we learned on cross-examination, like every cartoon. what does that tell us? who on this earth with any sense of morality would make a cigarette that -- make a product that they know is a habit or an addiction that people cannot break? that they know causes cancer and kills people? who on this earth with any decency for money would do such a thing? it is an outrage. it is repugnant and they hid the truth for years. you have seen the truth in this courtroom. and that is why, like his honor said, you will find -- you have a tremendous responsibility in this case to right this tremendous wrong. as we said, they met at the plaza hotel, which we have seen the picture of. we can skip the picture. it is very interesting. one of these slides is from the plaza hotel, another one was a slide show at hilton head. you think you, corporations, they go to these nice places and have the board meetings and it is nice. but what is going on, the business at hand is covering up and deceiving the american public of the truth that kills millions of people. that is the business at hand. and it does not matter whether it is in the plaza hotel or the hilton head hotel, it is still repugnant. it still shows this conspiracy. and what they want to say is perry baker -- and i'm sorry, back to the forwarding memo -- boy, would not it be great for us if we were the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? like i said, that obviously shows they knew it caused cancer. looking at the frank statement, this came out, i guess you saw in evidence, that the palm beach post was not published, but there was an article in the palm beach post about it and it was big news. they said, we accept the interest in the health as a basic responsibility paramount above every other consideration in our business. that makes sense. but it was a lie. and that lie they continued to sell, that psychological crutch to people. everything kills you. it is not proven. selling doubt and controversy, knowing that it would give that crutch. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. we always have and always will cooperate. well, what they did not say is claude teague, the reynolds chemist, knew it was carcinogenic. the philip morris coconspirator, rodgman, said, we need to eliminate these ingredients, they are carcinogens, but we do not have a way to do it and then we lied and said we could do it with our filters and things like that. you guys remember dr. robert dupuis, who was speaking for the tirc, the tobacco executive. (the following video was played:) male speaker: as dr. little said earlier, all of the research of the tobacco industry committee is done independent of the cigarette companies. nonetheless, each major cigarette producer has been conducting its own experiments on this problem. this is the richman laboratory of one of the major producers. male speaker: i'm dr. robert m. dupuis, chairman of the industry technical group of the tobacco industry research committee. our primary objective is to analyze all of the components of smoke. of course, we do a great deal of research on analysis and technology on tobacco itself. but even if we knew all of the components of tobacco, we still have not known the components of smoke. and since smoke is what we sell, we feel we should emphasize this phase of research. after we have produced the smoke and separated it into fractions, the next step is to identify these fractions. these are then identified either photographically or on the oscilloscope. the oscilloscope is now demonstrating the means of identification of one of the smoke components. using these instruments, we have isolated and identified some three dozen components of smoke. many more will be identified. as we find these components, we published the results of our work in technical journals which are available to any scientist in any part of the world. so far we found none that gives us any cause for concern. if we do find any that we find consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette. (video concluded.) mr. shevin: that was a boldfaced lie and they knew it. they knew it. 1952, reynolds' own chemists said, we have carcinogenics as an etiological factor. you saw -the lines with the graphs. they knew they were killing people. they knew it, and they did not give a darn. they just wanted the money, and they lied and lied and lied. and they are here to tell you, well, perry baker was smart enough to not fall for our lies, and he is just a guy who is exercising his free choice. but he was cast into their net and he followed their script. you know, we heard a lot about perry baker. she said he never went two hours without smoking. but they put in that life insurance form, right? their own expert said he never went without smoking. but, look, there is a form that does not have his handwriting that said he did not smoke for 24 months, he must be an insurance cheat, ignore the evidence. our own experts said he never went two hours without smoking, but let us throw some mud on him. he is an alcohol abuser. who cares about perry baker? he is an alcohol abuser. you know, i would suggest that all of that is to distract you from their lies and deceit and what they have done, because the evidence is clear that perry baker fit their game plan. he may not have been the perfect person, he may have had sometimes too much to drink, he may not have checked the paperwork before he filled it out. but he sure as heck was their perfect customer because, like so many millions of americans, he smoked and smoked and smoked, and he got addicted to their product and he continued to smoke. so he may not be the perfect person, but he was their perfect person, and his money and the other people who died's money is perfectly fine by them. we have a history of cover up. you heard about these different organizations, the tirc. it became the ti and the ctr and all of that. let us talk about decisions and control. they control what they manufacture. they made it so it would be deeply inhaled and massively consumed. and they have a responsibility. if they knew nothing about everything they knew, there is no question they are responsible for making a defective product. in a civilized society, they may be allowed to sell cigarettes, but under the law they have made a defective and reasonably dangerous product. when you make a defective product and it hurts someone, you are responsible under the law. so you cannot just mass produce something and not be aware of what is going on. oh, i do not know if i'm going to put this on the market if it is going to kill millions of people? i do not know anything about it. see no evil, hear no evil, i'm not responsible. even if we did not have a single document into evidence, you are being instructed as a matter of law that this was a defective product and that is obviously what killed him. they had control over what they manufactured. they controlled the advertising, they controlled the message, they controlled how they responded to the public health. and i would suggest to you the truth matters. the truth matters. the truth is a powerful thing. and when someone acknowledges the truth -- now, why someone would enter into this business knowing their product is going to kill people, i have no idea. but the truth matters. and when the people that are manufacturing, instead of manufacturing a false controversy and a lie, and you saw that they spent 250 billion in advertising, that their message against the public message was one day compared to 365. so i expect you are going to see ed asner and you are going to see let us quit for a day, and i do not know what else they are going to show you. but the evidence is one day of their -- they had 365 to one, when it came to that public health message. they had the control, and they knew how to sustain addiction. i want to show one more clip from howard cullman from the tobacco merchant society, 1964. (the following video was played:) male speaker: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general committee. in our studio this afternoon, following the surgeon general's news conference, cbs news correspondent richard c. hoffler, put some questions to one of the leading spokesmen for the industry, howard cullman, president of the tobacco merchants association and a longtime director of the philip morris company. mr. cullman, prominent in the new york theater and civic affairs, is a third generation member of the tobacco family. male speaker: mr. cullman, the news is pretty stark and pretty solid. they say, quite flatly, the experts, the judgment that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases under the overall death rate than they have a rate of 10 times as high for smokers in the case of lung cancer and higher in other cases. male speaker: well, that is awful hard to -substantial. i do not believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. we are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. we eat more carefully. we have cholesterol habits. we have drinking habits of lighter whiskey. we have smoking habits, which, incidentally, today are changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters. i was surprised at the beginning of the conference when dr. terry was supposed to have said that they are better (inaudible) on the effect of any cigarettes (inaudible). so when we have, today, sixty percent in the business and in the field, compared to three percent 10 years ago, i think we need a little more research. i'm convinced that eventually they will find some element through a (inaudible) or through leaf-growing or a special type of seed-growing that will eliminate the mysterious (inaudible) they are looking for. we want to be the (inaudible) just as much as the surgeon general in every way, and we will cooperate in every way. male speaker: are you saying then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco which are removable by filter? male speaker: obviously, the filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. but at this point, we do not know. male speaker: does any of the research that the tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any part of the findings here or the conclusions as a whole? male speaker: well, without reading the report, i could not answer that, to begin with. i do not think that the tobacco industry, as a whole, agrees with the conclusions. (video concluded.) mr. shevin: once again, continued lies. i think there is no question in this campaign that they initiated back in 1953 -- to use their words -- was brilliantly conceived and executed. they even admitted back then, it was only a holding strategy. how long can we keep doing this? and cigarette smoking after that cancer scare in the '50s went up. and even after the surgeon general's report, cigarette smoking went up. and that is what they did. now, i want to talk -- i'm going to talk about some of these jury questions in a minute and i want to bring back some of the sworn statement of dr. heimann. he was the man that was the american tobacco assistant to the president and president. and he told you the position of the company of american tobacco, which r.j. reynolds is responsible for, and purchased, and then he went and work for rjr. (the following video was played:) q. mr. heimann, would you state your full name. a. robert k. heimann. q. what age are you, sir? a. sixty-eight. q. and where do you reside? a. in riverside, connecticut. q. and what is your occupation, sir? a. i'm retired. q. one source of expectations concerning product hich a consumer has are the advertisements of that oduct; is that accurate? a. i would agree with that. q. would you expect a consumer to rely upon your vertisements? a. yes. our advertising is truthful and we would ticipate that they would rely on it if they chose. q. that serves no promise as to what the consumer an expect from their product, is not it? a. yes, it is. q. okay. throughout your tenure with american, t was not only american's position, but your position hat cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that ccurate? a. through my tenure? q. yes. a. yes, that is so. q. that is something that american tobacco wanted he public to believe; is that correct? a. yes. q. that is a statement that american tobacco takes reat reliance on? a. we issued that statement, yes. q. as far as you are concerned, a person is ustified in relying on that statement? a. yes. q. okay. no reason you know of why the public houldn't accept your company's position, is there? a. well, in the area of scientific integrity, i now of no reason why they should not accept our osition. i know that as a practical matter with a reat deal of material being issued by scientists, one ersuasion or another, it is rather difficult to get them even know our position. q. i want to show you what is marked as aintiff's exhibit 17, which is simply a package of ll mall cigarettes that is currently being sold. can u identify that as a package of pall malls? a. yes. q. and would you read the warning that is placed that, please? a. "surgeon general's warning, quitting smoking eatly reduces serious risk to your health." q. that is not a warning that is voluntarily aced there by american tobacco, is it? a. no, it is not. q. would you put that warning there if congress dn't require it? a. no. q. and the reason is simply, american disagrees ith the warning, does not it? a. we certainly do. q. you do not think they harm smokers, so there is reason of putting them on it, is it? a. we believe our product is not injurious to alth. q. as far as you are concerned, is the surgeon eneral simply wrong in concluding that cigarette oking causes lung cancer? a. i would use the term "misguided." q. if it is misguided, i take it your opinion is, 's wrong? a. i was simply trying to be polite about it. q. but not being polite about it, in your inion, he is wrong, correct? a. he is wrong. q. congress is wrong requiring these warnings, rrect? a. we do not think they are justified. q. so they are wrong? a. they are wrong. (video concluded.) mr. shevin: if we can go to slide 58. and of course, this was the position of the company all the way through 1994. we were talking before about the press release to the surgeon general's report, the tobacco companies. this conveys a message that invites disaster and trivializes a serious drug problem. as i said, the same kind of verbiage that dr. eth uses. let us talk about -- we talked about what tobacco knew. real quick, number 60. they ease the fear with filters. we went from .6 percent of the population having filters and then winston became the number 1 brand, the brand that he switched to, and the pall mall filters because it was seen as a healthy brand. and they knew -- if we go to the next slide, 61, you have seen this in evidence. i'm going to move quickly. that technology does not allow filtration, contrary to what they lied to the american public about and said in their advertisements. that they said, you should trust our advertisements. we will filter out the stuff. new filter brands for a growing market. the smoking the filter was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than they would have got from the regular cigarette. they came up in the cross-examination of dr. feingold and said, look, i guess they were proud of themselves. they said, we fooled all of these scientists, because when they do it from a machine, it does filter stuff. guess what? the human being is not a machine. it gets the nicotine and tar dose that you want. so you inhale more, and you actually get in more carcinogens. and they knew that. they knew it was about the illusion of filtration. they knew that we will launch a new area of products, premiere, a nicotine delivering product test market. a report from the commission said, it delivers levels to the lung cancer-causing toxicants similar to those from the other commercial brands. once again, they knew the filters did not work, and they lied about it and created this illusion. next slide. you saw about the doubt and confusion. the filter was getting -- the tirc has been successful as a defensive operation. subject to -- subject to finding them they were making false and misleading statements, which they were. you heard their own president say, yes, people should rely upon us. that is reasonable. we must in the near future give smokers a psychological crutch. we need stories that cast doubt. doubt is our product and also the way of establishing a controversy. even dr. eth testifies as to that. we can go to the next slide. the industry's employed a single strategy, defend itself on litigation, politics and public opinion. it is been brilliantly conceived in important battles, but it is only been a holding strategy. they knew the whole thing was a farce. it was all just to keep people addicted and get new generations of smokers of youth. it was set up as a shield and a front, this whole conspiracy that we have talked about. and as we can see on number 64, the position is subject to a charge that they are making false and misleading statements. so let us talk about some of these questions on the jury form. the first question was -- if we can switch over -- "was the negligence of reynolds a legal cause of the death?" you are going to be told they were negligent. so the answer to that is simple. yes. thirdly, "was the defective and unreasonable cigarette placed on the market a legal cause of his death?" obviously, they were. you are instructed that he died from cigarette smoking, so it is obviously use of those defective cigarettes. the reason he smoked was this addiction. so obviously the answer to that is quite simple, based on the engle findings. the next question is, "please state whether he reasonably relied, on his detriment, to the concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes." and you are asked three questions. i would suggest the answer to all three of these are yes. you are given two different time frames there. now, you heard that they expected people to rely upon it. we are talking about a very different time, a time where when he grew up, before there was ever a warning on a package -- he had smoked for 19 years, had millions of doses of nicotine, over a million doses of nicotine before there was ever any warning where it had affected his brain. and if we can go to slide number 71 real quick, switch over. perry baker grew up in a time where everyone smoked. doctors smoked, doctors advertised for cigarettes. santa claus said, have a treat, not a treatment, all that stuff, movie stars, et cetera. eighty percent of men, you heard from the evidence, smoked in his age group and took up smoking. today, or after the truth became known, when they were forced to admit the truth and concede that it is an addictive product, that it kills you, only one in five smoke. you can see it is almost a mirror image, the truth is a powerful thing. and perry baker was just one of those minnows caught up in the net. you see he did not try to quit until the late '80s, until after the surgeon general said it is addictive. then he tried to quit with the patch, and that shows you he continued to rely on their lies, continued to rely all the way through the '80 -late '80s, when he quit. so the answer to that question is clearly yes. he did what they wanted him to do. they want to say, well, he knew better. the evidence speaks volumes otherwise. and that is why we have hundreds and hundreds and thousands of people dying, because they relied upon their lies. you heard their own executives say, yes, you should rely upon them. yes, when we say it is safe, they should follow what we say. the surgeon general has no idea. and they said to congress in 1994 that it was not injurious to the health, even after perry baker died. but he should have known better? that makes no sense. that makes absolutely no sense because of the psychological crutch. even dr. eth said that an addict has a psychological crutch. that is what they were doing. that is why they spent $250 billion advertising, not because it did not make them billions and billions of dollars, because it kept people smoking, and they knew they were addicted. going back to the elmo, if we could, the answer to question 4 is yes on all accounts. the answer to question 5 is yes on all accounts. now, this next question, we have admitted some responsibility for perry baker, because there can be more than one cause. yes, he had had more than a million doses of nicotine and started smoking in the military. before there was ever any warning or caution, it may be hazardous, he had smoked for 19 years. he tried quitting in the late '80s, after the surgeon general came out saying, it may be addicting. he does share in some responsibility, but here's what i would contend. you heard they are responsible for -- r.j. reynolds, they are responsible for american tobacco, who is part of this conspiracy, it involved the cigarettes he smoked, and r.j. reynolds. they are responsible vicariously for brown & williamson, and they were the key three players in the tirc, which is part of the ti and the ctr. and you have these four powerful players involved that are doing it out of greed and out of intent, knowing they are going to addict people like perry baker and knowing that millions of people are going to die and doing it for the money. and you are comparing the fault of those four entities to perry baker. and my suggestion to you is that for r.j. reynolds, to compare, should be 80-plus percent, and perry baker should be something less than twenty percent. i leave that to you. but i think when you compare the fact that these companies that they are responsible for, and they are the initiators of this massive lying conspiracy, and they are doing it for the money, and perry baker is doing what they want him to do out of addiction -- it does not mean he does not have a responsibility -- that is how you should compare the fault. because they are responsible for those companies. and each of those companies are certainly as or more at fault than perry baker in this because they did it for the money. at this point, mr. domnick is going to address the other questions. i thank you all for your attention. mr. domnick: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. it is our last opportunity to talk with each other about the things that we have learned over the last couple of weeks and then about the decisions that you are going to have to make here today. you have had the opportunity over these last couple of weeks to get a glimpse into the history of the cigarette industry in general and r.j. reynolds, in particular. you have had an opportunity to see that they are motivated by the unwavering pursuit of self, the unwavering pursuit, the love of money. that is what has been the foundation of all of the choices that they have made over the last 60 years, the choices to addict, the choices to lie, the choices to commit fraud and to commit conspiracy. that has been their choice, hatched with a room of executives in a hotel up in new york. no matter what the cost is, 430,000 a year killed, countless more are sick. and you heard from their own expert that to replace those dead, those 20, 30 million dead, that they have to addict new generations of children. and you will have the surgeon general's report from 2012 in which the surgeon general says that they continue today to engage in that same behavior of targeting replacement smokers. that is what they look at them as. they do not look at them as kids, but replacements, so that they can continue to fill their pockets with that ill-gotten gains, that gold that they so, so much want. i think it was stalin who said that one death is a tragedy, and a million deaths is a statistic. he was wrong. every death, every one of those 430,000 a year was a human being, a wife, a husband, a wife, a father, a child, a cousin, a friend, a member of the community. each one of those deaths was a tragedy. i'll tell you, perry baker was certainly no statistic. he may have been just one person in this entire world, but he was the one person who meant the world to shirley baker. and you are going to have an opportunity today to let the world know what it was that perry baker meant to shirley baker, because you are not going to be asked to put a value on a life. that is not what you are asked to do. that is something you cannot do. but what you are going to be, and the job that you have is to balance the harm, and the harm that was done to shirley baker as a result of the horror of finding out that her husband had lung cancer and having to go through that treatment and the radiation and the trip out there to san diego. and you heard about what happened on the way back, and to sit there and to see this healthy man, this big, robust man. and you saw the pictures. you will have them to take back with you, and you will get a chance to see it -- and to see him whither on the vine and to die in front of her, and that helpless feeling that there was nothing that she could do about it. so your job is to measure that loss that -and to recognize what it was that happened and what it is that has been missing from her life for these past 20 years. and shirley is 83, but you saw her up on the stand. she is a healthy, spry person. and so you are going to be able to evaluate that continued loss in the future. because you heard that perry baker was shirley's one and only. she never had a serious boyfriend before him. in 45 years, 43 years of marriage, there is been nobody since then that can fill his shoes or even try to fill his shoes. you know, the love of a husband and wife is the force that holds our families and our societies together. it is one of the -- one of the very few familial relationships where choice is involved, where people seek each other out and they come together. you do not get to choose who your parents are, you do not get to choose what kids you have that share your dna. you do get to choose your spouse and you get to come together and you realize, and you heard that from shirley, how different they were. but when they came together, when they left their parents, it says in the book, they came together and became one. what becomes one, no corporation should be able to tear apart the way that this corporation tore shirley baker in half. you got a glimpse into their life that they had, the trips that they took as a family and how important family was to perry baker and to shirley. you saw the pictures at dinner -deputy clerk: an hour and 30 minutes. mr. domnick: thank you. you saw -- you got an opportunity to see the pictures and the pictures are in evidence. you can just see that. look at the love that was there and you remember shirley baker talking about how she did not like to go fishing, but that she learned to love to go fishing because she got to spend time with her husband, and how her husband was not a dancer, but she loved to go dancing so he became a dancer. and is not that what love is all about? sacrifice? so that can you make the other one happy? and by her being happy, by him being happy together, together they are happy. that is what everyone seeks out. that is what they had, the love that they shared. there are not going to be any more pictures of shirley with perry baker, her husband. there have not been for the last 20 years. every picture is missing something. and, you know, you hear about love and loss and you think about the really big things in life that are there. you heard about, for example, what shirley had to go through alone with bruce as he battled depression and ultimately died from cancer himself, all alone without her husband to lean on, that terrible, terrible thing she had to endure by herself. but it is not just those big events, the weddings and the births and all of that. that is easy to understand. it is the everyday things that you miss so much. and you heard her, i asked her about it, what is it that you miss? she said, i miss the hugs. i miss him coming home and hugging me, me coming home and him giving me a hug. it is the holding of a hand as you sit on the couch next to each other, as you walk in through the aisle of the supermarket together and someone to talk to at dinner, as opposed to having the tv or a cat as your constant companion. it is a protector. it is knowing that when you lay down at night and there is a noise in the house, that perry is going to get up and find out what it is, that he is her knight in shining armor. to love her, it is her partner, through the good times and the difficulties of life. that is what shirley baker and perry baker had and that is what is been lost. you know, they say time heals all wounds. that is not true. time puts a little scab over the wound, but then what happens is the time wounds all the heals. something happens. every silver cloud in their life has a dark lining. every big event you look at the picture and somebody is missing, you turn to share it with perry and he is gone. he is not there. so every good event, every good moment, loss is associated with it. all good times are intertwined with the bad times. there is loneliness when you lay down in bed at night and shirley is alone, when she wakes up in the morning and shirley is alone. there is nothing worse than loneliness. you are going to be asked, if we can, if we put the elmo up, please, what is the amount of any damages sustained in the past or to be sustained in the future by shirley baker for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and her mental pain and suffering as a result of his lung cancer and death. i talked to you a little bit about it. your job is not to sympathize, but your job is to understand the loss. and then your job is to measure that loss. and how is it that you do that? there are a couple of factors that you have to look at. one is, how bad was the harm, how much does it hurt and how long was it? you know, you talk about there are small injuries of short duration. i might have to ask a jury for 50 or $75,000. small injury that lasts for a long, long time, years and years, that might be something where we would ask for 200 or $300,000. a medium injury for a short time period might be something where we ask for 6 or $700,000. medium jury for a long time period, that might be a range of a million to $2 million that we would have to ask for. sometimes you have big injuries over -but they only last for a short time and the person gets better, a couple of years of a catastrophic injury, that might be something where you are talking about 2 to $4 million for these types of human damages. because what are things? things are things. things can be replaced. love and people cannot be replaced. that is what is in the end is the most important thing. at the end of the day, when you are lying on your last bed, nobody says, i wish i had more things. they say, i wish i lived a little bit better, i wish i loved a little bit more, i wish i was with my family a little bit more. those are the things that matter. and so when you are talking about a death, that is the ultimate injury. for shirley it has been so long. it is been 19 years and it continues each and every day. so it is the largest injury over the longest period of time. in a case like that, the loss, the measure of that harm is between 8 to $10 million. we talked about this back in jury selection, about the fact that this was a case of big harm. and every one of you promised that if the evidence showed you the magnitude of that harm and the law allowed for it, that you would render a verdict that balanced that. well, in this case, the evidence has shown and the law allows it, i think the law demands that the harm be balanced with the measure of 8 to $10 million for the losses to shirley. if the number is great, it is because the loss is so great. and the amount that you put on there will validate the magnitude of their love because the loss becomes a mirror image of the love. and you have seen how great their love was and is. in addition, you are going to have a rare opportunity as representatives of the community to come together and take a stand to fight for what is right. that is not something that we often get to do. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. outside the scope. let us talk about the issues, sir. mr. domnick: yes, sir. you have a chance yourselves to send a message to make history -mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: excuse me? mr. belasic: objection. may we approach? the court: yes. (the following sidebar conference was held out the hearing of the jury:) mr. belasic: he is taking a stand to make history -- he is taking a stand to make history suggests it goes way beyond the evidence and your instructions on punitive damages. it is not -- it is it not to make some historical contribution to the united states; it is not limited -the court: just -mr. belasic: -- of this case. the court: i'm sorry. it is not historical context or in terms of overall world, but the conduct of this defendant and the conduct they have done, so not some other -- you are not doing that. you are asking -- you are talking about history, okay? talk about this case and this party. mr. domnick: yes, your honor. (sidebar conference concluded.) mr. domnick: this company, r.j. reynolds that has literally sowed the tobacco seeds of death in their lust for money, you have roles as the members of this community, in fact, its conscience, to send a message to these types of manufacturers of products to folks, to companies that lie and deceive and kill for money. the talk about money -- and we talked about that in opening statement -- began, not when perry baker died, not when this lawsuit was brought, but it began 60 years ago, when these companies got together, when r.j. reynolds got together and said, make the choice -- made the choice. make no mistake about it. it was a knowing choice by them to come together to lie and to deceive. and that is the choice they have made every, single day of perry baker's smoking life. and, you know, the purpose is to punish and deter, to punish them for what they have done and to deter this type of conduct in the future. and make no mistake about it, nothing about them has changed. they have not changed. they have not changed. they have not changed. and you saw that. you know, i talked to you about the way-back machine in opening statement, with an idea of looking at what it was that perry baker was exposed to and the community that he was in, and how everybody smoked. we had a glimpse of the way-back machine from dr. eth, who even today is saying the same things. we played that dr. heimann thing, where he is sitting there back in the late 1980s, saying, the surgeon general is not right. science is wrong. casting the doubt they know they have to do, that is their stock in trade where they said that they knew they had to provide the crutch that is there, that they had to create the illusion, and that they had to create doubt in folks' mind. and they estimated that the pressure, in one of the documents that is in evidence, would exceed $50 million a year. we know -mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: excuse me. is this -mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. you can go ahead. mr. domnick: and we know from their own internal documents that doubt is our product -doubt is our product, since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public; it is also the means of establishing a controversy. that is what they started out on 50 years ago, and what they have engaged in each and every day. and you saw it from dr. heimann when they came up with the surgeon general's report in 1988, continuing to throw those doubts, cast the seeds of doubt out there, because they knew it was a crutch for the addicted smoker. and dr. eth, here today or yesterday or a -last week -- things kind of run together -- that dr. eth is doing the same thing with the surgeon general's reports even today, with science, even today with his own american psychiatric association. and on direct examination, he was so proud of being a member, but on cross-examination, i said, well, this is what they said, and he said, no, no, no, no. nothing has changed. nothing has changed. there is only one thing, only one thing that can get them down the path to change, and that is a small group of our community coming together and -was it the movie network, where they stuck their head out the window and said, i'm mad as hell, and not going to take it anymore? be mad as hell. do not take it anymore. punish them. deter them. thank you. mr. domnick: thank you. i listened to that and i'm reminded of that old sonny and cher song, as the beat goes on. i do not do it very well, but it is the same story that has not -mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. i'm going to allow it. mr. domnick: it has not changed. the tobacco companies are saying the same thing. you just heard two hours of excuses for nicotine addiction, excuses for what all they have done. and sitting up here saying the 430,000 or 440,000 people that die every year, the 20 million-plus that have died from this and the countless scores more who have been ill and had their lives horribly affected by it, nicotine does not have anything to do with it, it is all about choice. these poor people. it is just them. they wanted to smoke themselves to death. it is the same. it is the same. it is the same. you have seen that. you have heard it with your own eyes and your own ears. i'll tell you, we talked about this in jury selection. just because they are allowed to sell cigarettes, they say it is a legal product is not a part of the lawsuit. i talked about that with each one of you in jury selection. all of you said that if you determine under the law that as the court reads to you and under the evidence that their actions caused this harm, this terrible harm, that the concept of legal would not be a bar to it. you know what? here is something i tell my kids; it is what somebody needs to tell the cigarette companies: just because you can do something does not mean that you should do it. right is right and wrong is wrong. and they have been doing wrong for so long and causing so much harm and so much death and so much destruction in the wake. today is the day. now is the time and you are the people to send a message. no more. no more. the surgeon general's report, they say that they have changed. go to the 2012 surgeon general report. read it where it says adolescent young adult initiation rates for cigarette smoking have been stable over the past five years. this finding is consistent with the idea that tobacco companies are successfully targeting young people in advertising and promotion efforts to attract new smokers and they want to say they are somehow different. manufacturers of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products spend a great deal of money to market their products in the united states, the report says at page 507. efforts to constrain marketing by tobacco companies appear to have had the opposite effect. total expenditures on marketing for cigarettes rose in the years following the implementation of the constraints as these companies changed their strategies in response. they are chameleons that fit into the corners every chance they can get. and i will tell you this, that it does not say that the fda regulates what they do and regulates what they put in there. it says they have the power. but they have not done it and they will marshal, as we know it happens in the political process. mr. belasic: objection. the court: sustained. get to the evidence in the case. mr. domnick: according to the surgeon general's report, at page 508 in 2012, cigarette marketing refutes, youth to smoke and that the major cigarette companies know it. cigarette marketing, which includes both advertising and promotion is designed to play a key role in the process of recruiting new young members. that is them, r.j. reynolds, that is what they do today. that is what they have been doing. it is what they must do if they are to survive as a company and to survive as an industry because we know it, that only kids, people, under the age of 20, 95 percent of smokers by that age. if they do not successfully target them, people once they get into their 20s, do not pick them up. the industry dies on the vine if they do not go after the kid. they have not changed. the cigarettes today, surgeon general's report from 2010, the way tobacco is grown, mixed and processed today has made cigarettes more addictive than ever before. it is more of the same. the song remains the same, it comes from them. they have not changed. the defects that this jury found, the lies, the fraud, the conspiracy, the negligence, the defect in the cigarettes, their cigarettes today that they market and sell are in no material way different than the cigarettes that they have been marketing and selling that have been killing so many people. it is the same, they are the same. they need to be punished, they need to be deterred. let us talk a little bit about the verdict form. you have got it there in front of you. each one of you has it. was he addicted to cigarettes -- was elmer baker addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? you saw cls024. the amount of evidence on the issue of addiction and the cause of that in this case in that perry baker was addicted to nicotine, and addiction to nicotine was a cause of his death is overwhelming. i am very, very glad they brought up richard baker and said to you, trust richard baker on this type of an issue because this is what richard baker testified to. if you recall, when dr. eth was on the stand, i asked him the question, because we went through what the family members think about addiction and what the person thinks is an important factor. and i said, did you see any evidence of addiction? i did not see anything in there. then we went to richard baker's testimony. the question was asked of him: did your mother ever tell you that she thought your dad was addicted to cigarettes? the answer was, yes. when did she tell you that? the answer was constantly. from -- question: from the very get-go, you mean, as long as you can remember? and then the answer was, as far back as i can remember, you know, i mean, it was a problem. she knew it. i guess she knew deep down inside we all knew it. deputy clerk: counsel, 10 minutes left. mr. domnick: that is richard baker. everybody in the family. you heard from todd baker as well. you heard from todd baker as well that his dad said, i cannot kick these damn things, i'm addicted to it. it is okay. it is all right. we remembered the testimony. i cannot kick these damn things, i'm addicted to it. and then they asked him, i want to be very clear, did your dad tell you that he was addicted to these things? he said, absolutely yes. the overwhelming testimony in this case was that he was addicted to cigarettes and that that was the cause and that that was why he could not stop. and dr. eth, i asked him this question about does nicotine always have a role in smoking behavior. he said, it has a role, it always has a role. nicotine had a role in his smoking in the '80s, i asked him? he said, yes. it had a role in him smoking in the '70s, i asked him? he said, yes. it had a role in him smoking in the '60s? he said, yes. it had a role with him smoking in the '50s? he said, yes. and the nicotine being in those cigarettes made it harder for him to quit? and their own expert said yes. dr. rosen, they talked about. what dr. rosen said on the issue of addiction and the ability to quit, he said, absolutely, absolutely, perry baker was addicted to cigarettes. and when they said, does anyone -- everyone who is addicted to nicotine who tries to quit smoking, is everyone successful? and he says, a minority of people are successful. very few people are successful. generally speaking, they cannot stop. so the addiction and the testimony is overwhelming. you will have the reports back there from the surgeon general and all of those others to talk about what it is that addiction does and how bad it is and how tough it is to quit. we know it is so tough because look how many people -- look what dr. eth said, that it kills more than alcohol, cocaine, heroin, homicide, car accidents, fire and aids and suicide combined. and they want to say it is not dangerous like heroin; it kills so many more people. it is not dangerous like cocaine; it kills so many, many, many more people. now, when you look at the jury instruction with regard to causation, you will see that more than one thing can be a cause. comparative negligence, that is mr. baker's comparative negligence, can be a cause in conjunction with their bad acts. and they can work together and join up. that is why you have the part that says, it can work with some other cause. we have admitted that mr. baker is partially at fault; that he should have, as time went on, tried harder, tried other things when things were not successful, despite the power of addiction that was gripping him. but if his comparative negligence that we had admitted was a legal bar to their actions being a legal cause as well, then we would not be here. the law would prevent us from doing that. it does not. so that argument is one to put aside and not talk about in this case. so the answer to question 1 is not the question about choice. the answer to question 1 is about addiction. was he addicted? did that play a significant role as the jury -- that the jury instructions talk about? and the overwhelming answer to that is yes. you know, dr. eth, they put him up there to do the same thing they did for so many years, which was to create doubt. we talked about doubt in jury selection, as you recall. and under the burden of proof that we have on this issue, it is okay for you to have a little bit of doubt. in fact, you could have stickies of doubt all over the place -mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. this is argument. i'm going to allow it. deputy clerk: counsel, 5 minutes. mr. domnick: thank you. we still prevail, as long as we carry the greater weight of the evidence, which clearly in this case is. so even if dr. eth has a little bit of "eh" to it, does not seem to be. but if it does, it is so mild in comparison to everything else that is there, the answer to question 1 in this case has to be a resounding yes. we know from the findings in this case that you have to follow that they were negligent, that they -mr. belasic: objection to "you have to follow," your honor. the court: overruled. mr. domnick: that they were negligent, that they committed the fraud, the conspiracy, the defective product, all of those things in this thing. and we know from the death certificate, it is fact, it is stipulated, that it was the smoking of the defective cigarettes that was there that led directly to his death. there is just no doubt about it in this case. smoking caused his death and they have not fought that. in fact, they have, in fact, agreed to it. when you get to questions 2, 3, 4, 5 -- and the answer is going to be yes, because another jury already determined they did these bad acts and that is going to be binding on you when you get to those questions, and they have already stipulated that smoking was a legal cause of his death. so the yes part of that should be fairly easy. with regard to the questions about concealment and conspiracy, please take a look at the jury instruction on this. it is instruction 20, page 20. and look at the second paragraph. what it says is that reliance may be actual reliance or reliance may be inferred. what does that mean? and they said, nobody puts up anything where anybody said anything that they did not say somehow affected perry baker. an act by omission by that is them withholding the truth. of course, nobody sees them withholding the truth. how do you see somebody that does not tell the truth? they did not do that. they told affirmative lies. but before 1982 and afterwards, we saw the videos that were there in 1984 and in 1988 where they were still pedaling the truth. i asked dr. eth about it. and if you recall, i wanted to be very clear with him where i said, dr. eth, their failure to tell the truth, and he acknowledged that they lied in 1994. and that was with regard to both of the addictive nature and the harm of it. and i asked him, well, they needed to tell the truth because without telling the truth, that creates the crutch for the addict? and we went through that, and he agreed with that and he agreed their failure to tell the truth, along with their lies, affects an addict and it gives the crutch that makes it so much harder for them to quit. that is what happened in this case. and it is -- they talk about what is out there. a lie, it is said, makes it halfway around the world before the truth gets its shoes on. and when the lies are outspending the truth 365 to 1, 365 to 1, that is from the cdc, you have seen that, it is not like what happens in here where you have the opportunity -- they can make it look like there is an equal amount of information going on out there and an equal amount of things being pushed out on the undersuspecting public, that is not the way it is. they drown everything out. they drown it out. they drown it out. deputy clerk: counsel, one minute left. mr. domnick: they want you to believe their advertising does not have anything at all to do with it. why would they spend $250 billion if their advertising was not making a big difference? use your common sense with regard to that. with regard to the percentage of responsibility, perry baker started smoking in the navy when he was a kid. by the time anything came out, he was so -- he was addicted. they sat down and intentionally set forth on a pattern of lies and untruths, and their choices were knowing choices on a daily basis for many, many, many years to try and equate perry baker's fault in this case with the death of -- the depravity of their fault and wrongdoing makes no sense. it is 4 to 1. it is ninety percent/ten percent in this case. and with regard to the damages, one final thing, the last one we talked about, why it is that punitive -the court: do wrap it up. mr. domnick: i need to be done. i have one last thing. that is out there. and any subsequent thing on that would be done in a very short time period. with regard to the damages in this case, you have seen the quality of the love. they have referred to shirley baker as "this woman." she is not "this woman." she is shirley baker and she dearly loved her husband. there is a poem by edna st. vincent melay, i think, that says so much about what happens when you lose somebody close to you. it is called, time does not bring relief. you all have lied -- and it goes something like this: "time does not bring relief. you all have lied. who told me time would ease me of my pain? i miss him in the weeping of the rain. i want him at the shrinking of the tide. the old snows melt from every mountainside and last year's leaves are smoked in every lane. the last year's loving must remain heaped on my heart and my old thoughts abide. there are a hundred places where i fear to go so with his memory they brim. and entering with the leaves some quiet place where never felt his foot or shun his face i say, there is no memory of him here and so sand stricken, so remembering him." and that is love and that is loss and i implore you to do justice. thank you.