mr. reid: it is still morning. good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. reid: not only do i get to go second, it seems like every day i get to go just before lunch. so i apologize about that. we will do the best we can, though. might want to write something on this in a minute. that'll work. let me start first by thanking you also. you know, lawyers usually do not get to be on juries, but i've been told by people who have been on the juries that it is remarkable when you get back there, one of you will remember these facts, another of you will remember this fact, and even without your notes, you will discover that jointly, you will remember everything, and that is why the www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1737 system works, and that is why i told you in the beginning that i fully support and believe this is the best way to resolve these kinds of disputes. so, but it requires your time. and you all agreed when we talked during voir dire last week that you did not mind being asked to resolve this dispute. and as you can see, there is a serious issue here, a serious dispute, a serious case to both parties. so i would like to talk a little bit about what the evidence has shown, and i would like to start by reminding you of something i said in the beginning, and that is that regardless of everything that you have heard, this case first and foremost is about mr. ballard, it is mr. ballard's case. now, there may be some disagreement, if you remember -- may i see number 1, please. in the beginning, counsel said, "i do not have to prove anything that defendants said or did that had any impact on mr. ballard. so i do not have to prove that he relied on any statement that they made." well, as a result, the vast majority of the www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1738 evidence that you have heard from the plaintiff in this case has been what i'll call generic evidence. some examples. and we will talk about these in more detail. dr. henningfield, for instance, he never heard -- he never met mr. ballard. he did not know anything about mr. ballard. he did not know anything about his smoking, his -- all he knew about was generic ideas about addiction. if you think about the documents, remember, there was -- there were about four hours spent showing you a lot of different documents, and not a single one had anything to do with mr. ballard, not a single one. in fact, virtually none of those documents had anything to do with my client, of the potentially millions of documents that are available, you heard somebody talking about there being this computer base -- you can take that down. this computer system with a lot of documents. out of that, you only saw, and you will go back, you look, 27 documents, that is all, that related to my client, and that includes the other two companies that are now part of reynolds, brown & williamson and american. but the point is there is nothing in those www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1739 documents, there are no words in those documents, there were no words in the depositions that you heard on the video from the plaintiff that had anything to do with mr. ballard. in fact, if you think about the products that he smoked that were manufactured for my client, winston, for instance, there are not any documents about that brand in all of the documents that were put into evidence. now, we saw something in opening that disappeared. you remember the -- mr. alvarez had a slide that showed this old tv show of time travel, and remember there was a tunnel and people going in, and he said i'm going to talk to you about what happened. well, that is changed because now what he is asked you to do, in effect, is to take the level our knowledge today about smoking and health and to apply it to decisions and statements and things people did in the '50s. and i'm going to demonstrate that to you in a little bit in more detail. that is what you have to think about. these documents were all written at a different time and a different place with a different understanding. so you were -- you get to www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1740 be the judges. and if you look at documents, you get to decide if somebody wrote something that was stupid or that you cannot explain, knowing what we know today, you have to decide what did they know when they wrote it? and i'm going to talk about some of that as we go through. i would submit that all of the documents that were in have really nothing to do with this case, nothing to do with this case, because this case is about whether mr. ballard was addicted and whether it was an addiction or a choice to smoke that drove his smoking decisions, and that is what the case is about. now, i want to talk about these findings that you have heard something about. remember, i told -- miss furness when she spoke to you in opening and when i spoke to you during voir dire, i told you nobody from reynolds is going to come in and make any objection or disagreement or anything about those findings. but you heard literally hundreds of -- well, four hours, hundreds of documents, that dealt with trying to prove that smoking causes cancer and that smoking is addictive. today, think about of all the clips that you saw, how often did you see a www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1741 clip that was shown to you to try to prove to you that smoking causes cancer? remember the list of cancer -- carcinogenic substances? there was kind of a little trick there, you might say, not -- i do not mean that in a bad way. the letter said there -- we do not know of anything in the amounts in which they appear in tobacco smoke that cause cancer, and then he listed the things that appear, and there are thousands of chemicals when you burn a piece of broccoli, much less when you burn a tobacco plant, so those are the kinds of things you are going to have to deal with as we go through. but as to the findings, i told you and it is come true, nobody on our side has contested those findings. those findings were made by a different jury. could we see number 2? that jury, the case was called engle, and it was tried here in this courthouse. they did not hear any evidence about mr. ballard. they do not mention him. they do not decide any issues about mr. ballard. they do not decide whether he relied on anything we said. do not decide whether he was injured. do not establish whether we were www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1742 responsible for any of his actions or choices. if you think about it, the findings -- if the findings dealt with mr. ballard, we would not need you to be here. you are here because those findings left an important part for you to decide, and that is whether this individual, not a generic person, whether this individual smoked by choice or not, whether this individual was aware of the risks of smoking, none of that was decided. none of that was decided. so the findings do not answer the question, notwithstanding what you might have thought or heard this morning, or think about how many times, how many pieces of evidence, how much testimony the plaintiffs have put on to convince you that smoking causes cancer or that smoking is addictive. that was completely unnecessary, because i -- we told you at the beginning, and i'm telling you again now, that is not in dispute. this case is about mr. ballard. now, i'll go over the questions on the verdict form, but i've sort of organized the evidence that i would like to talk to you about in this manner. and the first question is whether mr. ballard is a member of the class. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1743 and the judge will tell you that when you were asked the question about addiction, it is really two questions rolled into one. the first is was he addicted to cigarettes. the second question is was the addiction that caused him to develop the cancer, that caused him to smoke and develop the cancer, or was it choice. the second -- the second group of things i would like to talk about is his awareness. was he aware that there was a risk associated with smoking? and finally, did we do or say anything that he relied on or that caused him to make the decisions that he made. now, nothing from dr. henningfield can answer those questions, because he did not know mr. ballard. nothing from the corporate depositions of reynolds people can answer those questions. nothing from anybody that you heard from can answer those questions except for mr. ballard. that is why you are here, to answer those questions about mr. ballard. now, the plaintiff talked about the burden of proof. and he told you -- he gave you an example of a rice bowl. two children, you want to split the rice, you have got some rice in this bowl, you have www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1744 got some rice in this bowl, and in order to give one a little more, you take one little teaspoon out and put it over here. that is not what this is all about. the plaintiff has the complete and total burden. the clearer way to say it would be one person has an empty rice bowl and in order to balance it and get past the other person's, you have to fill it up a little bit and then get a little more. it is not that the plaintiff has to prove a tiny little thing to win the case. that is what the suggestion was to you. and, you know, he said the scales tip slightly. well, the scales start on the bottom for the plaintiff in this case, and the plaintiff has the burden to bring those scales up and then to surpass. so that is the burden of proof, and that is why he goes first and last and as the judge told you and so forth. and what is the burden? the burden is to establish some connection between what my client did and mr. ballard. now, i wanted to draw something, i'm a terrible artist, but i was trying to think something that would make this clear, i was thinking about -- i thought about this when i was www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1745 driving across one of the causeways, if you can imagine this is -- this is miami, and this is the beach. and in order to get across, you need, what, a bridge. or causeway, but let us say you need a bridge. i'll try to draw a bridge here, if i can. does that look like a bridge? now, here in town that is called the macarthur or tubb or different things, but what i'm going to call it is the bridge of causation. and over here is mr. ballard and over here is his claim of causation -- or rather addiction and cause of addiction and so forth. mr. ballard has to get across this bridge. and you know what the bridge here is? it is evidence. so i'm going to keep referring to the bridge. does mr. ballard have evidence in this case that connects mr. ballard with the claims he is making in this case? can he cross the bridge of causation with the evidence that he has? now, one other thing, i want you to recall that the plaintiff's entire case, this question of class membership, is based on an assumption that mr. ballard is addicted. they want you to believe based on the evidence they put in with dr. henningfield and some of the documents they put www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1746 in yesterday, i think, from the nida and surgeon general and so forth, they really want you to believe that mr. ballard was completely trapped to an unwanted life of smoking, that he had no ability to control his decision about smoking. mr. alvarez: objection, improper standard, judge, improper proof. the court: well, no, he is commenting on what he believes you want them to believe. overruled. mr. reid: well, let us move on. let us see what they put into evidence. let us look at slide 6. this came from dr. henningfield and from the nida document, and basically, it said that an addicted person jumps out of bed with a cigarette, suffers through or leaves activities where smoking is not permitted. smoke in excess of a pack a day. cannot concentrate when smoking. cannot do a job when not smoking. often relapses. within hours of -- this is from the nida document that he showed you this morning, i think, within hours of cessation, irritability, craving, depression, anxiety, cognitive and attention deficits, sleep disturbances, increased appetite. that is the evidence they put in to demonstrate to you what the generic addicted smoker is. none www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1747 of that applies to mr. ballard, not a single one. now, i realize we had a little disagreement about jumping out of bed. mr. ballard testified that he went in, made his coffee, and he did not smoke when he was still in the bed. there has been some suggestion that maybe he did, but the point is none of that applies to mr. ballard. and that is the standard that they have given you in this case through their experts. that is the generic evidence, that is not mr. ballard. so i would like to go to the first question i'll talk about, and that is whether or not mr. ballard is a member of the class, and specifically, let us talk about addiction. now, we talked about this during the voir dire, you may remember. most of you, i asked the question, and i think everybody in the room raised their hands. i said at that point in time, without knowing anything else, if a person smoked a pack a day for 50 years, would you believe that person was addicted. and you know what, you all raised your hand. now, the difference now is that you know more. you know now that no one says that you can identify addiction solely, solely by knowing how much and www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1748 how long a person smokes, that it is a complicated question of personal behavior. now, we know, for instance, over the years that the definition of addiction has changed. i made this little chart to kind of show you what happened back in the -- you know, we showed you the chart from the king and john quincy adams, they were calling things addictive way back, but in '64 the supreme court -- the surgeon general, rather, said it is a habit, it is not addictive. and then in '88, they changed the definition and said, well, now we are going to take away the intoxication requirement, and since then it is been called addictive, and that -- as you know, that is what my company now abides by that definition. but the difference is, even though you changed the words, the behavior never changed. think about this. if a person had been evaluated, somebody came in and did a complete evaluation, such as dr. phillips did in this case, in 1964, they might say, well, there is no addiction. but if you do the same thing in 1988, they would say there is addiction, because the definition changed. that is why you cannot just decide this case by saying you smoked a lot, a long time, must be www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1749 addicted, because that is not always had the same meaning. for instance, can we see the next slide? this is from the '64, and it talked about the two differences, we showed you this yesterday, the difference between addiction and habit. and that was the definition that was used by the world health organization, it was used at the time, when you read these early documents that counsel is talking about, some of the early things written by the various companies, this was what everybody agreed was the definition and the correct definition. now he comes in and says, well, back in 1960, you did not say it was addictive, and you need to apply the 1988 standard back in 1960. that is what he is asking you to do in this case. that is what he is asking you to do. even dr. henningfield and plaintiff's expert agreed that people who smoke a lot for a long time are not all addicted. that means you take a smoker, you know how much they smoked, you know how long they smoked, and starting there, we know that some of those people might be addicted and some of those people might not be addicted. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1750 your job in this case is to decide which category mr. ballard falls into. because we all agree, smoking a lot for a long time does not mean you are addicted. so you have to decide which case. now, their evidence was brought in without any reference to mr. ballard. mr. ballard, for the first time after he filed this lawsuit, and came in and testified, for the first time in this courtroom, he said he thought he was addicted, even though he had never said that before and nobody else had ever said that about him before or you would have heard it. that is the first time. dr. henningfield told you he could decide if somebody was addicted by knowing two things, when do you smoke the first cigarette, and how much -- how many do you smoke? is that common sense? one of the things the judge does not instruct you, but it is clear when you go back in that room, you get to take your common sense with you. does it really make common sense? if that were the case, virtually everybody would be addicted. and that was all he said, generic, he is generic, he knows nothing about mr. ballard. he talk -- counsel talked about the fagerstrom www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1751 test today. well, the fagerstrom test, as you heard, is not used to identify or to diagnose, it is used to determine -- if somebody is addicted, it is to determine the depth of the addiction so that you can do research about it. you heard dr. cooke make it very clear. if the fagerstrom test really was the test, dr. henningfield would have met mr. ballard, given him the fagerstrom test, and then come in so he could talk to you about mr. ballard. he did not do that. mr. alvarez tried to do the test, remember on the board with dr. phillips, and dr. phillips said, well, i think that is a two, and he said, well, let us give him a three. you also heard you could smoke two cigarettes a day and still be considered dependent under that test. and the suggestion that he waited 22 years, well -- that dr. phillips waited 22 years to do the dsm, well, dr. henningfield, mr. alvarez, they did the fagerstrom, attempted to do it. the bottom line is it is used for research, and it is not the only answer. now, i'm not going to tell you that it does not have some value, just like i'm not going to tell you that dsm. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1752 from the plaintiffs, you have a real absolutism, they say the dsm cannot ever be used and the fagerstrom is the only test to use. except dr. henningfield said the only test he uses is the two questions. what i'm saying is all of these tests have to be used in conjunction with the person you are testing. imagine if you went to a doctor and the doctor took one blood sample and did not ask you about any of your other symptoms, and came back and said, well, you are okay because this one blood sample, even though you had all these other symptoms, all these other symptoms. that is how you have to decide. you have to look at the patient, and then you have to use these tests or these -- these devices as appropriate. and that is all that language that he was reading from dsm, that is all that says, you have to be careful. and nobody came in here and said all i did, dr. phillips did not come in here and say all i did was look at the dsm, do a calculation, and come up with a conclusion. that is not what he did. and we will talk about him in a minute. but that is -- their evidence is generic, it is www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1753 not about this case. it does not prove cause. it does not go across the bridge. and you are going to hear that a lot today, because most of their evidence does not go across that bridge. they try to convince you that it is -- that it is addictive because they say, well, nicotine is the same as hard drugs or alcohol. let me see the next slide. now, you know that is not the truth, and you know he was not even asked a question about this, there was no cross-examination. this shows you the difference in various activities. and you can get an idea of what effect it has on the brain. nicotine is like caffeine, it is -- other things. and then the next slide shows compared to other substances. so you can say, you can say they are similar because they both have -- they both operate the same way. remember, the dr. phillips example of the house plugging in? one thing plugs in, you need a lot of power; one thing plugs in, you do not need much power. well, that is what it is, but they both work from plugging in. so you would say they are similar. well, in this case, the brain has the same www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1754 function, it acts the same way, but there is a big difference in what happens to you, and you know from your common sense that withdrawal from nicotine is nothing like withdrawal from the dts in alcohol and from withdrawal of other hard drugs. but they want you to believe it is the same so then you will jump to the conclusion, without more, without any evidence about mr. ballard, that he is addicted. and that was their evidence and that is all of their evidence. mr. ballard smoked a lot. he smoked a long time, a lot of cigarettes, must be addicted, and that is all they think -- remember the first slide, they do not have to show that anything we did. so now let us talk about the evidence that we offer. we do not have any burden, we do not have to offer any evidence, but we did. and you heard from an expert witness, from dr. phillips. and, number one, counsel's attacks on dr. phillips, when he said he is never treated any patient for nicotine addiction, he said that. then later when he said it, he said -- and i do not know if you caught the change in the sentence, he is never treated anybody exclusively for nicotine dependence. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1755 well, you heard dr. phillips say people do not usually go to a psychiatrist if their only complaint is smoking, is addiction to nicotine. but he has treated thousands of people, thousands of people, in jails, in criminal hospitals, with the other problems who also have addiction. it is completely false to say that dr. phillips has never treated anybody for nicotine addiction. he is a clinical doctor. he also does forensic evaluations for the justice department, for the secret service, for cases like this, but the bottom line is dr. phillips came in and he told you what he did. now, what did he do? well, he read every single piece of paper that exists in this case about this, to learn everything he could learn about mr. ballard. nobody from their side did that. and then what did he do? he interviewed mr. ballard for two hours. for two hours. and he learned more about mr. ballard. and his conclusion was in part based on the dsm. and the dsm said that, as a baseline, the first thing you have to establish is does -- it requires that there be a clinically-significant impairment or distress. and that helps establish www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1756 the threshold for diagnosis of a dependence disorder. now, what did you hear about that today? well, first you heard from the plaintiff that this is totally irrelevant, you should never use it, that the four volumes that they have put out over the years, that the entire american psychiatric association, every medical doctor who deals with they cannot use that if they are ever going to come to court. well, you know who you heard about dsm first from in this case who talked about that very description? do you remember? dr. henningfield. dr. henningfield understands that that is a legitimate device that would assist a doctor in making a determination. now we have -- that was a long time ago. you probably do not remember that dr. henningfield talked -- he talked about fagerstrom, he talked about dsm, none of which related to mr. ballard, by the way, he just talked about them as methods. and yet the position now is forget dsm, it is totally irrelevant. that is not a realistic. but the most important thing is it goes back to what i said a minute ago, you do not take the blood sample and www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1757 ignore the rest of the patient's history if you are a good doctor. and what you find is dr. phillips used this and he used all the available information, and these were his findings about mr. ballard. and we are going to talk about these, because you heard a lot of this evidence in this courtroom also about mr. ballard. and based on that, dr. phillips reached the conclusion that there was not evidence of a clinically-significant impairment. so he did not just take -- in fact, he did not -- i'm not sure if he showed you or not, but if you look at that dsm, it also says you cannot use the dsm like a cookie-cutter method, you cannot just go in and check off three things and say, well, addicted or not addicted depending on how many points you get. it is required that you have some clinical experience. so you are going to have to compare the only two experts you heard in this case about addiction were dr. phillips and dr. henningfield. and let us see what -- how they compare. which one was a medical doctor? by the way, there is no doubt that www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1758 dr. henningfield is an excellent researcher, an excellent academic about the subject matter of substance, dependence, and so forth. i'm not saying he is not. but remember, we agree that smoking is addictive. so the only thing left is is this gentleman addicted and was it caused by addiction or his choice. if you had a physical problem, would you rather go to a great researcher who has read lots of papers and who does laboratory work and all that and never sees a patients or treats a patient in his life; or would you rather go to somebody who is a licensed psychologist, who treats patients, who treats patients, who talked to the patient, who found what the patient's situation was and reviewed it all? dr. phillips did all of that, dr. henningfield did none. i would submit to you that when we get to -- when you get to the verdict form on that first question, the answer to whether or not mr. ballard is addicted should be no. now, i told you there were two parts to that first question. the second part is was addiction the cause, in other words, right here, is there evidence that carries mr. ballard across the www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1759 bridge. and you have to answer both those questions yes or no, and if your answer to either one of those questions is no, then your verdict is for the defendant. now, let us talk about that question. choice. we have a real clear question here. the plaintiffs say it is addiction. and remember all those signs they gave you about generic addiction, none of which applied to mr. ballard, but that is what they are claiming. our position is that mr. ballard was aware of the risk and he made a choice. so you have to decide which is which. and choice is not something that we made up for this case. as long ago as '77, the surgeon general of the united states called it "a personal choice health behavior." again in '82, "a personal choice behavior such as smoking." and in '86, "the individual smoker must decide," in other words, has to make the choice. so this is -- this is accepted by the public health community that choice is important in evaluating whether there is a causal connection, whether you go across that bridge or not. so the real question is whether a smoker can quit. and dr. henningfield, who does not know about www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1760 mr. ballard, but nonetheless, made all of these admissions in the course of that testimony. he told you about the 60 million who quit, more former smokers, ninety percent quit without formal intervention, some people quit without problem, some people do not want to quit. quit requires motivation. the majority of males eventually quit. the majority of heavy dependent smokers quit over time. so if the question is can you quit, and we are going to talk about whether mr. ballard had the ability to quit and chose not to quit or whether he falls in that category of all those things that you read about in that first slide i showed you, but you cannot answer this question unless you know something about mr. ballard. you cannot answer the question. if you only knew what dr. henningfield knew or what the other witnesses had testified by video, if you only knew what was in those documents, you would not know anything about mr. ballard, and you have to know about mr. ballard. and if you think about it -- i'm going to talk to you about four or five things. i'm going to talk to you about his personality, the reasons he www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1761 smoked, whether he smoked for something -- because of something we did or some other reason, whether he could control his smoking and whether he could quit. those are the topics i want to kind of cover in the evidence. so you met him and you heard him testify and you heard other people testify about him, and these are the types -- these are the things that people have -- either mr. ballard or people that knew him. well, he is not a weak person. and that is the first step. because you could have someone who just personally has problems making decisions, problems being proactive. it is not mr. ballard. and let us look at how he was described. first of all, mr. ballard himself agreed that he would evaluate a situation, decide whether he wanted to take a risk, and take it or not, depending on his evaluation. mr. ballard understood that he was making a choice every time he picked up a cigarette, he was choosing to continue to smoke, and he evaluated the risk, he told you this is how he -- what he does, and you are going to see evidence to that, and he was capable of evaluating the risk, and he made the choice. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1762 now, in this case, his lawyer complains about that choice and says, well, it really was not his choice, he was weak. he did not know smoking was bad at all. except a minute ago, you heard that they are at least admitting that he knew about it in '77. and we will talk some more about that in a minute. but let us look at how people describe him. number 20. that is what mrs. ballard, his current wife, said about him. this all came from the testimony that you have heard, hers was through the deposition that we read. let us move on to the next one, that is his daughter. remember what mr. ballard said to her? "i'm old enough to smoke, do what i want, do not tell me what to do." does that sound like a person who is a weak, captured smoker, who has no ability to put down those cigarettes? hardly. let us see the next one. now we are talking about -- i told you the first thing would be the personality. now, why did mr. ballard smoke? and we asked, mr. ballard said all of these, we did not make them up, we did not lead him. why do you smoke? and he told you. he told www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1763 you he enjoyed it, he liked it. even dr. henningfield agreed that some people smoke because they want to smoke. plaintiff would have you believe that nobody who smokes does it because they want to. that is just not realistic. some people choose to smoke. and you have to decide, again, we are back to this which bucket does mr. ballard come in, is he one of those people who chose and knew the risk or is he one of those people who could not do anything about it because he was so weak? those are the reasons he smoked. let us see the next one. now, let us look at his brand. we know -- you get insight from a lot of ways. you know, you get insight from mr. ballard, from when he testifies, from his family, and so forth, and you observed him on the stand. let us look at his smoking decisions. he told us under oath why he chose various cigarettes. 1942, he saw everybody else doing it and took cigarettes. the first one, a friend recommended he change because the taste was better. then he switched to marlboro or winston, there was a confusion which he did, he did each one of them about the same time. today -- in the court, he may www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1764 have said he thought winston was first, but marlboro was milder than the winston he was smoking, it had a filter. i'm going to talk about filters before i sit down today because there have been some suggestions that are just flat wrong about filters. the cough, and the friend recommended. winston, same thing. and then he switched to vantage because a friend said they were less tar and nicotine, milder taste, cough. he was having a cough, having shortness of breath. so every decision he made -- not every. the last three were all made because of health concerns. it is hard to understand how a person could say i did not think there was anything wrong with cigarettes, yet they are changing cigarettes because of health, which is what we have here. lucky strike, it was taste, but the other ones were all related to health. and that is the evidence that you have seen so far. now we know what mr. ballard was like and we know what -- why he did what he did, and we see that through the smoking, so the next question to ask is what did my client do, what did reynolds do that caused mr. ballard to make smoking decisions? www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1765 and the first thing they try to tell you is advertising. and do you remember last week during those four hours how many different advertisements, you know, doctors, athletes, movie stars, tv, how many ads they put up on that screen and went through them and went through them? and i fully expected, since they put all those up, those generic ads, that sometime in the trial they were going to bring mr. ballard up and say, okay, mr. ballard, which of those ads caused you to switch to luckies? or whatever. they did not even ask him about it. he never said a word about any ad. but we do know what he thinks about ads and we do know, you know, what his philosophy of smoking as it relates to advertising. he told you that he does not pay attention to ads generally. he does not believe everything he sees in them. ads do not have a lot to do with whether he buys a product. when he started smoking, he said he did not rely on any ads, paid any attention, i believe were his words. and let us look at exhibit number 26. this answers the question. "when you saw them," talking about the ads, "you did not pay any attention, you did -- you just www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1766 knew they were there? "i did not do what they said. i did what i wanted to do." does that sound like a weak person? not what they said. "did anything, any ad put out by a tobacco company, an advertisement about cigarettes, print, television, radio, did any of those have anything to do with your decision about smoking?" the answer was "no." that means that all those ads you saw, all this talk about a culture of smoking had nothing -- had no effect on mr. ballard's case, because i can assure you that if mr. ballard had been able to say i smoked because of reynolds' ads, you would have heard it in this case. they did not even ask him that question. they did not even ask you that question. and he told you that he also did not know -- he would never heard of the tobacco institute, the ctr, never heard any -- the frank statement. he did not -- none of that, none of that does anything to help mr. ballard get across the bridge. it is just completely irrelevant to his case. now, it might be relevant to some people's www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1767 cases, there might be some other plaintiff who has a case who can say, oh, yeah, i saw that and i believed it, and that is why i kept smoking. not mr. ballard. not mr. ballard. in fact, i said to him, you know, he is been involved in this case for some time, he is looked at all these documents, he is heard all the arguments, he is seen all the things that his lawyer put in, i said, "you know, knowing everything that you know, is there anything about smoking and health that you now know that you believe was concealed from you originally?" and his answer was, in front of you here in the courtroom under oath, was no. he could not name anything that he now knows that he is learned. they said, well, you cannot know what they withheld. but he knows now all these facts, and he could not name a single thing that he thought ever was withheld from him. and that is because, as you are going to learn in a little bit, he was fully aware of the risks of smoking and the risks of addiction. now, i told you i was going to mention control. mr. ballard testified that his average over his life was about a pack a day, during many years of smoking. and that is -- whether it is a www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1768 pack or pack and a half or two, the only importance is that mr. ballard sometimes smoked more and sometimes smoked less. and you heard the testimony about drugs. i forgot which -- whether it was a document or a witness who said, oh, yeah, drugs, hard drugs, tobacco is the same way, you have to have an ever-increasing dosage to satisfy your habit. that is true with a lot of drugs. well, mr. ballard, that was not true. he would smoke more, he would smoke less. he did not smoke the entire cigarette oftentimes. oftentimes he would leave one burning, walk away and never come back. sometimes he would go an entire day and not smoke at all. mr. ballard was in control. mr. ballard also, there were places he could not smoke throughout his life, again. the next slide, please. if you -- if you were this person described by the evidence, this trapped person with no control -- mr. alvarez: objection with regards to no control, it is not the standard. the court: okay, this is closing argument, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1769 ladies and gentlemen. you will follow the law that i give you. mr. reid: i'll tell you about that. the plaintiffs put in evidence and listed all of those withdrawal symptoms, all of those conditions that showed people are not in control. now, they were not able to relate any of those to mr. ballard because he does not fall into the category of an addicted person based on their evidence. their evidence. and so we saw that -- that at night on the patrol, sometimes all night, in church. dr. henningfield said, oh, yeah, they have to get up and leave church, the generic smoker that he talked about. that is not mr. ballard. all of these controls. control of your smoking is relevant to whether or not you can quit. to quit is the ultimate control. we will get to that in a minute. mr. ballard could control his smoking. he did not get up in the middle of the night to smoke, and he did not smoke when he dealt with customers. he did not smoke, based on his testimony under oath in front of you, when he was sitting in the bed first thing in the morning before he got out. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1770 so mr. ballard, the evidence is, and they have not contradicted it, other than the quibble about whether or not he smoked sitting in bed or in the kitchen with his coffee, aside from that, they have not object -- they have not questioned any of that. it all came from mr. ballard's sworn testimony, either i asked the question or he said it in his direct. so now i want to move to the idea of quitting, the quit attempts that mr. ballard made. and, you know, you have some very compelling evidence about what -- the question is whether or not mr. ballard was able to quit. you have the best evidence you could have about that, and that evidence is that he did. he quit. he quit cold turkey. now, mr. ballard, you heard from dr. phillips that motivation is the key. well, you know what? mr. ballard gave you a standard for quitting as well in his testimony. mr. ballard said -- first he said it is not the hardest thing he is ever had to do. but then he said it takes a lot of willpower to lay the cigarette down. it takes willpower? you have to want to quit. you have to be motivated to quit. that is the same testimony that you heard from www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1771 dr. phillips. you cannot quit if you are not motivated. that means did you make a choice and say i'm going to quit and mean it, or did you do 50/50, try a little bit and then go back and try a little bit more? so let us see how mr. ballard's -- how the evidence demonstrates mr. ballard relating to his own standard. by the way, let me say this. if a person comes in in front of a jury to say i was a smoker and it was absolutely impossible for me to quit, i was so addicted, i could not quit for all those years, we will ignore the ultimate quit, my question would be this: "how do you know?" and the person would say, "well, i never tried, so i guess i do not know." if a person never tried to quit, how can they come in to you as a juror and say, even though i never tried, even though i never tried, i'm sure i could not quit. especially when the person did quit in the end. now, mr. ballard even told you he had thought about quitting, he talked to people about quitting. he had given the idea of quitting some -- given the idea some thought. but -- www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1772 let us see 31. but the evidence is undisputed, the sworn testimony. "before this time frame," talking about the '90, '91, "had you ever attempted to quit before?" the answer was, "no," unequivocal, under oath. number two, "had you ever quit before?" answer: "no. "for any period of time at all?" answer: "no." mr. ballard under oath admitted that he never quit or tried to quit. so how can he say to you with credibility i could not quit, i was so captured by addiction, i could not quit, when he would never even tried? now, he did quit finally. and when the day -- when he finally quit, he made the decision, and that was it. let us look at 32. "and when you made the decision to quit, i think in your words, that was it?" answer: " yes." he said -- could we see 33. he even describes it as a habit. when he was asked, "is not it more like a habit than an actual www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1773 strain on you to quit, is that what you believe?" he says, "a combination of both." now, we had this two-year period, plaintiffs argue that, well, it was so hard for him to quit during that two years, that proves he was addicted. well, now you know what he told dr. phillips in the interview, and this was not contested, they did not jump up and cross-examine, mr. alvarez sat through that interview, and he told dr. phillips that during that time when he was -- said he was going to try to quit, he told his wife, during that time, he said he was only about halfway trying or 50 percent trying. so he was not trying, he did not throw away his cigarettes, he did not throw away his ashtray, he did not throw away his matches, he did not break other habits, he did not stop drinking coffee or drinking alcohol during that period. that is why it took a while, because he was not motivated. but the day he smoked his last cigarette, that was the day he was finally motivated. all those days before, he made the choice to keep smoking, because he was not trying very hard by his own admission. but on the day he finally said what you just read, "i decided, and i quit, and that is it." www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1774 and interestingly, the suggestion was made, and you saw the chart, about all of the withdrawal symptoms that you have if you are truly addicted, anxiety, insomnia, and all that. mr. ballard testified that he did not personally feel that he had any change in his personality, and that nobody told him his personality had changed. he said he had no physical problems as a result of quitting. he said it was just as hard to quit coffee as it was to quit cigarettes. which is interesting, if you think back to that chart, cigarette, caffeine, and nicotine were kind of at the same level, compared to hard drugs, but he said it was just as hard for coffee. mrs. ballard said no changes in personality when he quit. the son, ralph ballard, iii, said he did not notice any changes in his dad when he came down to visit and he was now not smoking and his daughter. lisa sims -- lisa ballard-swims, i think, never -- said her dad never complained, he never did. so if you consider his personality, in other words, his ability to quit, the reasons he smoked, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1775 the lack of any connection between reynolds and mr. ballard's choices, the fact that he could control his smoking on a regular -- for his whole life, and finally, that he, when he was finally motivated to quit, by his own agreement, when he was motivated to quit, that is when he quit, he was able to quit. based on all of that, i would respectfully suggest that the answer to whether or not mr. ballard's addiction caused him to develop cancer, as opposed to his choice, the answer is no. and i will talk to you about the verdict form, how that becomes part of your verdict later. now, i want to talk about mr. ballard's awareness of the risks. because today, when the damages were being discussed, for instance, counsel made a line of demarcation, he said after 70 -- until '77, it was entirely the fault of the tobacco company because mr. ballard did not know that smoking was bad for him. it was not until that doctor said in '77, you have spots on your lungs. once you -- once you get there, he says, well, then he is fifty percent at fault and then he came up with that average. so their position is that throughout most was www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1776 his life, mr. ballard was unaware of the risks of smoking and that something that my client did or said concealed from him -- what you have to have for concealment is something he did not know otherwise -- about smoking and health. if he knew it from something else, it cannot be concealed. could we see 35, please. this is the -- this is the finding. the concealment, it says, the finding, "not otherwise known or available," and in a few minutes, excuse my back for a second here, in a few minutes when you look at the verdict, you are going to find out that the judge is going to tell you -- let us see if i can find it here. the court: please tell me which one you are reading from or looking at. mr. reid: yeah, i'm going to get there. the court: when you get it. mr. reid: i'm looking at page 7. the judge is going to tell you if you find that mr. ballard was aware of misstatements or omissions, then he cannot rely on said misstatements or omissions as a cause of his bladder cancer as it applies to concealment, only concealment. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1777 the court: hold on one second. stop the clock. when you say page 7, i want to make sure we are all on the same page. mr. reid: yeah. the court: we went over individualized jury instructions. mr. reid: yeah, well, i was given the -- i thought this was the -- is this -- ms. vieira: that is the conformed copy that plaintiff is going to -- mr. reid: that is the one that you are going to read from. the court: okay. so that is the one i'm reading. mr. reid: yes, sir. the court: not the ones with numbers on it. mr. reid: right. this is it; right? you gave it to him this morning? mr. alvarez: yeah. the court: okay, i want to make sure i had that. mr. reid: sure. so as we talk about concealment, talk about whether mr. ballard was aware, whether he made a judgment about the risks, we need to talk about what did he know. now, i www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1778 made a timeline over here, because it is important for you to understand mr. ballard's entire life. and i had to put it on two boards to cover all the years. okay. i did this so that we could see one place all of the evidence of awareness that you have heard in this trial so far. there is overwhelming evidence that mr. ballard was fully aware of the risks of smoking for virtually his entire life. now, the first thing you would consider, perhaps when you are talking about getting information about risks, is direct personal information, not something you read somewhere, but it is stuff that would affect a normal person. and we know that way back when mr. ballard was in the fourth grade, he took a health class. and yesterday, we showed you, if we could see the slide 36, this is what was required to be taught in florida public schools in the year '33 when he would have been in elementary school. and it was specifically required to teach is avoid -- avoid cigarettes or other forms of tobacco. so as early as 1933, mr. ballard's in a class in florida where the state requires that they teach people the problems, the risks associated with www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1779 smoking or tobacco. he heard that it was dirty, but he said it was mostly your teeth that got dirty. when he got into the service, he started smoking in '42, he had discussions with friends and people about tar and nicotine being bad. friends talked about stuff getting into your lungs. his friend did the handkerchief, blew on the handkerchief, and it showed the brown, but then it is interesting, mr. ballard did it himself, which demonstrates that he was concerned about it. why would he do it himself if it did not matter? he saw people coughing, problems -- now, let me just say, this is a matter of building up knowledge over time. nobody would say that because of the fourth grade health class, mr. ballard knew that smoking might cause cancer someday or might have a serious -- nobody is saying that. what i'm saying is mr. ballard is denying any knowledge until now his lawyer says '77, which is going to be contrary to the evidence, but you look at what he did and when he did it and he began to develop. that is how we all learn things. we learn things by learning a little bit at a time and it goes over time. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1780 you know that in 1952, he started changing brands based on health, health concerns. and we went through those a minute ago. the warning, just so you know, the warnings to mr. ballard are the ones in orange. the red are warnings that would have been to mr. ballard but also in the public at large. and then these are some of the polls we will talk about. so we know that from '52 on, he changed brands three times solely based on health reasons, one time on taste also, but the rest on health. we know that by 1966, that is why i said, there is a real dispute about the '77, 1966, mr. ballard started seeing the warnings on the packages, the warnings on -- by the way, he had heard about the 1964 surgeon general's report, and we will talk about that in a minute. but in '66, slide 37, that shows you all the warnings that went throughout the whole period of time, '66, then '70, then the rotating warnings. so mr. ballard knew that cigarette smoking may be hazardous in '66. he knew that the surgeon general had determined that smoking is dangerous in '70. and so it is -- you have to decide if it is credible to say that he did not know there was a www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1781 problem with smoking until some doctor in '77 told him there was when you consider all of the evidence. and you did not hear about any of this, all you heard about was '77 today. from '68 on, he said, every doctor asked about smoking. he said before that, doctors just did not ask. but from '68 on, which is nine years before '77. in the late '60s, he told at least some of his children, we do not know which of his children he told, because he did not say, but in the late '60s, before he went to vietnam, he told his children not to smoke because it was bad for them. and then we get to '77. we get to '77. and he went to the doctor at homestead and he said you have spots to your lung, and the interesting thing about that is that mr. ballard then said to the doctor, oh, do i have emphysema? so he knew to ask about -- when he was told -- he knew it was related to smoking. when he was told he had spots on his lungs, he asked is it emphysema, which demonstrates that mr. ballard knew something about smoking and risks and so forth when he had that interaction with the doctor. and the doctor told him then you should have www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1782 quit 30 years ago. so at the very latest, even under counsel's admissions for the first time today, mr. ballard should have quit, and if he had quit, you saw one of the announcement that said if you quit at a certain time, your lungs immediately start getting better and so forth and so on, we might not even be here if he had stopped smoking in -- certainly we would not be here if he had stopped back during all of this, but we might not even be here if he had chosen to stop, which he did not do. now, that is direct personal knowledge. and i should add, if you count up the smoking that mr. ballard did, assuming a pack a day, might have been more, but until -- from the time the ads went on until the time he quit, that meant for 175,000 times mr. ballard held in his hand a direct warning about the health risks associated with smoking. and you know what he said about it? he said i read them, i understood them, thought about them, maybe even thought about quitting, i ignored them. ignored. that does not sound like somebody who is captured by nicotine. that sounds like somebody who made a choice. 175,000 times, every time he took out a cigarette and there is the warning in www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1783 his face, and yet he ignored those warnings. now, that is the knowledge he gets from some people, from people directly. you also know about his family, the history of cancer in his family. and you know -- and you know that his aunt myrtle, his uncle -- aunt jaunelle, four members of his family passed away because of smoking-related problems in the '80s, four people. and that had to tell mr. ballard that there was some association between smoking and health at that time, and yet he chose not to -- not to smoke. his brother-in-law the doctor, or trained doctor, talked to him about quitting, his wife talked to him a lot about quitting, and they both quit cold turkey and he knew that. and he knew that he had symptoms by then, he was coughing much more. and his wife was complaining about -- not complaining in a bad way, but saying you really need to quit that. and he chose not to quit. he chose not to quit. more importantly, he chose not to try to quit even. it is one thing to say i was so addicted, i could not quit after i really, seriously tried. it is another thing to say, i am ignoring the warnings and i'm just not going to try. and that is www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1784 what happened here. so then we also, counsel talked about this culture in advertising. there was also a great deal of information out in the public domain that mr. ballard was exposed to. now, we cannot prove that mr. ballard read a particular newspaper, but what we did, and the things i went through with you yesterday, we looked for places where mr. ballard was present. we knew he read the newspapers, we knew he read time and life -- time and newsweek or u.s. news, we knew he saw the reader's digest and we knew where he lived over the years. so we started looking for those kinds of things. and what we discovered was that there were -- we showed you the reader's digest. and i'm not going to -- you can -- these are in evidence, some of these things. reader's digest, if you remember, they were given an award by the -- by the american cancer society for their outstanding leadership. let us see the next one. that is the -- that is the award. over the years of writing articles about that. can we see the next one. time, newsweek, reader's digest, u.s. news, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1785 american legion, leatherneck. these were all things that mr. ballard -- you heard yesterday mr. ballard said he also remembered the public service announcements about not smoking, and we showed you three of those. remember there was one -- one with the ashes and one with j.r. ewing, you know, the dallas guy? or if you are as old as i am, the i dream of jeannie guy and you saw those. and he said while he was living in atlanta -- can we see 42, please -- he heard about the surgeon general's report. that is what was on the atlanta paper. the health -- you saw the video yesterday where they had that big meeting in washington with the surgeon general and all. it was covered widely. there was atlanta. let us move to the next one. it was covered in stars and stripes pacific which would have covered when he was in the service. the next one is the miami herald when he lived down here and i think there is one more. there were some from charleston because you remember he was up at paris island some time, so that is near charleston, so we included some of those. the clerk: 15 minutes, counsel. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1786 mr. reid: i'm sorry? the court: 15 minutes. mr. reid: okay. then you heard about the cultural things. but let me just make one point. today counsel told you that my client could control nicotine. the suggestion, obviously, is that we were doing something to the nicotine to keep people addicted. well, remember what the evidence was. there is more nicotine in the plant than in tobacco. both witnesses from reynolds say they do not add more nicotine than is there, in fact, it is less in the cigarette. and you remember that chart, i tried to find it and we do not have it. it was a chart you saw during, i think, dr. figlar's deposition, and it showed the tar and nicotine in the '50s, and it went just like that down into the '80s. i forget where it ended. in other words, over those years, the companies have substantially reduced tar and nicotine. so when counsel tells you that we can control it, the answer is we can control it and the way we controlled it was by reducing it because the public health community, and you saw a bunch of articles www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1787 yesterday and they are in evidence, that the public health said it is really better to have less tar and nicotine, and that is what we did. so i would say that is mr. ballard's case. he was knowledgeable, he was aware, he was able to quit. he quit, but he never chose to quit until he was ready to quit and nothing reynolds did caused him to quit. now, what is their answer to that? their answer to that is -- i want to say one other thing. let us see slide 49, please. he told you yesterday you only saw do you know polls, not -- i mean, are you aware polls not do you believe polls. well, this is do you believe, this is a believe poll, 70 percent believed smoking, and let us see 51, please. do you think cigarette smoking is not harmful? 90 percent said it is. those are not are you aware polls, those are do you believe polls and then he said that -- counsel said, well, you -- the american cancer society, nobody would believe them, they would all believe what the tobacco company said about smoking and health and we had a poll about that, 52, and what you found out is most reliable sources on smoking and health, this is in evidence, american www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1788 cancer society and so forth, american medical association, 3 percent. he just told you this morning that people would believe us, the tobacco industry, instead of these organizations. well, that is the poll. and there were belief and -- there were awareness and belief polls. now, what did they try to do to convince you in light of all of this evidence that mr. ballard chose to smoke, could have quit, did not quit for a long time, then did? they put in a lot of documents about the companies that have nothing to do with mr. ballard, and i'm going to give you a few examples just to show you. let us talk about the plaza meeting. the plaza meeting, they invited the attorney general of the united states to come to that meeting. they sent him papers about it before. slide 53. judge barnes, he was assistant attorney general and they said we will talk to you and then it was reported in the new york times. hardly a way to start a secret conspiracy. and by the way, when counsel kept talking about these agreements, conspiracies and so forth, the only thing he pointed out to you that these www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1789 companies did together was that meeting, and that was not a secret, and that was not a conspiracy. everything else, for instance, philip morris had some dispute with dow who was one of their suppliers. reynolds had nothing to do with that. you saw -- you saw i think one executive from reynolds, and as i told you, you saw about 20-something documents from reynolds. you have to decide if these companies did something jointly to harm mr. ballard, and the answer is, number one, they did not show you anything jointly except going to this one meeting, and they did not show it was related to mr. ballard. now, i want to talk about the frank statement for just a minute. this frank statement was issued one time in 1953, and you have to decide if it was true when it was -- and you will find, ladies and gentlemen, that virtually everything in there at the time is absolutely true and we will go through it kind of quickly. recent reports about experiments with mice. let us go to the next slide. they put that into evidence. that is what we were talking about there. the next one, although doctors say these www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1790 experiments are not regarded, distinguished authorities point out, well, let us look at number 57. in all the documents that are in evidence and all the testimony, i went through and back in the '50s and into the '60s, that was a dispute and i read to you yesterday a number of articles that said while there are some statistical association, while maybe there was some mouse, a mouse back is not the same as a human lung, it was in dispute. and that is what the frank statement was talking about. and every one of these doctors, every one of these doctors, there is a document in evidence that establishes that they questioned whether there was a relationship between smoking and health. so when we said what we said, it was true. could we see 57. this was in cancer research journal. for every expert who blames tobacco, another one says it is not the cause. you did not know any of that. all you knew was what happened in years later. could we see 50 -- 58, please. and then these are just -- these are all in evidence, you can go through them, 58, let us just run through them, they are all the same, basically, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1791 they -- these are articles saying there is a question. and that is what we said. let us go to 63, please. we accept an interest in people's health. let us go to 64. this is what the -- in evidence that the companies have done over the years. you heard dr. figlar and dr. cooke talk about how they worked with the federal government, the tobacco working group, the hew, that is what they did to try to make cigarettes safer, and you also saw i think number 64 -- is that 64? okay. let us go to 65, then. we also said, "we believe the products are not injurious." at that time they believed that, and there is no dispute about that. there is no dispute about that. let us see 67. okay, "we will work with those whose task it is." and we did, with the government, with the hew in fact, they wrote a letter to dr. rodgman, 68, one of our scientists congratulating him, thanking him for his work on trying to find a safer cigarette. and 69 deals with ctr and he told you this is where we said in the document we would form this organization, he told you that was a front www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1792 organization. well, you know now what the facts are, ladies and gentlemen. could we see the next slide, please. the ctr funded -- awarded $3 million to fund scientific research throughout the country. did they bring a single witness in here to say that he was pressured or told what to find? if that happened, they would have brought in a study, they would have shown you some evidence of that. did not happen. we funded 250 scientists at 200 institutions, university of miami, university of florida, harvard, yale, all over the country. there were 7,000 published scientific or medical articles, and many of these people were funded by the tobacco ctr and the government. they worked with us on that. to suggest it is a front organization is belied by the facts. let us talk about company documents for a minute. you did not see a single reynolds document that helps you answer the questions about mr. ballard. you saw 27 documents. remember one, a survey, dr. teague. what they did not tell you was that this was nothing more than dr. teague going to the public sources, to libraries, and www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1793 gathering all the documents that were in the public domain. 78 he found. it was not anything secret to reynolds. they suggested to you that that was some secret work we did, and they are doing that with all of these documents. they are showing you a little bit, and they are misrepresenting them. filters. you saw the testimony yesterday. all of these public health people, all of these scientists, all of these people thought filters were the right way to go. could we see the next slide, please. you saw these articles yesterday, all these studies that found there was scientific evidence that filters help. they did not offer you any evidence that any of that was wrong. they did not offer you any evidence. and finally, i want to talk about the verdict form. i did not have this earlier or i would put it up. the bottom line is was ralph ballard addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction the legal cause? that is two questions. the judge will tell you it is two questions. was he addicted? and we talked about the www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1794 evidence about that. and was it a legal cause? that means was it because of his choice or was it because of his addiction. and if you get together or decide the answer to one of those is no, then you would answer no to the whole question. the negligence and defective product, again, you have to find was there evidence of what specifically reynolds did to harm mr. ballard, and there is been no evidence of that. they just say the findings say that they are negligent so mr. ballard gets to recover. did he rely on -- to his detriment on something, as we talked about, he did not already know. that tells you the answer to that. mr. ballard knew everything that he needed to know about -- everything that would advise him of the risks associated with smoking, and then finally was there a concealment -- i'm sorry, was there a conspiracy. the only time that there -- the only document that where people met was at the plaza, and that was not a secret conspiratorial meeting because they invited the government, and then you saw the things, the frank statement and the things that came after that that established what companies actually did. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1795 the clerk: five minutes, counselor. mr. reid: thank you. so that is the verdict form, that is the verdict form. i need to talk about damages not because i believe that the plaintiffs are entitled to damages. obviously our position is that the first answer to the first question should be no, that mr. ballard was not addicted, and even if you think he was addicted, it was his choice and not his addiction that was the causal relationship. that is how he got over the bridge. he never gets over the bridge in this case because they do not have evidence about mr. ballard, but i have a duty to my client to talk about all the issues and one of the issues was damages. now, there is no claim that mr. ballard presently has cancer. there is no medical bills, no lost wages, no out-of-pocket expenses. the judge will tell you that your verdict for damage amount has to be fair. it has to be -- it has to compensate fairly. it is not to punish reynolds, it is not to punish. now maybe that is why -- maybe that explains why so much time was spent putting in all of these old documents about all of these other companies, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1796 most of which have nothing to do with reynolds, all of which prove nothing that is at issue in this case in order to convince you that my client is despicable and that you need to punish them and that is why you need to award $18 million for this. that may be -- that may explain why -- because there is no reason for all of that evidence in mr. ballard's trial. because it had nothing to do with mr. ballard. you heard two kinds of evidence. you heard the inconvenience and the loss of intimacy and that is certainly a fair -- a fair complaint. i'm not suggesting that anybody would want to accept that. you have to decide, though, who is responsible. but yesterday, you heard -- or a couple days ago you heard a lengthy explanation of how mr. ballard's life otherwise completely changed because he had to sell his boat, he could not fish anymore, he lost interest in everything he was doing. all that evidence was put in to convince you that a damage award would be appropriate. now we know the damage award was going to be $18 million, but then you found out on cross that was totally false. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1797 mr. ballard sold his boat and all those things that happened, happened because of hurricane andrew, not because of anything related to his bladder cancer. and today, the suggestion is to try to -- mr. ballard, you know, in his deposition said he did not think he was at fault at all. but at trial, he said, oh, yeah, i'm at fault. and they want to use this '77, because that is when he knew. well, i would submit to you, if you take -- it is a hundred percent because that is the first time he knew, that you start taking that hundred percent down for the warnings, the warnings on packs, what he told his children, his relatives, switching, you take it down, take it down, take it down and pretty soon it is all gone because mr. ballard was fully aware of the risks. and his whole life tells you that. his whole life tells you that. this case is about mr. ballard. with everything he knew and was being told, there is no reason to believe that anything reynolds said or did or withheld could have made any difference. remember, mr. ballard's wife and family members who were ill and smokers, those people, mr. ballard, they could not convince him to quit. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1798 the direct warnings on the packs and other places mr. ballard saw and knew could not convince him to quit. all this media information and the books and the magazines and the movies and everything else that mr. ballard was aware of could not convince him to quit. a specific doctor's warning in '77 that he has the beginnings of a serious disease, fortunately, it did not develop and there is no claim for that here, even that could not convince -- the clerk: one minute, counsel. the court: excuse me? the clerk: one minute. the court: one minute. thank you. mr. reid: thank you. even that could not convince him to quit. how in the world could it be argued that something my client did would have made a difference with mr. ballard when he totally ignored and rejected all this other information from personal -- how could it be that mr. ballard, that they could argue to you that mr. ballard relied on something we failed to say or something we did, and did not rely on everything else that happened in his life? it is not common sense. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1799 now, i do not get to talk to you again, and because of that, i'm going to ask you to answer that first question no. and to return with your verdict in favor of my client. but the last time i get to talk to you and it is terrible if you are a lawyer to have to sit down and never get to stand up because he is going to say something that i would like to respond to, he may say something that he had not said before or something that i did not think of, i'll just ask you to do this, i assume as you have been listening to me and i pointed things out you have thought to yourself is that really what the evidence was, you know, you have been critically listening, i hope you will listen to him. if he says something that i have not had a chance to respond to, i hope you will maybe think to yourself what would ben reid have said if he had another opportunity to speak to you, because i think that is how you have been listening to me, and i think that would be fair. last thing i want to say, you did not realize when we got here we have a pact, you and the parties. the parties agree as part of this pact that when you go into that jury room, you get to www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1800 decide this case and you will never have to explain to anybody why you did it or who you believed or who you did not believe and we will not be able to -- we might not be happy, one side might not be happy, we both may not be happy, but we will not get to carp about it because we have given you that right. but you have agreed to something back to us. you have agreed that you will decide this case only on the evidence. you will not decide this case because you do not like smoking. you will not decide this case because somebody wrote a stupid memo in 1950 that had nothing to do with this case. you will not decide this case because there is a big company over there and an individual over here. you will not decide this case because you feel sympathy for anybody in the case or hostility toward anybody. you will not decide for -- your agreement is i'll decide it on the evidence. and that is why the jury system works, that agreement that is an unspoken agreement until right now when i spoke it, but that is the agreement, and i'm certain that as you retire and consider this evidence, you will definitely do your duty and for that, we thank you.