mr. alvarez: good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. alvarez: first of all, on behalf of ralph ballard and myself, we want to thank you very much for giving up two weeks of your time. this is an important service. jury service is very, very important. it is the backbone of the civil justice system. the system would break down and collapse if it was not for you all. so we do not take it lightly that you guys gave www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1686 up two weeks of your lives and your work and your family to come here and listen and judge this case. so thank you. there is a lot of history that we talked about. we went back almost 60 years. i hope that you learned something about the history, because we tend to live in today and what happened today. but to be able to judge this case, i told you at the beginning was you have to go back and you have to judge the tobacco company, you have to judge ralph ballard on things that happened 50, 60 years ago and how life was 50 or 60 years ago. that is important. you cannot use today's standards to do that, you have to use what he knew, what was reasonable for him to believe, just like with tobacco companies, what was reasonable for them to believe. so that is why it was important for us to take you back in time and show you, and hopefully, you know, you took something away from this that you could maybe teach your friends and family members about what you know about tobacco and the history of tobacco, because not many people know, so you are part of a select few people that have been given an education about this. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1687 so let me first talk to you about class membership. remember i told you that this was a class action lawsuit where one of the things, the first question you would have to decide was about addiction. if you could put it up, please, mr. philipson. okay, class membership is not about fault. in order for mr. ballard to qualify as a class member, we have to establish certain things. now, class membership is about whether he was addicted, okay. and was the addiction -- "was ralph ballard addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his bladder cancer?" that is the first question. you are going to get a verdict form, so you can write this down or you can hold off because you are going to get a verdict form that is going to have the very same things that i tell you about here, okay? and those are very -- two questions. the first question is was ralph ballard addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. now, all cigarettes contain nicotine, so the real question is was he addicted. okay? the second part of that question, since there www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1688 are two separate questions, is and was such -- "and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his bladder cancer?" okay? they have stipulated, meaning they agree, they do not dispute, that his bladder cancer was caused from smoking their cigarettes. okay? so that -- answer to that question should be yes. now, we are going to talk about addiction in quite detail in a few minutes. okay? now, the legal definition of legal cause, because you say, okay, what is legal cause, well, legal cause is simply, addiction is a legal cause, the judge is going to tell you this, and you are going to get these instructions. they are going to get these instructions, right, judge, when they go back? the court: yes. mr. alvarez: okay. he is going to read them to you, and then when you go back to the jury room, you are actually going to get a copy of this, okay. and it is going to say addiction is a legal cause of loss if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss so that it can be reasonably said that, but for the addiction, the loss would www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1689 not have occurred. that means a lot of things, a lot of words, but basically what it means is contributes substantially, did the addiction play an important role. but for the addiction, if he was not addicted, would he have smoked one to two packs of cigarettes for 49 years and developed lung -- and developed bladder cancer. that is really the question. if he was not addicted, would he have continued to smoke for 49 years? that is really what that question is. okay? it is a very simple question. okay? so there really should be no -- you know, there may be a move to try to confuse, but this is what it means. that is the law. now, let us apply the law to the facts. okay. he was addicted to nicotine, that caused him to smoke, and the smoking caused the lung cancer {sic}. directly produces or contributes substantially to loss, okay? that is how it is. he was addicted, did the addiction cause him to smoke, and did the smoking cause the bladder cancer, okay? and the last two we know have been stipulated to by the defendants. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1690 now, we could talk about concurring cause, and i'm going to skip over that for now, but, you know, people always request ask, well, listen, how do i weigh this evidence? how do i know what weight to give it? well, listen, how do i know which side wins? who proved the case, you know? how do i measure that, you know? you know, it is like, for example, if you have got two kids and you want to make sure that you give them each enough rice and meat on the plate, you want to make sure that, you know, it is even. but if you give one just a little bit more, then that is one way to think about greater weight of the evidence, means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. and a lot of times you see the scales of justice that kind of signifies that, and if it tilts just slightly to one side, that side has met their burden by the greater weight of the evidence. that is what that means. so i do not have to prove it like this (indicating), it is one-sided like this, all i have to do is prove it like this. okay? whoever proves their case this way or if i prove my case just slightly, i win the case. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1691 that is the law. okay? now, was ralph ballard addicted? that is the key issue in the first question of the case, okay? well, he started at 16 years of age smoking. and we know from the studies that i read to you, the surgeon general's report and all the other stuff in the dsm, that 95 percent of all smokers start as teens. the younger you start, the more likely you will become a heavy smoker. you heard from dr. henningfield. smoked one to two packs a day for 49 years. that is 400 hits of nicotine to the brain each day. he smoked first thing in the morning. he smoked before going to bed. he smoked everywhere, in the house, at work, in the car. he smoked in the hospital. remember when he was injured, he was put on a navy ship and sent to a hospital in japan, he smoked in the hospital. he smoked in the foxhole while he was fighting. he smoked in the navy ships. now, nida, which is the national institute for drug abuse and the surgeon general report say that the majority of regular smokers, a regular smoker is somebody who smokes about a pack a day, okay, regular smokers are addicted. okay, the vast www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1692 majority. that is the surgeon general. the dsm. we heard about the dsm with, you know, dr. phillips, we are going to talk a lot about him in a few minutes, even the dsm says 80 to 90 percent of regular smokers are addicted. okay? so that -- let us talk about what his family said. maria, his wife says he -- in bed, he smokes and he watches tv -- while he is watching tv. he tried to quit every day. he would start on a monday, and by wednesday, he was smoking again. he stopped today, and two days later he was smoking today. took several years for him to quit. dolores, his first wife, says first cigarette of the day before he put his feet on the floor. he smoked a lot. "seemed like you were walking into a fog," is what she said. okay? well, you do not walk into a fog by smoking two or three cigarettes a day; right? if you are walking into a room and it is foggy, it is because you are smoking a lot. okay? his children, lisa, he would smoke more than a pack a day. first cigarette, in the morning. ralph, iii, his son, "it was something they all did, seemed like everyone smoked. as far as i could remember, it is what all the adults did. all www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1693 i know is he was smoking." okay. so his whole family, no one -- no one that met him, no one that is testified, they have not brought you one person to come in and say he was not a smoker. he was a smoker, and the evidence is he was a heavy smoker. okay? now, you know, nicotine is the drug that is inside of cigarettes that make it addicting. okay? and they knew that. and it is very, very addicting. if you could bring out for me -- mr. philipson: i cannot pull it out. mr. alvarez: oh, you cannot put it out. well, these documents are in evidence. and these are internal documents from the tobacco company. and if you will look at the one over here, it says, "if we move towards reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business." okay? what they were selling was nicotine, it is all in their documents. they kept nicotine levels at a certain level to keep you addicted, to keep smokers addicted. that is what they wanted. they could raise or lower the level of nicotine. okay? that is what the testimony was from the corporate representative, dr. figlar and dr. cooke from r.j. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1694 reynolds. they could lower it and they could -- you know, naturally -- there is naturally-occurring nicotine, but by their processes, they could lower it or raise it, and they kept it at a certain level always to keep you smoking. okay? "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." i mean, there is -- i mean -- i think you heard all these, because i remember reading them to you, and they are going to be in folders for you and you are going to get them back there, but these are documents that are in there. and, please, go through them. here is another one here, "my reason for this high priority is that i believe that the thing we sell the most is nicotine." how about this one down here, "however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gates from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." so what they are saying is, look, guys, are we going to be comfortable selling this thing that if www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1695 -- that if people could stop using it, we would be out of business? and we could be out of -- they could stop using it (snaps fingers) and we would be out of business overnight. here it is, "nicotine delivery can be controlled via a filter or smoke ph adjustments." that is theirs. so they know that they could do it scientifically. okay? here is another one that is interesting. "i would be more cautious in using the pharmic-medical model. do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications of having such conceptualizations go beyond these walls." they knew that it was addictive, they knew how addictive it was, they knew they could be out of business in a day if they lowered the levels of nicotine or people did not smoke it because of nicotine, they would be out of business (snaps fingers) like that. they knew it. here is the other thing because this is -- this is a conspiracy. this is a conspiracy. it is not just r.j. reynolds, it is philip morris, american tobacco, brown & williamson, which merged with reynolds, lorillard, liggett, all these www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1696 tobacco companies that you saw in the frank statement that signed off, all these guys were, you know, shoulder to shoulder, you know, they decided, hey, listen, we have got to stick together, we have got to stick together and figure out a way to get these people to doubt that our products is dangerous. and, you know, that is very important, because one of the counts that i told you early on is a conspiracy count, that they agreed with these other tobacco companies to conceal the health effect and addictive nature of cigarettes, and that is what they did. so what did they do? what did philip morris do, one of their co-conspirators? what they did was when they found out that dow chemical was selling nicorette gum, they went after them, said how could you do that. well, if they really cared about the public and if they were really sincere about the public health as they said in the frank statement and as they said in some of those videos, they said we really care about people, then why would it bother you that people would use a product to help them stop smoking if they are addicted? why would it bother you? because they put profits over people. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1697 and this is in evidence, nida, the national institute of drug abuse, "addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug" -- "drug seeking use" -- "and use despite harmful consequences." okay. what that means is, hey, look, if you have that urge, if you have that desire, and i think mr. ballard, who has got an eighth grade education, okay, very smart guy, but he is got an eighth grade education, what he was trying -- what he was telling you is i cannot explain it, all i know is you had this urge that i had to have one, you know, he goes, "i cannot explain it." okay? that is what they are talking about here, compulsive drug seeking, use despite a harm -- and let me tell you about "despite harmful consequences". 1977, when the doctor told him, hey, you should quit, he smoked knowing it was harmful. that is the definition of addiction. if you cannot stop or you have a desire -- not cannot stop because everybody -- but if you have a desire, a compulsion to smoke and you know it is bad for you, that is addiction. that is what the government says, that is www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1698 addiction. in 1988, the surgeon general report came out, and they made certain conclusions, and cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. "nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacologic and behavioral process that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine." that is 1988. that changed the game. that changed the game because the tobacco companies could not come back and say, oh, you know, we did not know it was addictive. we know from their internal records now that they knew from way, way back. but when the surgeon general came out in 1988 and said, by the way, this is addicting, this is addicting, they were on the hook. and i'm going to show you the congressional hearings where one of them tried to say, no, it is not addictive, in fact, it was a r.j. -- it was a ceo of r.j. reynolds. he says, no, there is no intoxication, there is no this. and do you remember yesterday, dr. figlar, their representative by video, he says, well, because he was using the 1964 surgeon general www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1699 definition of addiction. remember that? i think somebody wrote that down. right? you know what the problem with that is? is that statement, that statement when he said that was 1994. and in 1988, the government changed it and said smoking is addictive. so he was trying to wash himself off and cover himself with the 1964 report that said we do not know if it is a habit or addiction, but by 1988, they knew, the government published it, and when they asked him about it, he lied. let us listen to the surgeon general. mr. alvarez: now, that is the surgeon general. they heard it, what did they do? they attacked him again, they continued to attack the surgeon general. any public health official that criticized the tobacco company and said that there was a link between smoking and lung cancer or other types of cancers and diseases, they attacked, every single time. so why are they disputing addiction? let me tell you why. because if you answer no, that he was not addicted, (gestures) case is over, we all go home. okay? that is why -- that is why you see www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1700 the push on he was addicted, he was addicted, he was addicted. this is a man who started smoking at 16, barely 16. a month before, he just turned 16. he smoked for 49 years, a pack to two a day. that is over half a million cigarettes. so who do they bring to testify that this man was not addicted? dr. phillips. he is never conducted any research on nicotine. he is never written any articles on nicotine, nothing. he never taught any classes on nicotine or addiction. never treated -- he is never even treated a single patient, not one patient exclusively for nicotine addiction, not one. and before working with the tobacco lawyers, he had very limited knowledge or interest in nicotine addiction. now, he never worked for the fda, for the cdc, for the surgeon general, or any nicotine addiction specialist. in fact, i asked him, "you are not a nicotine addiction expert?" he said, "no, i am not." he disagrees with the surgeon general, this guy is not an expert, but he disagrees with the experts. he disagrees with nida, he disagrees with www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1701 them. he admits that he has the minority opinion, that he is in the minority, he says everybody is wrong, he is right, the government is wrong, nida is wrong, surgeon general is wrong, cdc is wrong, fda is wrong, but he is right. but you know what? he slipped up, because in his report, what does he say? he says, under diagnosis, "nicotine dependence, parentheses mild, in sustained full remission." and then he says, "oh, no, no, no, i made a mistake. i meant to say rule out nicotine dependence." i said, well, wait a minute, if that was true, if that were true, then why would you say mild? why would you have to say mild? why would you have to say anything? why would not you just say rule out nicotine dependence? then it says, "in sustained full remission." if you were saying rule out nicotine dependence, how could you rule out something that is in full remission? does not make any sense. he refuses -- the other thing he does is he wants to use the dsm, we are going to talk about the dsm in a minute, but he refuses to acknowledge that for nicotine addiction, all the experts that know www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1702 what they are doing that treat people use the fagerstrom test, that is what all the experts use. they do not use the dsm the way he uses it. i'm going to tell you why in a minute. in fact, if you go to the website at the university where he teaches, guess what they use? they use the fagerstrom test. they use the same test that our expert says he -- that he should be using. and you know what, his own dsm, he says i use the dsm, but he disagrees with the dsm, because there, i read to him, well, here in the dsm it says, "since it is estimated that between 80 and 90 percent of regular smokers have a nicotine dependence, up to 25 percent of the u.s. population may have nicotine dependence." he says, "i disagree with that." i said, "wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. this is the dsm. okay, you are using the dsm to say my client is not addicted, all right? you are using the book to say that; right?" you cannot take selective parts. either it works or it does not. now, in there, it says 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers are addicted. he says, well, i www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1703 do not agree with that. so he is going to cherry pick, he is going to take bits and pieces of what he likes to come up with an opinion that my client, who smoked for 49 years, a pack or two a day since he was 16 years old, and he is not addicted. and the dsm -- let me tell you, i said to him, "listen, the dsm, you cannot use the dsm the way you are using it. the dsm is to treat people, not to come to court. you are a forensic pathologist -- i mean forensic psychiatrist, you cannot use the dsm to come to court. that is not what it is for." and that is exactly what it says. "cautionary statement, the clinical and scientific considerations involved in categorization of these conditions as mental disorders may not be wholly relevant to legal judgments, for example, that take into account such issues as individual responsibility, disability, determination, and competency." you are not supposed to use this book for that, okay? it says, "use of dsm in forensic settings," that is exactly what he was doing; right? look what it says, "when the dsm-iv categories, criteria and textual descriptions are employed for forensic purposes, there are significant risks that www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1704 diagnostic information will be misused or misunderstood. these dangers arise from the imperfect fit between the question of ultimate concern of law," which in this case was the person addicted, okay, "and the information contained in the clinical diagnosis. in most situations, the clinical diagnosis of a dsm-iv mental disorder is not sufficient," not sufficient, okay, "to establish the existence of a legal purpose, i.e., a mental disorder or mental disability," which is exactly what he was doing in this case, and the book itself says you are not supposed to do that. and he comes up with some extreme opinions, okay? you know, because sometimes you want to be somewhere in the middle; right? it is always good to be in the middle; right? well, he is not in the middle. he is way out there. let me tell you why he is way out there. because he said, if you listened to him, he said, "you are only addicted if smoking causes you to lose your job, your wife, and you are unable to perform daily activities." that is what he said. that is a ridiculous opinion. that is a ridiculous opinion. do you think 60 million americans who were addicted or quit, lost their wife, lost their job, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1705 and could not perform daily activities, that is not the definition that the government says. he is coming up with these absurd opinions. and i said, "look, doctor, there is nida," he goes, "alan. i know alan." well, he goes, "i sit next to him. well, something should have rubbed off because what alan says is, "look, addiction is uncontrollable, compulsive, drug seeking and use, even in the face of negative health and social consequences." okay? "this is the crux of how many professional organizations all define addiction." okay? dsm is not meant specifically -- the other thing is, if you look in the dsm, and i pointed it out to him, i said, look, this book is -- there is a zillion addictions, there is 13 or 12 categories of different classes of drugs that are addictive; right? you cannot use -- nicotine, you cannot use it for this specifically. he goes, "oh, yes, you can." i said, "well, let us look at the book. let us see what the book says." and the book says, under nicotine dependence, it says, "to the text and criteria of substance www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1706 dependence, see page 192, some of the generic dependence criteria do not appear to apply to nicotine, whereas others require further explanation." you do not use it the way he was using it because you cannot use it in forensic purposes, and when you are using it for nicotine, they are telling you be careful because this stuff do not fit. here is the other thing he did. you know, this struck me this morning when i was in the shower at 4:30 in the morning, you know, that is when i do my best thinking. this guy used this dsm to diagnose a patient 22 years after he smoked his last cigarette. think about that. he is using this book and saying you know what i'm going to do, you have not smoked in 22 years, but i'm going to use this book to establish that you were not addicted. here is the other thing. common sense. it is enough to give him cancer after 50 years of smoking, but it ain't enough to addict him? how does that make any sense? he smoked enough to get cancer, but he is not smoking enough to be addicted? you know, one of the instructions the judge is going to give you is to use your common sense, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1707 guys. common sense tells you you smoked for 50 years, a pack or two a day, you get cancer. you were not addicted? you did not have enough nicotine in your body to make you addicted? they admitted it. and this is the actual instruction the judge is going to give you, it says, "and in this case, the defendant r.j. reynolds tobacco company has stipulated that smoking its cigarettes caused ralph ballard's bladder cancer." so who do we bring? we played it by video, okay, we did not bring him live, but we played it by video. the judge is going to tell you -- give you the instructions, you have to consider the guy -- the video is the same as if the person was here. he had an opportunity to cross-examine, you heard it. who do we bring? okay, a world-renowned expert in nicotine addiction. he is gone to the united kingdom, european union, canada. he worked for nida. he actually worked for the national institute of drug addiction. he was one of the leading -- he was their leading scientist on nicotine addiction, okay? the guy published more than 300 articles in www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1708 scientific and medical journals just on nicotine addiction. he is an expert. he is testified before congress on nicotine addiction. he helped -- he either helped write, rewrite, edit many, many of the surgeon general reports. okay? this is the expert. this is the expert. okay? this is the guy who most of his life spent as a scientist studying nicotine addiction, not dr. phillips who has never even treated one person exclusively for nicotine addiction and had no interest in it until one of the tobacco lawyers hired him to do one of these cases. and so what does he say? he says nicotine affects the brain. nicotine binds to these receptors in your brain. they can measure that. okay? and when they -- what he said was, listen, they check smokers' and nonsmokers' brains, you know. and smokers have 400 percent more nicotine receptors in their brains than nonsmokers. he said, look, this is what i could tell you about nicotine addiction, the younger you smoke, like if you are a teen, the harder it will be to quit. regular smokers find it easier to quit in their 60s to 70s. remember, he said that. he is the poster child for exactly the type of smoker www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1709 they are talking about, started as a teen, quit in his 60s, when it was easier for him to quit. 20 cigarettes a day is a high dose of nicotine. the most -- this is what he said, look, there is two most important factors when you are going to find somebody who is addicted, this is really what it comes down to. the most important two factors in determining cigarette or nicotine addiction, one is how much did the smoker smoke, how much, and how soon after you wake up do you have your first cigarette? and let me tell you why that is important, because while you are sleeping, obviously you have to sleep, your body tells you you have to shut down, you have to sleep; right? the moment you get up, what are you in? if you are a nicotine addict, what are you? you are in withdrawal. you have been sleeping for seven or eight hours, and you are in withdrawal. so what is the first thing you do? if you do it in the first five minutes, smoke a cigarette, that is a key factor in establishing nicotine addiction. that is what he said. and what does he say, the best and most effective way to diagnose nicotine addiction is using the fagerstrom test. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1710 that is what they do at nida, that is what they teach, this is how you do it. that is a horrible copy. i can see it better there. and it is in evidence. this is the fagerstrom test. i went over the fagerstrom test with mr. ballard when he was on the stand. you probably did not realize what i was asking him, why i was asking him those questions, but i was asking him those questions because that is the fagerstrom test. and he rated very high dependence. so "was ralph ballard addicted to smoking" -- "to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his bladder cancer?" i would humbly and respectfully ask you to answer yes to that question. now, let us talk about what they did. okay? let us talk about what they did from 1953 until 2000 until they finally admitted that smoking was bad or addictive, okay? this is one of the internal company documents from 1968. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1711 cigarettes." duh. okay? that is exactly right. and, in fact, the findings that the judge is going to read you, okay, if we prove that he is addicted, these findings, these things i'm going to tell you about, you have to accept them, they are the letter of the law, this is the law of this case, okay? that rjr agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal the health effect of and addictive nature of smoking with the intent that the public would rely on the information to their detriment, that rjr concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking, or both. let me tell you what that means. what that means is, look, because they are going to say, well, listen, everybody knew, everybody knew. well, what he did not know was that the tobacco companies knew what they were saying was lying, and what he did not know was that they were creating a culture and creating a controversy; right? and a conspiracy to create doubt. because what happens if you are an addicted www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1712 smoker? okay, if you are an addicted smoker and you hear two messages, one message is smoking is bad for you, you know, doctors and health-care officials say smoking is bad for you, or if you hear, look, if you smoke filtered cigarettes, this is going to be okay. if you are addicted, which of those two messages do you think you are going to hear? which ones are you going to hear? which one are you going to believe? the third finding was rjr was negligent. it means that they were careless. and number 4 -- the last one is that they manufactured cigarettes that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. this is the law of this case. they have been found to have violated these things. what needs to be decided -- let me tell you the easiest thing in this case, there is four counts, the easiest one is strict liability, okay? strict liability, that means they sold a product that was defective; right? in this case, the judge is going to instruct you that the cigarettes that he smoked are defective. case over. if you find, if you find that he was addicted on this count, on strict liability, the case is over, because they have www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1713 already admitted, they have already admitted that his bladder cancer was caused from smoking. the defendant's cigarettes have already been determined as a matter of law to be defective and unreasonably dangerous. move past it. was the defective product, cigarettes, the legal cause of mr. ballard's bladder cancer? now, legal cause, you know, legal cause, whether it is addiction, strict liability, negligence, or whatever, is -- is basically the same thing. legal cause, if it directly and in natural, continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss so that it could be said that but for the defect, the loss would not have occurred. okay. contributes substantially. did the defective product play an important role? but for the defect, but for him smoking those cigarettes, would he have developed bladder cancer? well, we know the answer to that is no, because they admit it. so legal cause, if it directly produces or contributes substantially such loss. smoking directly produces bladder cancer. they are not disputing it. but for smoking one to two packs a www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1714 day for 49 years, would not have -- you know, would not have caused his bladder cancer? because that is what they have to prove. they have got to prove -- well, they have already admitted it, so they cannot disprove it, all right, they have already admitted that he smoked this product, they admit it, he smoked for 49 years, it caused his bladder cancer. once you answer yes to addiction, you have to answer yes to strict liability. it is not an issue, it is got to be question number 3, i started with the easiest one, of course, "negligence is failing to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable company would exercise under like circumstances." now, the question in the verdict form is not was there negligence -- i mean, was the negligence of rjr, okay. they have already -- i've already established, the judge is already going to tell you that they were negligent. if he was addicted, they were negligent, that is the law of this case. the question is a legal cause, was that a legal cause of his bladder cancer. well, again, we go back to the same thing, well, what causes bladder cancer? the smoking. whose cigarettes? theirs. they admit it. so the answer to that one www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1715 is easy, it is yes. now, this conspiracy started in december of 1953. and one of the first things you see is that frank statement the next month where they come out and they say there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes. "we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business." well, if that were true, why would they be saying, guys, if we start putting a cigarette out there that is not addictive, then we are going to be out of business? well, that is kind of inconsistent with this. and they say, "we believe the products we make are not injurious to health." when they knew all along that that was a lie. and the judge is going to instruct you that rjr tobacco company concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. he is going to tell you that, okay, that they concealed or omitted material information, okay? www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1716 that is the law of this case. and how do they do that? this is what they did -- i mean, they are very smart people. very, very smart. what they did is they created a culture where smoking was acceptable. they created it with stars on tv, with radio, with magazines, with billboards. everywhere you turned around back in the '40s and '50s and '60s, you saw this. they were the number one advertiser, they are -- you have got to give them credit, man, they pushed this thing and they made -- you know, you have got humphrey bogart, fred astaire, all the great actors, smoking, okay? so that is lucille ball, desi arnaz, all of them smoked or pushed their product. okay? so they created this culture so that when this kid, this 16-year-old kid from homestead, son of a farmer, starts smoking, "oh, this is what everybody does." who created that culture? who created that? did he create that? did he create that culture? no. it was everywhere. now, look how much they spent. i just pulled this little part out here because this is part of the federal trade commission report in 1967. and they looked back and said how much are these guys spending on advertising. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1717 look, in '63, they were spending 249 million. by '66, they are spending 297 million. and go through the report. guess what they -- they kept spending more and more and more and more and more. okay? on advertising. that is a lot of money. you know what, 200, almost $300 million is in 1960? i mean, i -- in 1966, i was seven -- i was seven years old, so i would have been in second grade, second or third grade. you know, i do not know if i can count that high. that is a lot -- that is a lot of money, man. that is a lot of money. okay? and this defendant, they spent half a billion dollars, half a billion dollars just them and their companies that they bought out for these tobacco institute, the council for tobacco research, all these front organizations, okay? so let me ask you this, because, you know, i'm a common sense guy. i'm a common sense guy. so they are going to come out and say, "well, that money was spent in research. we did research. we did scientific research." let me ask you a question. you spend half a billion bucks on scientific research; right? and do not you think it is a little late by 2000 to www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1718 finally figure out that smoking is bad for you and causes cancer? you think for a half a billion dollars, you maybe got that answer sooner than that? what do you think? h'mm? maybe? that was a front organization. documents are there. they put that out there because they wanted to create doubt and confusion. that was their plan. anybody who said anything bad about the tobacco company or linked cigarettes to cancer, they attacked. and that is what that money was for, it was for attacks. okay, so they come up with this filter thing. remember i told you about the filters, that is why he smoked, that is why everybody smoked filters. everybody believed that, hey, listen this controversy, this may be bad, but do not worry, the cigarette companies are putting filters on the cigarettes, we are going to be okay. okay? remember they said that? okay. this is 1964. this is the industry spokesman. can you play that, mr. philipson, please? mr. alvarez: and they are smug about it. they are smug about it. they create this whole www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1719 thing about filters to scam the american public and dupe them into thinking that hey, if you smoke a filtered cigarette, you are going to be okay. because in their documents it is clear, the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. look what the government says. this is from a government report from the ftc. it says, "the industry has moved strongly toward filtered cigarettes, which have increased from .6 percent, that is less than 1 percent, okay, less than 1 percent in 1950 to 87 percent in 1975." why did they do that? because it was part of the conspiracy to create doubt, confusion, and a controversy about the health effects. and by the way, it did not stop. and we heard some of that here, right, when i was cross-examining dr. phillips, i go dr. phillips, you know, the science is out there, the science says this, the government says this. he goes, well, there is some controversy about that. are you kidding me? you guys are still doing that? are you still doing that, are you still creating doubt and confusion in this courtroom? mr. reid: objection, there was an in limine www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1720 motion on that, your honor. the court: come over here. (the following is at the bench.) the court: read me back the last statement. (the court reporter read back the last portion of the statement.) mr. alvarez: right. mr. reid: that is an attack on our litigation and a suggestion that this trial is part of a conspiracy. we had an in limine motion, he was going to tell me before he said that kind of stuff. it is totally improper argument to say -- the court: i do not remember anything about an in limine. mr. alvarez: we did not hear it, but. mr. reid: the point is, the point is he said that we, the lawyers in this case, are part of a conspiracy to continue to obfuscate and that is an attack on the lawyers. the court: is that what you said about the lawyers? mr. reid: yeah, he said it in this courtroom. mr. alvarez: i'm talking -- i said dr. phillips. what dr. phillips came in here and said. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1721 the court: calm down. mr. alvarez: what he said was, dr. phillips, he came in and said there is a controversy over the science on addiction when in truth there is no controversy. the court: i heard him say that he believed -- he admitted he is in a minority, but. mr. alvarez: no, he said -- and he said there was a -- he used the word controversy, judge. the court: your concern is he is trying to attack you. mr. reid: our witness, our litigation, he is saying that our litigation, he said you are still doing it, in other words, he is claiming that we did it originally, the client did it, now he says we are still doing it in the courtroom, the witnesses we put on, that is an attack on the lawyer and the strategy in this case, and that is inappropriate. the court: okay, make it clear that you are not attacking the attorney -- mr. alvarez: the lawyers. the court: -- you are talking -- mr. reid: but he cannot say the witness did it, because i put the witness on. he cannot say that something we did in this case is evidence in a www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1722 conspiracy. that is what he cannot say. mr. alvarez: judge, they cannot come in here, okay, a witness cannot come in here, okay, and say there is a controversy over the science of what something means -- the court: right. mr. alvarez: -- when that is not true. they cannot do that. mr. reid: he is already said that. the court: he can say that. mr. reid: yeah. the court: he can say whatever he wants. mr. reid: but he cannot say they are still doing it. the court: and you cross-examined him by showing him -- admitting that he is in the minority. mr. alvarez: right. mr. reid: he cannot say they are still doing it in this courtroom, meaning they, the defendants, are still doing it in this courtroom, that is the inappropriate part. mr. alvarez: well, judge, it is not inappropriate if they do it like he did. the court: he is concerned the implication is that they are doing something wrong in this -- in www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1723 handling this case. mr. alvarez: okay. the court: so i want you to clear it up. mr. alvarez: no problem. mr. reid: i'll move to strike what he said. i'll do it in front of the jury. the court: you have already done it. mr. reid: so you will grant my motion? the court: i'll grant it. rephrase your statement. (in open court.) mr. reid: your honor, you were going to make a ruling i thought. the court: yeah, sustained. mr. reid: and move to strike that last comment. the court: that is statement is stricken and mr. alvarez will rephrase. mr. alvarez: sure, i did not mean the lawyers did anything wrong in this case. the lawyers, this is a great group of lawyers, they are defending their client. okay? i do not have any problem with any of these lawyers, they are terrific lawyers, so do not take anything i said to mean that they have done anything wrong or unethical. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1724 they are great ethical lawyers, so we may disagree about the facts and we each represent our clients, but i'm not making any personal attacks on them, okay? so think about that. in 1950, less than a percent and then jump -- of the cigarettes have filters, by 1975, 87 percent of them have filters. that is what they did, they created this whole thing about filters to get the american people to do what? keep smoking. okay? in fact, the poll, when they did a poll, the government did a poll, they said filters reduce -- they asked smokers, smokers and nonsmokers, okay, "do filters reduce the health risk of cigarette smoking?" fifty percent of the people -- 51 percent of the people who do not smoke said yes, 58 percent of the people said yes. those are -- that is like 30 million people. 30 million people. that is a lot of people believed it. now, i do not want you to believe me that they concealed stuff. i want you to hear it from them. okay? in their own words. mr. alvarez: by the way, that gentleman you just saw, that is the president, ceo of r.j. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1725 reynolds tobacco company. mr. alvarez: okay. let us hear that whole interview on abc on nightline with ted koppel with ceo of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. the clerk: ten minutes, counsel. mr. alvarez: you noticed at the beginning of that, it started with they took out a front page -- a full-page ad in the newspaper. okay, american tobacco company, okay, that is one of the companies that rjr ultimately merged with. let us hear what his -- what their ceo thinks. mr. alvarez: okay, let us hear from some more tobacco executives. could you play it, mr. philipson? mr. philipson: this one? mr. alvarez: next with one. mr. alvarez: go on to the next one. do you want me to move this? mr. alvarez: i mean, these guys do not stop. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1726 that was the -- that was the drum that they beat for almost 50-something years. they just did not stop. and this is philip morris, a co-conspirator of r.j. reynolds. this is a letter on their letterhead on may 20th, 1963, to the assistant surgeon general of the united states. because they asked them, hey, what is in your cigarettes? do they cause cancer? and it says, "none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, have been found by scientific research to be harmful to health of the smoker in amounts reported in smoke." right? so he is telling the surgeon general there is nothing in cigarettes that we found that is harmful to smokers. here's the problem with that. this is a report two years earlier, 1961, and look what it says, "partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens." they knew and they were willing to do anything so that the public did not know. anything. okay? put billions of dollars behind it and look what else they said they would do. they wrote a letter to the legal department and they said, "invalidation of some reports in the research department. we do www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1727 not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files. once it becomes clear that such actions is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports from our files." the clerk: five minutes, counsel. mr. alvarez: thank you. "as an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite the scientific" -- "the sections of the reports where" -- "which appear objectionable." so, hey, listen, we are either going to get rid of it or we are going to tell the authors and the scientists rewrite it. that is what they would do. that is the depth that they would go to. so the question is, r.j. reynolds -- did -- "did ralph ballard reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement by r.j. reynolds tobacco company that omitted material information regarding the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes or both, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his bladder cancer?" they created that atmosphere, they created that culture, they created that whole thing of www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1728 lies, they told him about the filters, they did this whole thing to hook this kid so he would be smoking for the next 50 years, and they got him, and now that they have got him, they owe him. so the answer to that is yes. and the gall of these men, these tobacco executives to go in front of our congress and lie. mr. alvarez: so that is what they did, they lied to the american people, they lied in front of congress, they lied, they lied, they lied. so did they agree -- this is -- this is the question, was there -- "was any act taken in furtherance of the agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes or both a legal cause of ralph ballard's bladder cancer?" and the answer to that is yes. they conspired with the other tobacco companies to do exactly this. all right, now i'm going to talk to you really quickly about the polls because i think you are going to see something in a few minutes. okay? remember i told you in the beginning there is something called an awareness poll and something www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1729 called belief poll? remember that? awareness polls are like hey, have you heard that cellular phones cause cancer? and, you know, they will get a certain amount of people say yeah, i've heard that, but if you ask the question, the belief question is, do you believe, do you believe that using a cellphone will cause cancer, that number will be much lower, because people hear it but not necessarily believe it. right? those are two different things. every single one of the polls they showed you yesterday, guess what they were? awareness polls. they did not show you one belief poll. the clerk: one minute, counsel. mr. alvarez: i'm going to use some -- i'm going to go over my time. the court: well, then it is going to be taken off your rebuttal. mr. alvarez: i get that. the court: okay, i just want to make sure -- mr. alvarez: thank you. the court: -- that you know so you have got to cover whatever you are going to cover. mr. alvarez: i'm going to cover. the court: whatever's left you get, if there www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1730 is nothing left, there is nothing left. mr. alvarez: nothing left. the court: all right, let us go. mr. alvarez: i'm going to leave it all here. the court: all right, leave it all there. mr. alvarez: here it is. this question is a belief poll, "what is your opinion, do you think cigarette smoking is or is not one of the causes of lung cancer?" and it says yes, this is one of the causes, okay, 53 percent of the smokers believed in 50 -- in '64 and 29 in 1954. those are belief polls. what you saw yesterday were just awareness polls. so keep that in mind. you know, the -- i'm going to go through these pretty quickly. mr. ballard is a man, an honest man, a genuine man, a man's man. okay? and he came up here, he said i'm going to accept partial responsibility. okay? and he did that. okay? they are saying they are not responsible. he is saying i'm taking part responsibility. okay? (phone rings.) ms. furness: sorry, judge. the court: that is okay. mr. alvarez: so this is what he is taking responsibility for. look, from 1942 to 1991, when www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1731 he quit, he had smoked for 49 years, okay? he started to quit in 1977, when the doctors finally told him for the very first time, okay, smoking is bad for you. he goes, okay, i should quit, i'm going to try to quit. so from 1942 to 1977, that is 35 years, they are one hundred percent responsible for that time. okay? but once he -- once that thing went off in his mind (snaps fingers), says, look, i'd better start quitting, doctors told me i'm on the hook for this thing now, okay, till 1991, that is 14 years. okay? and now for those 14 years while he was addicted, is 50/50. it is 50/50 okay, he shares some responsibility and so do they. okay? so for the first 35 years, it is a hundred percent. for the next 14 years, it is 14 percent. when you do the math percentage-wise, it is 85 percent for r.j. reynolds tobacco company and 15 percent for ralph ballard. that is the math. listen, he is an 86-year-old man and this case ain't about him going out on his boat. he is got bigger problems than that, okay? he is got a bag attached to his stomach where urine comes out of it, okay? he has not been with a woman for 18 years. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1732 okay? if we were to put up an ad in the miami herald and said we are going to accept people, and we want to do a study, and we want to find out if you can go 18 years without having sex, -- mr. reid: objection, that is improper argument. the court: excuse me? can you re- -- mr. alvarez: sure. the court: can you repeat. mr. alvarez: what i said was if we put an ad in the miami herald and said we are going to do a study and we asked these study participants that you have to go 18 years without having sex and then he objected. the court: okay. well, i sustain the objection. mr. alvarez: all right. the court: let us keep it to this case. mr. alvarez: okay. well, that is what he did, okay, for the last 18 years, he is had this bag stuck to him, okay, where urine comes out of, and he has not been with a woman for 18 years, and he will never be with a woman for the rest of his life. okay, so you decide what is that worth. what is the value of his loss? what is that worth? what amount www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1733 of money will compensate him for that? they probably do not have enough. and they have a lot. mr. reid: objection. the court: sustained. mr. reid: move to strike. the court: sustained. granted. mr. alvarez: well, it is up to you to decide what is fair and just in light of this evidence, not the judge, not the lawyers, not me. you decide. i can only make a suggestion. it could be higher or it could be lower, it is up to you. and we think $15 million is a reasonable amount of money. now, maria is his wife. she testified by deposition. her -- she moved out of the bedroom with him so she would not make him feel bad. and she has not been with a man for 18 years, either. and she has, under the law, under the law, she has a right to damages for the loss of her husband's comfort, society, attention, and services. and we suggest that a reasonable amount is $3 million or you could make it whatever you want. you may think, hey, she suffered just as much as him, she should get the same amount. that is completely up to you. okay? www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1734 in conclusion, if i've done anything in this trial to offend anyone, i apologize. i'm only trying to represent my client the best way i can, and if i've done that, i'm sorry, i apologize, but please do not take it out on mr. ballard. it is been a pleasure being here for two weeks, and spending time with you all, and -- but most of all, i feel honored in the task that i was chosen to represent this very honorable man. thank you. mr. alvarez: leave that there, i want to -- mr. philipson: you want the whole thing? mr. alvarez: yeah, put it back. he said that they were not a front; right? they were not a front. robert, when you get a moment, can you please put up the document, please? now, you are going to also see -- robert. r.j. -- this is the final -- mr. philipson: you want that or you want this? mr. alvarez: that is fine. pull out that section, please. this is their document. okay? dr. -- "bill shinn feels that special projects are the best way that moneys are spent. on these projects, ctr has acted as a front." go to the jury instruction. the finding. there has been a finding here, a finding that "r.j. reynolds tobacco company, the tobacco institute, and other tobacco companies entered into www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1802 an agreement to conceal or omit information." how can they say they were not a front? how can they say they were not working together, that they were not conspiring together when there is a finding that the law says you have to accept? they are still denying it. they came in court and denied it. now, they say they invited the attorney general. let me ask you, they did not send the attorney general the forwarding memo that they did the very next day with this concocted plan. they did not send the attorney general the memo saying we are going to destroy these documents or we are going to rewrite all the -- we are going to rewrite all these reports that people find objectionable. they did not send those to the attorney general, did they? and let us talk about this timeline. because he said he knew, look at this, he went back, 1940, 1950, 1960, this guy knew, everybody knew, look at this, he knew, he knew, this guy knew, his family was dying, everybody knew, we had warnings on the label. well, let me ask you a question, if mr. ballard knew, mr. ballard with an eighth grade education, if they are saying, hey, he www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1803 knew, guess what? what about them? how come they did not know? how come it took them until 2000 to admit it? but they want you to use a different standard, they want you to say, well, he is a hundred percent because he knew way back in there. oh, no, not us. it is okay that we did not know until 2000. well, who do you think knew more, a man with an eighth grade education or all the scientists and people that they had at r.j. reynolds tobacco company? who do you think knew more? and they said, well, we would not have been here if he would have stopped. well, we would not have been here if they would have stopped this conspiracy 50 years ago. none of us would be here. he would not have lost his bladder, he would not be having these problems. we would not be here -- you are right, we would not be here if they stopped lying 50 years ago. they bring up all these new york times articles and the life and times and reader's digest, they got an award, reader's digest, what is the matter, do not these guys read? do not they have books and do not they have magazines at the executive offices at r.j. reynolds tobacco company, www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1804 because if they are saying he should have read them, he should have known, well, what about them? they said we do not lower nicotine, we do not lower -- we do not -- robert, put the thing on, please. "to enhance the taste, one must raise the ph of smoke, so simply to raise ph, say to 6.0 to 6.5, you raise the level of nicotine." come on. that is how they manipulate it. they could drop it to wherever they want to drop it to, but they do not want to drop it to a place where people do not want to smoke because if they do not make it addicting, guess what? no one would buy it. they said a bridge of causation. this is not a bridge of evidence, it is a bridge of doubt. listen, they said he is not a weak person, that is the only thing in their whole presentation i agree with. there is nothing, that is not -- that is like the opposite of what he is. this man is not weak. this man is an epitome of a hero, okay? he is a strong man that when he puts his mind to something, he does it. and guess what it took him a while to do before he was able to do? finally quit smoking. that shows you he was addicted, because if not, he could have dropped it www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1805 like that. and in -- you know, they have selected -- you know, they bring out selected parts of the deposition, okay, because he said it, his wife said it, in 1977, when the doctor told him, he started to try to smoke -- to try to quit smoking. it is in there. i had to stand up and read it. but they want to do select -- you know, everything about them is selective. he says choice. there is a lot of choices here. these corporations have choices too. they could have chosen not to be part of the conspiracy. they could have chosen not to conceal the health effects of smoking and its addictive nature. that is a choice. the clerk: five minutes, counsel. mr. alvarez: thank you. they said these ads did not mean anything to him. these ads -- listen, it is not that he sees one ad, nobody sees one ad and decides to do anything. it is what that ad represents and what all the tv shows, movies, everything of the era, that is the culture that they built. it is not one ad, it is not one statement, it is what they built. it is the society they built, the culture that they build. www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1806 that is why they put half a billion dollars into the ctr and the tobacco institute, to create doubt, confusion, and controversy. there is a reason they did that. if everybody knew, if everybody knew, then why are they pumping billions of dollars into this? and by the way, you are not going to see a word in any of the instructions that talk about choice, that talk about control. that is not what addiction is. you saw the definitions, the definitions are in evidence, has nothing to do with your ability to not -- everybody can quit. listen, everybody can quit. that is not what makes you addicted. what makes you addicted is if you have an uncontrollable urge to smoke when you know it is bad for you and that is what it is, that is all, it is a very simple thing, but think, have common sense. you think this guy smoked for 50 years, it was enough to give him bladder cancer, but it was not enough to addict him? i mean, come on. by the way, they keep -- the awareness polls, let us talk about that. because they are tricky. turn this on for me. is this on? okay. they showed you two polls, they said, oh, we www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1807 showed you two polls that were not awareness polls, remember, there were two polls that were not awareness polls, they were belief polls, they were belief polls, remember that? look at the polls that they sent. they said, "do you think cigarette smoking is harmful or not?" harmful. does not mean it caused cancer, does not mean it caused emphysema. harmful could be short of breath, scratchy throat, a million other things. where does it say cancer there. there is polls. where are those polls? where are those polls that say do you think cigarette smoking causes cancer? where is that poll? they did not show it to you. do you believe smoking causes lung cancer? they did not show you that poll. that poll is in the government report that we showed you. this is harmful. yeah, i'm sure it is harmful, could cause a million things, but it does not say cancer. and when they come in here and they say they are not disputing the findings, we do not dispute. well, what do you mean you do not dispute? you spent the whole hour saying that we did not know. well, then when did you conceal? when did www.uslegalsupport.com 813-876-4722 1808 you conspire? i did not hear them once saying, yeah, we concealed and we conspired, not once. did you hear them say that? all they said was we do not dispute it. well, does that mean that you do not admit it? because that is the law of this case, they did. and somebody got hurt. thank you.