5 mr. schlesinger: may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. thank you. so we are a little bit ahead of schedule. this was a long trial by general standards. some of us have been in shorter ones and much longer ones. some of you -- i cannot even remember, quite frankly, if any of you have ever been a juror before that deliberated to verdict; but today you will have that opportunity. and as i told you at the beginning of this case, this is an important case. it involves serious matters. and i'm kind of -- i'm going to try to address them with the respect, dignity and gravity that i think they deserve. i want to cite to you a simple rule that i think is an overarching theme that should carry through, a principle to help us understand some of this. and what i would say is that a manufacturer is never allowed to needlessly endanger the public. and if they do, and, as a result, somebody is hurt, the manufacturer is responsible for the harm. if the manufacturer does this wrongful conduct on purpose and intentionally, then such conduct warrants sanctions and penalties by a jury of that company's peers. a manufacturer is never allowed to conceal a danger they would -- they know about in their product, because concealing dangers needlessly endanger the public. a general principle. and let us talk about the story of this case a little bit comprehensively. one of the jury instructions that you will hear is that a company is entitled to be treated with the rights of a person. and that is fair, because, in this country, we try to treat all -- all people and fictional corporate entities as equal under the law; but when you have the rights of a person, you also have the obligations of a person. and i told you what this case was going to be about, and i'm going to come back to the theme of what this case is about. this case is about an opportunity, through george banks and his family, a smoker, who was clearly a class member by every definition of the word -- and i will get into that -- to express, as part of our community, moral condemnation -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- to a company -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: the objection's overruled. go ahead, mr. schlesinger. mr. furr: i make a motion, your honor. the court: your motion's denied, sir. overruled. mr. schlesinger: the punishment, the nature of punishment, the nature of a fine, this is the tool that we have at our disposal in what is known as a quasi-criminal context. this case is not the beginning. it is far along. this matter has been going on for decades. we are at a point in time here where we have moved very far through a process, all established by the findings of the prior engle jury. you are an engle progeny jury. you are the children of engle. and you have the right, the responsibility, the obligation and the duty, as his honor will instruct you, to take the findings, the supreme court-approved fault findings, against the wrongful conduct of this -- of these companies. and they are represented here by the attorneys. and they may be nice guys, but they are not r.j. reynolds and they are not philip morris. they can call any witness they want. they did not call a corporate representative from the company. you did not hear anybody -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: they -- mr. heise: objection. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: they -- you are entitled to hear from whoever witnesses you want. you heard from the family that are survivors of george banks. you are also entitled to hear from a corporate representative, a corporate executive, to come down -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. this is part of a motion in limine pretrial. the court: the objection's overruled. go ahead, sir. mr. schlesinger: and -- and you are entitled to hear from them and look them in the eye and hear what they have to say about this. but here's what we know. and this is without a doubt. and i ask you, embrace these findings, because some of the -- some of the ways to look at it is you have found these findings yourself. you embrace them as if they -- you found them yourselves. and his honor will say they are the law, you must apply them, you have no choice. and that is fine, but they are also true. they are facts, they are law. this is an industry represented here by the two biggest manufacturers, r.j. reynolds and philip morris, who are culpable for, at fault, right now, for fraud, conspiracy, marketing and selling and -- mr. heise: objection. this is misstating the law. the court: okay. again, ladies and gentlemen, the instructions are as i read them. if the lawyers say something contrary to the instructions, always follow the instructions. you may proceed, sir. mr. schlesinger: fraud, defrauding the american public as to the known dangers -- "fraud" means being dishonest on purpose. "conspiracy," to gather together with all of the other members of their -- of their industry, including the center for tobacco research and the tobacco industry research council, that mr. heimann changed the name of so it would sound less industry friendly, and the tobacco institute. and the traveling truth squad. and the college of tobacco knowledge. those entities, the ctr, the ti, the tirc, all of the major manufacturers, including all of those gobbled up by rjr -- brown & williamson, american tobacco company -- they are all culpable in a conspiracy to deny the truth about the health effects of tobacco, to sustain their business over the rights and the safety of their customers. that is a starting point. and that is why i say -- and i will show you how to get to where we want to be, because we have come so far. we have come so far, because we are at a point where fault has been established. we will show how it applies to one smoker -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. that is a misstatement of the law, your honor. the court: all right. again, ladies and gentlemen, the legal instructions as -- as -- they are as how i read them, okay? if the lawyers say something that conflicts with the legal instructions, always follow the legal instructions. go ahead, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: yes. fault findings have been established. we will show how a single smoker, george banks, a little man, not a -- not a giant man, somebody that you could squash under the foot of a corporate entity, we are going to talk about him, and i'm going to empower you, because today you have power. the power you have today is more power than you may ever hold again in your life; and especially with george banks, and especially with some of the things they said about him and the picture they tried to portray of this gentleman. and i will acknowledge the weaknesses, but the picture they portrayed of this gentleman -- what a powerful message. what a powerful voice from a jury it will be if you say to this company, you cannot do this, not even to george banks, not even to the weak and the vulnerable and the post -- the folks that are most easily preyed upon. mr. furr: your honor, i object to this. the court: i sustain the objection. ladies and gentlemen, that is not an issue in this case, and i sustain the objection. mr. furr: i move for a motion -- i make a motion, your honor. the court: your motion's denied. it is improper argument -- mr. schlesinger: in -- the court: -- so disregard the comments. keep going, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: i apologize, judge. in an era where a gentleman was born in 1914, and his life parallelled the existence, the implementation and the initiation of a product that came to define the 20th century, the cigarette century, that was epidemic proportions of deaths caused by a product that was deadly and dangerous, known to be so, discovered by people like claude teague in the '50s; and rather than make the right choice, the moral choice, the decent choice, the human choice, they lost their way. their moral compass did not direct them in the right direction. they went off the rails. they said, our clients are dying. too bad. we are making money. they did not care. we will lie. we will lie to the american public, we will deceive, we will give people an illusion of safety with filters, we will provide them with a psychological crutch to keep smoking, we will undermine everything about what it is that we will need to do to keep our business rolling. that is -- that is what the proofs of the engle findings establish. that is where we are when we have come this far. and i say to you that -- if you remember the iwo jima memorial, the famous picture taken when the men were raising the flag in iwo jima, in world war ii, and they were raising the flag, they had fought a battle against overwhelming odds, and a flag was partially raised; and the symbol there is freedom and achieving monumental victory over great odds. and what is the point of this? the symbolism is we are pushing the flag up, but it is not all the way up. and what i suggest to you is, today, in part, you get to be the people that finalize planting that flag in a vertical position to say, we validate these engle findings. we apply them to the banks family, to the loss of this one man, this generic smoker, he who is typical of so many of the people that happen to be in the state of florida that are this engle progeny. 1913, the camel was invented, 1914. 1914, 100 years ago. we are talking about a day of reckoning. we are talking about an accounting for past misdeeds. that is why we are here. that is why this is important. we are going back in time. we are looking at corporate conduct that set the -- the sad standard for corporate misbehavior in our country for a century; and when you punish them, you are punishing them not only for george banks, but for the harm they did to others -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- and you are -- mr. furr: your honor, that is a flat misstatement of the law. the court: ladies and gentlemen, i explained that in the jury instructions. if my jury instructions differ from the lawyers' statements, you will always follow the jury instructions. mr. furr: and i move for a motion based on that. i make a motion. the court: denied, sir. proceed, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: you will hear the instruction. you are allowed to learn about reprehensibility. reprehensibility has to do with harm to -- entitlement -- not -- excuse me. i lost -- i lose my train of thought. i'll get back on track. look, the law is going to show you very simply -- question 8, put question 8 up, please. this is the question i want you to know. this is where we are going. this is the goal that i'm trying to show you how to get there. i'm going to show you the roadmap of how to get there. and the question is going to be: under the circumstances, are punitive damages warranted? and all of the evidence of what we call reprehensibility, wrongfulness, indecent behavior, amoral conduct, these things all are driven by the actions of the tobacco companies over the decades, through the conspiracy, through the fraud, through the selling of an unreasonably dangerous, defective, addictive product, far more dangerous than it needs to be, that captures people, constrains their choice -- mr. furr: excuse me, your honor. your honor, i object. punitive damages are not available for selling a defective product. the court: overruled. mr. furr: it is a misstatement of law. the court: the law is set out in the legal instructions. ladies and gentlemen, you will follow those legal instructions as i've instructed you. you may proceed, sir. mr. schlesinger: for the harm to george banks and others. twenty million people have died. we are going to talk about that. look here, you will see. this is the question. it is question 18, not 8, because we have a lot of questions. but this is the question: state whether by -- you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant under the circumstances of this case. philip morris, "yes"; r.j. reynolds tobacco company, "yes." and then we have to come back monday. and that is all i want. i want you to -- i want to try to stitch together why we have to be here on monday, because you are going to check those boxes off "yes," and we can resolve the matter of punitive damages in an amount that you think will be appropriate to punish them for the harm they have done to george banks and others, and to -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- deter -- mr. furr: punitive damages are not available for harm -- the court: overruled. mr. furr: -- to others. the court: overruled. you will follow the legal instructions, ladies and gentlemen. mr. schlesinger: -- and to deter future conduct. j.r.r. tolkien, the fellowship of the ring, said that even the smallest person can change the course of the future. i notice j.r.r. is just a rearrangement of rjr, like reynolds. but even the smallest person can change the course of the future. and that is the kind of thing i want you to be thinking about as we go through this, because i say this is a day of reckoning, a chance to make an accounting for past misdeeds, for a man whose life parallelled the rise of the camel cigarette. it was inevitable that their lives would be intertwined. he fell into a use of a product that was dangerous during a period of time where nobody knew, nobody understood it. they -- there was no common knowledge amongst the public before the '60s. it was not appreciated how dangerous it was. and folks by the millions, the majority of americans, the majority of american men, smoked. they believed it was fine. doctors were smoking and telling you -- they were using doctors in advertisements. it is a man from a different era. you must place that into context so you recognize no matter how it came to be that an official public pronouncement finally, in the '60s, let folks know this is causing cancer, however well that was disseminated, and however well it was countered by the tobacco companies to confuse them and the folks going forward as to the dangers, that confusion campaign went on for decades. but prior to the '60s, george banks smoked in at least the '30s, maybe even the '20s, but at least the '30s, '40s, '50s and '60s, for decades. and you know the adolescent brain -- you heard evidence that most people smoke in adolescence. you heard evidence that george started in adolescence. most people are addicted in adolescence. it is an addiction of youth. children -- not -- young people who -- young -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: i -- i misspoke, and i changed it. mr. heise: we filed a motion -- mr. schlesinger: young people, youth -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: -- do not know what they are getting themselves into. their frontal lobes are not -- are not well established. they do not know what the future holds. they cannot make important, long-range planning decisions. all the statistics we heard are, people that are young, that start smoking cigarettes, they do not think they are going to be smoking in five years. and it is the pediatric brain, so -- so exquisitely sensitive to the -- to the application of nicotine that is what starts the process. and nicotine addiction is not a free choice, and we will talk about that. the -- this question, you need to figure out how to get there, and we need to show you the evidence that gets you there. so let us -- let us start doing that now. i want to show you some of the -- some of the documents that are pertinent to this, because you had not seen some of the original documents. you have not seen some of these documents. i want to start with tamol, and then i want to go to crop, okay? i'm going to -- there is a lot of documents in evidence that are internal documents. they talk about such things as, we know we are a highly stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. now they are under the fda. that is the food and drug administration. we know that they are selling an addictive drug, and nothing else. they say, do not think of the cigarette as the product; the cigarette is but a package. the product is the nicotine in the smoke. that is what they knew since the '60s. they said, moreover, nicotine is addictive. they knew that. they said it had unattractive side effects. they said that we are in the business of selling nicotine; and if we did not have nicotine, our entire industry would collapse. now, human beings, decent human beings -- like robert fulghum's book, everything i needed to learn, i learned in kindergarten, is, you know, tell people you are sorry if you do something wrong; do not -- do not be -- you know, be decent to people. do not hurt people. and no matter how you cut it, no matter what you want to say about my client, george banks, his human imperfections, no matter how you cut it, what they did was on purpose; and at the end of this, i say to you, no matter what they say to run him down or blame that victim, i say that george banks was better than they were. he was a better man than they were. everything about him was decent. there is nothing in this record other than a character attack on alcohol use, which is irrelevant to whether or not he is a member of the class. it says all floridians and their survivors, and these are the survivors; and she is a survivor hanging on just to see this case through. and i'm so thankful that judge tuter gave us the opportunity to bring this case forward and get this case done, because what you heard from her is a dying declaration. and that is a rare thing to hear in a courtroom. mr. heise: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: and the -- the court: mr. schlesinger, stick to the evidence, please. mr. schlesinger: and the one thing she held on to and said was her vision of the central truth in this case: my husband was addicted. the records are irrefutable. the man smoked for a minimum of 50 years. you can read the records any way you want, but do not allow folks to apply shifting justification to how it is that you make a determination of what the evidence should be. you want to keep it fair on both sides? what did george banks see, what did not he see? use the same -- use the same rules. you heard cross-examination of dr. proctor. it was in the reader's digest. george banks did not read the reader's digest. george banks must have known about all of these dangers. they did not put anything into his hands. they want to suggest things were in his hands. then they say, george banks did not see our advertisements. we have no proof that anyone saw those advertisements. this goes back a hundred years. even roosevelt hall said it was everywhere. the federal trade commission, in 1981, said it is immersive, it is saturation advertising. nobody can avoid advertising. so, all of these things, use the same justification. use the same basis of consideration. the record is very clear. the record is clear, the man was a long-term smoker. so what -- of what distraction value, of what confusion value, of what doubt-raising value is it that some other folks that barely knew him, that saw him in a -- in a landlady role, or whatever, did not see him smoke? nobody's denying that he smoked. that is not an issue in the case. he was a smoker. now, let us look here. dr. tamol -- this record is in evidence. you have not seen it yet because we showed it -- we showed it -- it is in evidence, but we did not use it with dr. proctor. and we are always trying to go really fast, and i'm going to try to shoot this stuff at you, and you will get what you can out of it, as best i can. but dr. tamol is a philip morris researcher, and he was looking into the concept of a health cigarette. in the '70s, when they had the filter fraud going, the phony filters that were the illusion of filtration, and the phony color-changing dye to make people think that something was coming out of the filter, as the health reassurance campaign, as part of the fraud and the conspiracy, to falsify the truth to the american public so they would keep smoking, the psychological crutch to give our addicted smokers a rationale to keep smoking, what was dr. tamol doing? one thing they were really concerned about were making these light cigarettes. we are beating that machine that tests them because we know that people will smoke to get the nicotine, because that is the determinant of smoking, the sine qua non -- without which there is nothing -- according to dr. teague. without cigarette -- without nicotine, nobody has ever become a smoker. my client would have never smoked 50 years or more, or 60 years. even in '96, in february, there is a note saying he was smoking greater than a pack a day. so that there is evidence from which you can reasonably say that what the family came up with was they thought he kept smoking. now, he may have relapsed, he started smoking again. the '96 record corroborates it. but for purposes of as far as we need to get, 50 years of smoking a pack a day is enough to give you esophageal cancer. there is no doubt about it. we brought a world's expert that is written chapters and books and taught on it for a lifetime. they brought nobody. they could have brought anyone they wanted. they did not rebut it. it is not an issue in dispute. it is a definitive fact, unrebutted. they did not get him to retreat in his opinion. and dr. traube was right on the money as a legitimate, qualified expert, bringing true science that you can rely on. what did dr. tamol say after he was figuring out how can we put out a health cigarette, make people think they are healthy? what is the crucial thing we have to do? we have to determine the minimum nicotine required to keep the normal smoker hooked. the next one about the crop. the minimum amount to keep the normal smoker hooked. meaning, no matter what we do, the essential ingredient is nicotine; we have got to make sure we do not go below a minimum level where the smoker cannot be hooked. nobody chooses addiction. my client did not choose to be addicted. he smoked as a young man, and he became addicted as a young man, in a world where it was perfectly appropriate. and when it came time for information to get out there, he was already hooked. he was addicted. dr. difranza said, in no uncertain terms -- dr. difranza, the real expert -- the man was addicted. his brain was permanently altered, as is all addicts' brains. that is just the harsh reality and truth of this. so here, this is philip morris, dunn to wakeham. this is an article that came -- a paper, internal, secret documents. we never would have seen them. we are learning from them; we will learn from them for decades. they are the internal industry admissions of that which they denied to the public so they could sustain profits and earn money in the billions for decades. and they have succeeded. and they continue, to this day, selling a product that they say is organic. now, in our current society, what does "organic" confer? health. that is health reassurance. even today, right now, on the shelves at the -- at the drugstores, you can buy american spirit cigarettes: one hundred percent additive-free, menthol. is that deceptive and unfair trade practices? is that honest? selling a health cigarette with menthol? and we showed you -- mr. furr: your honor, i object. this is inflammatory. it has nothing to do with this case. the court: i sustain the objection. mr. schlesinger: we -- we showed you the 2013 scientific conclusion by the food and drug administration, that -- that the cigarettes, even today, are more addictive than ever. that is in the surgeon general's report. right in the beginning of the surgeon general's report, the way they are made and processed and grown, they are more addictive than ever today. they are not a leaf rolled up in a field like some natural crop. they are highly processed. they are full of chemicals like ammonia, and they are made and designed to deliver nicotine in the fastest, most addictive form. crack nicotine, freebase nicotine. menthol, according to the food and drug administration, right now, under consideration for removal to help and benefit the public today, despite the fact that more people are dying now than even 50 years ago. mr. furr: your honor, i object. this is -- mr. schlesinger: there is -- mr. furr: -- improper inflammatory argument. it has nothing to do with this case. the court: ladies and gentlemen, again, you will confine the arguments to the evidence in the case. you may proceed, sir. mr. schlesinger: please the court. menthol -- we read it to you, we showed it to you. menthol is a chemical additive that makes cigarettes more addictive, initiates youth into smoking, and -- and nicotine addiction, and makes it harder to quit, representing one-third of the market right now. and it cools the throat as an anesthetic to get that first puff down, because the basis of the business is the adolescent smoker. they are the replacement smokers. now, these are cynical and these are comments that disregard humanity and the reasonableness we expect from people. they lost their moral compass. profit motive made folks go off their moral compass. it is a terrible tragedy in this country that is been going on for decades. we have got the goods on them now because of these internal documents. and six people at a time, drafted to learn about it, get to know something that they did not know. and when you were a member of 60 people back there, in a big group, and we asked everybody to raise their hand about who thinks they know something about smoking, many of you said, i thought i knew, i think i know. well, we live in a culture they created. we have been immersed in cigarette advertising and all the things they have said, the denials they have said all these years. but here's something: the elton john song, mona lisas and mad hatters. it starts out "i thought i knew, but now i know." the rest of the line is "rose trees never grow in new york city. it is a great song. but it starts out, "i thought i knew, but now i know." i hope that as you go through these documents with me, that now you know. now you know really how we got to where we got in this tobacco epidemic, in this country, in a most inappropriate way. this is -- when you lose 20 million americans, it is an atrocity. it is not acceptable under any set of circumstances. there is no consumer product in the united states, there is no consumer product in the history of the world, that kills over half of its users. and what does it look like? it looks like a normal -- a normal product. how can you tell? here's a pack of cigarettes. here's a pack of cigarettes. here's a pack of gum. it looks normal. it hides in plain sight. it does not look like there is anything terrible. here's a pack of playing cards. everything -- it looks the same. the color schemes are the same. it does not look deadly, dangerous. it does not have a skull and crossbones. liggett finally put "smoking is addictive" on the label, but you do not see that on any of these products now. they could have voluntarily did it. they took it off. mr. heise: objection, preemption. the court: ladies and gentlemen, i gave you an instruction about the warning labels. you will follow the instructions i gave you. you may continue, sir. mr. schlesinger: right here. in 1964, they were concerned about the surgeon general's report coming out and what would the impact be. they were worried about their business. they would always describe themselves in human terms: the health of their business, the prosperity of their business. will they have replacement smokers, because the population must continue to give birth. this is how they refer to themselves, in human terms. now, i say they have no soul, but they have a survival instinct. mr. furr: objection, your honor, that is just an -- the court: sir, sir. mr. furr: -- inflammatory -- the court: you can not make personal comments. you can comment on the evidence. that is a personal comment. ladies and gentlemen, you will disregard the comment from the attorney. mr. furr: i make a motion on the cumulative effect of all these improper arguments. the court: all right. your motion's denied, sir. mr. schlesinger: the tobacco company has a survival instinct. i'll prove that to you. now, right here, this document came out -- i'm trying to go through it real quick with you. this was in 19 -- in 1965, after the 1964 surgeon general's report came out. and they were trying to figure out what is going to happen to our business. they were worried they were really going to have a deceleration of business. and it did knock the business down for a little while. it did go down for a little while, but then they also compared it to an english experience, and they said, you know what? it was not that bad. as a matter of fact, the first punch -- meaning, the '64 surgeon general's report -- was by no means as lethal as it first appeared. they are talking about lethality to them. they are referring to themselves anthropomorphically, in human terms, but here's how they refer to their customers. and you already heard how they described them like rats in a cage. and when you stop being able to see your customers as people, and merely as something that you can consume, just like your customers consume cigarettes, you lose your moral compass, you lose your way. you do something that is indecent and inexcusable, wrongful, on purpose, intentional, and justifying in this setting because you have been entitled to say so, an expression of moral condemnation from you that says -- mr. furr: i object, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- we want you to -- mr. furr: that is an improper -- please do not talk over my objection, sir. your honor, that is an improper argument. the court: mr. schlesinger, stick to the legal instructions. ladies and gentlemen, you will be guided by the legal instructions. please go ahead, sir. mr. schlesinger: now -- mr. furr: and, your honor, could he be cautioned not to talk over my objections -- mr. schlesinger: i did not talk over his objection, your honor. mr. furr: -- so i do not have to raise my voice? the court: all right. when he makes an objection, please stop, mr. schlesinger. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: here it says, there is a backlog of youth who have refrained from taking up smoking in the face of the report. a substantial number of these can be expected to join with this year's crop of prospects to produce a healthy increase in the number of new smokers. so the youth that slowed down because of the warning, they were really -- they were really satisfied that, despite this backlog of youth, they could be expected to join with this year's crop -- "a crop" -- of prospects to produce a healthy increase in the number of new smokers. again, you are referring to people, youth, that are going to become addicted, that are going to be lifelong smokers, that are going to deny -- that are going to die, and you are going to replace them as replacement smokers with more youth? that -- that does not meet with the bounds of human decency, just plain and simple. the next one we will go to -- i want to go to the instruction for punitive damages, please. now, you have to realize, this is an industrially created epidemic. and what do i mean by that? this is not a disease that is being eradicated because it is polio or malaria, that we have a pill. there is a powerful industry. and you heard dr. proctor talk about the overwhelming power of this industry, and how it invaded every part of society. this is a powerful industry that is driving, driving with all of its might and all of its force, the perpetuation of this epidemic. now, when -- this is the highest standard of proof, the highest burden of proof we have to prove to you that punishment is warranted for people who document, the smartest people, the brightest people: the claude teagues, the princeton graduates, the people that should be curing cancer, not causing cancer; the people that should be protecting youth, not addicting youth; the people that should not have doubt as their product. how different would our world have been if, in 1953, when they knew full well and when dr. teague knew full well it was causing cancer, and in the early '60s, when they knew indisputably it was causing cancer -- and you cannot wrap your mind around it, but imagine if they had come out and said, oh, my god, oh, my god, mass marketing -- mass production led to mass marketing, led to mass addiction, and now we, as a responsible titan of industry, captains of industry, the folks that are -- that are the most high echelon in the country, would have said, we have to stop, we have to take our responsibility, we cannot make this product, we cannot make the product, but instead, what did they make? they made mass hypnosis. and they said, we are going to hire public relations people, and we are going to take responsibility to make it safe or get out of the business. well, you know why i want to talk about did george banks rely? if they had got out of the business, there would not be cigarettes in the '50s, and george banks would have lived the rest of his years -- mr. furr: objection, preemption. your honor, move for mistrial. mr. schlesinger: -- that he was entitled to have. the court: ladies and gentlemen, that is not a proper argument. please follow the jury instructions as i instructed you. i sustain the objection. mr. heise: we would move, as well, your honor. the court: the motion for mistrial is denied. mr. schlesinger: this is the -- this is the -- evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter in issue. there is no doubt about the doubt. their product was doubt. they sold it, they relied on it. it worked. they studied it. they knew that the filters were getting people to continue to smoke. they knew that making uncertainty in the minds of people, particularly those dependent on drugs, would undermine their ability to continue -- to quit smoking and they would continue. there is no doubt about the doubt. the doubt is part of the conspiracy, it is part of the engle findings; and so this burden of proof is the burden of proof that allows you to say, the evidence is clear, it is explicit, we are not confused by it, there is no confusion -- there was a confusion campaign by tobacco, but here, you have the right to determine from the evidence that you were not confused. you have the right to determine that it is clear. and with that high standard of proof, you have the right to determine that punishment is warranted, and that these folks should be punished for what they did. so let us go to a couple of the documents. let us go to the pt03615 -- this board. (discussion off the record between counsel.) mr. schlesinger: i do not know. it does not have a number on it. just put one up. so this is the truth about their business. this is the internal truth about the chemical compound, nicotine. the cigarette market would collapse, philip morris would collapse, and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. and then they talked about -- and this is claude teague again -- we can never be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market would suddenly open, we could be out of business overnight. that is -- nicotine addiction is their business, and that is the -- that is the basis of their business. i would like to show you that there was no doubt that they knew that cigarettes were carcinogenic. these are all their internal documents. and way back in the '60s -- you have seen this, this is in evidence -- carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds of smoke. obviously, the evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is -- "such an," it is a misspelling -- is scant. and then another one here: cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. they cause lung cancer. and yet the men that promised to stop making it, the men that promised to take this out -- these materials out were not saying that because they truthfully wanted to take any of the stuff out that was bad, or that they would stop making it. they never intended to do that. it was their way of reassuring the public that, in fact, they could keep smoking. and sure -- sure enough, they did. now, this is in evidence, the major conclusions from the surgeon general's report. and i'm going to refer to it real quickly. and you heard about how -- you heard about -- yesterday with dr. hoge -- and i'm only going to speak about him for a minute, because there is an instruction -- yeah, we will come to that. we got this up, let us do this real quick. these are the major conclusions. this is surgeon general, 2014, and this just came out. here, find the major conclusions and i'll read it. i'll read it. all right. thanks -- thanks, jon. all right. so, this is 2014, 50 years after the surgeon general's report came out in 1964, the first surgeon general's -- and i will show you the 1915 surgeon general, because i put that into evidence. one of the things that happened in opening statement was i told you that when they delayed incorporating the term "addiction" in the '60s, in the first surgeon general's report -- remember i told you about that? -- and that they delayed by 25 years public knowledge that nicotine was addictive, and it was not until surgeon general koop put it in the report in 1988, that it became widely publicized even though that conclusion was attacked and called -- was denigrated by tobacco, tobacco delayed, by decades, the recognition by the public and the public health authority of the fact that nicotine was addictive even though internally they said, we possess a knowledge of nicotine far greater than any other public health scientists. they knew it was addicted -- addictive, they delayed the recognition of it for decades, and it did not appear as addictive in a surgeon general's report until 1988. what year did george banks quit? 1988, right? we have evidence two years before 1990, he quit in 1988. knowledge is out there, information is out there. george banks was aware of the 1964 report because everybody was aware of the 1964 report. how about george banks was aware of the 1988 finding that nicotine addiction was now something that the public health officials and the famous dr. koop said it is addictive? and that played a role in why he quit. that is reliance. that shows had they have told him sooner, had they have shown him earlier, he would have had a chance to quit earlier, he would have had a chance to live and not die when he did from esophageal cancer, and had additional life expectancy. they did not tell him that they were hiding the truth about addiction. they did not tell him that they were foisting lies and conspiratorial deceit on health reassurance to make people think filters would be better -- and he smoked filters -- or that -- that you did not have to worry about it, time is on your side, it is still an open question. they had a traveling truth squad. it was a traveling hit squad. all they did was run around and lie. and it is like a negative campaign. they are liars -- mr. heise: objection, your honor, inflammatory rhetoric about squads. the court: again, sir, stick to the evidence, please. mr. schlesinger: they are telling lies. what do you do to your opponent? call him a liar. they are raising doubt and confusion. what do you do to your opponent? he is raising doubt and confusion. but the fact is, is we know, in 1988, that is when the surgeon general said "addiction." and i'll show you. i put into evidence the 1915 surgeon general's report, because in the beginning, in opening statement, mr. furr, a fine lawyer, a powerful advocate for his client, i take nothing away from him, but he is not r.j. reynolds, but he got up and said, after i made an opening -- and, you know, we talked about ego yesterday with this fine dr. hoge, we talked about him -- you know, look, everybody's got an ego. i got an ego. but sometimes when you have an ego, it reminds you to do something. and i say there was confusion. i -- i said: tobacco was not determined to be addictive by the public surgeon until 1988, and it was delayed for decades, and -- and i believe -- it does not matter what i believe -- and the evidence supports that contention, but mr. furr got up and referred to what i said in opening statement. and he said: mr. schlesinger said that the surgeon general of the united states did not announce tobacco to be addictive until 1988, and then there was a pause, and in the transcript -- and i can show it to you -- there is one word, a single declarative utterance from mr. furr: false. and that got my ego, because i'm saying to myself, mr. furr is saying i said something false, and he is saying it to you, i am being false. so, i looked carefully, i looked very closely. you may have to put that up. and we have in evidence the surgeon general's 1915 report, and it does not say anything about a warning of smoking being addictive. it does not say it. that was a false statement. the surgeon general of the united states did not make that statement at that time. here's what they did: and i say there is a little bit of something here that you should consider as to whether or not it is completely candid and forthright. because they also said my client died alone, and i'm going to address that. i'm going to address that, as well. but here it says: warnings about the addictiveness of cigarettes, 1915. surgeon general report, 1915. dr. blue is the surgeon general in 1915. and then it is got a quote over here, "smoking is addictive." and the -- the implication was, as early as 1915, when my client was two years old -- and there is no reason to think he ever saw it; but if everything that is out there is seen by everybody -- no implication he saw it -- it says, smoking is addictive, and then there is a document here that they point to. well, that document is not the surgeon general's report. that document is a public health bulletin. it was the garment workers district that asked the surgeon general to study diseases in the garment workers, and some other doctor named simenewski (phonetic) did a report, and there is -- the word "addiction" appears in the report, and it does not say smoking is addictive. the word in the report, which i do not even know if this report is even in evidence, said that pipe tobacco and cigarette smoking are smoked by the garment workers in these dusty factories, in these relative amounts, and most of it is cigarette smoking, and it said, smoke -- cigarette smoking was the most popular form of tobacco addiction. it was a descriptive term of something in a document that is not the surgeon general's report. it did not say smoking is addictive; it said that of three kinds of smoking in 1915, the cigarette smoking was, quote, the most popular form of tobacco addiction. and through the power of crunching and reading and extracting, they found a word in a document and they turned it into this: a board they showed you that they said was -- that the surgeon general report says smoking is addictive and, therefore, there was a warning. none of that is true. and i put in the actual 1915 report. you cannot find the word "addiction" in there, because it is not in there, except having something to do with morphine. there is nothing in there about cigarettes. now, we are talking about the health warning the surgeon general put -- now let us go back to the -- we are talking about the warning the surgeon generals made when smoking and health became a public health issue with john f. kennedy in the '60s, and has gone on for 50 years since then. this is an irrelevancy, but it is also not a legitimate and -- and honorable way to truly tell you what is going on. it is confusing, it is misleading, it raises doubt that you should not have. mr. furr: your honor, i object to the personal attacks by counsel. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: now, the major conclusions -- one of the things i've got to tell you, one of the things is, we do not know how much evidence you need. you know, they used to have a little tv show, the gong show, when somebody could finally come out, hit the gong, and they are like, that is it, stop. you guys do not have that button. so, in an abundance of caution, we sometimes go too far. maybe you could have gotten some of this in a week -- we are saving a week -- because i want you to come back on monday, but we have saved a week. so here are the major conclusions: this is hot off the press. this is brand new. this is available to any member of the public. it was announced at the white house. dr. proctor was there. proctor, cummings, difranza -- the leaders, the titans in the public health battle against the scourge of cigarette disease and death in this country -- we brought you witnesses from the surgeon general's report. we brought you legitimate titans in the industry, and they wanted to talk about the money they earned. all in, the money they earned in this case was less than what dr. hoge earned in this one case. they did not earn 70,000 together. traube -- traube and -- and proctor and difranza, together, their billing, when you heard it, it did not add up to the 70,000 of an unqualified expert, who you have the right -- and i'll show you the instruction -- to reject his opinions. i told you, you have great power. this is the most power you will ever have in your life for some of you, and it is a -- it is the greatest act a citizen can perform. this is a serious business. and the judge lets the witness testify, because he also tells you, you have heard what a technical opinion is by an expert. these guys are like, you go, we will figure out where you are going and we will follow you and put it on. the court: that is your 45-minute warning. mr. schlesinger: yes. thank you, judge. (discussion off the record between counsel.) mr. schlesinger: yeah, i know. so it says here: you have heard opinion testimony from persons referred to as expert witnesses. you may give it such weight as you think it deserves. but here's the key: you may reject it, considering the knowledge, skill, experience and training of the witness. i do not want to spend a lot of time with dr. hoge. you saw him yesterday. it came out the way it came out. if it took too long to do it, like i said, we do not know how much information you need. my point is this: you can reject him. so dr. hoge, a bowling ball, and you roll him right down the lane and out of that courtroom, you reject his opinion, because it serves no beneficial opinion to finding the truth and the justice in this case. none. however, this is what you should look at, as well: the century-long epidemic -- remember, dr. hoge did not know what that was -- the century-long epidemic of cigarette smoking has caused an enormous avoidable public health tragedy. since the first surgeon general's report in 1964, more than 20 million premature deaths can be attributed to cigarette smoking. next, number 2: the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking cigarettes. now, that is a portentous statement, because the surgeon general, they are not in the business of public relations and advertising to make money on a deadly and lethal product. they are in the business of carefully reviewing legitimate scientific evidence, not false evidence, not evidence planted by people into the halls of the ama and harvard and the dsm, where even dr. hoge, we know, a consultant for tobacco, is now writing how the document should be used for forensic purposes. that is scary, because they tried with the dsm-iii; they are still doing it today. the evidence came from the witness stand by dr. hoge's own admission. he did not make the right choice. he should have disqualified himself from that committee, and he admitted it and he did not, and he also admitted nicotine played a role in this gentleman's cigarette smoking. nobody smokes 50 years for pleasure, taste, satisfaction. that is just -- that is nonsensical statements to sell a product, to show health and sports figures and glamorous celebrities. and philip morris says: you smoke, and something wonderful happens. remember that video? something wonderful happens. yeah, it is wonderful. you get emphysema, you get esophageal cancer, your body is wracked, eaten alive, you decompensate and you die. there is nothing wonderful about it. the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking. and that goes right along with the findings in engle. they concealed and omitted material information not otherwise known to the public, with the intent that people would rely. and the reliance comes from the fact that saturation advertising was immersive. they did not tell them the truth. and in the '80s, when they finally did in 1988, is not it an interesting coincidence and cannot we tie together that that is when he quit smoking? let us go back to the -- go to number 6 -- go to number 9. let us take a second here. i want you to think about this: i want you to think about this because -- i'll tell you why after i tell you, because i've got to tell you in the right way for it to have the kind of impact that i think it is going to have. i think it is clever. maybe that is because it is absurd. the court: mr. schlesinger, please make arguments. mr. schlesinger: yes. i'm sorry, judge. we are floridians, but we are also americans. we live in the state of florida, a beautiful state. some of us were born and raised here. now, i want you to think about this image. conjure this image up in your mind. you go out on i-95 and you start driving north and there are not any cars. no cars. and when you pass the gas stations, there is no gas stations. and if you stop in a strip mall, there is nobody there. and if you go to your friends' homes, they are not there. and if you go to a church, or a school, or a courthouse, or a hospital, there is nobody there. and then you go to the populated parts of the coast, and you go to palm beach, and you go to jacksonville, and you go to tallahassee, and you go down to tampa. and everywhere you drive, there is skyscrapers, the lights are not on and there is nobody there. it is the middle of a beautiful day. there is nobody there. not a single soul. then you go to the central part of the state. you say, i'm going to go up on the lake wales ridge, and i'm going to drive up and down sebring. and i'm going to go out to hardee county, and i'm going to go look in zolfo springs. and i'm going to go to the farmlands in the state of florida. there is nobody there. i'm going to go down to the keys. i'm going to drive down to islamorada and duck key. i'm going to go to marathon, i'm going to stop in key west, and i'm going to look for somebody. there is nobody there. not a single solitary soul in the entire state of florida. no traffic jams. no -- no fire trucks, no firemen, no policemen. nothing, nobody, empty. the state of florida like it was when panthers roamed the beaches. imagine that. not a single, solitary soul in the state of florida. that is 20 million people. that is the population of the state of florida. so if you want to think about -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. this is talking about -- mr. schlesinger: if you -- mr. heise: -- state farm/williams, harm to others. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: if you want to think about and put it into terms where -- because here's my concern: numbers numb. numbers numb. we throw out a term and it has no meaning, because it is so big, it is incomprehensible to the average person. we know of tragedies that have occurred in our recent memory that have taken lives of folks, and we know how important they are, and i will not invoke them here, because i will not degrade the memory of those things, but you can think of them, but i -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. this is an improper argument, your honor. the court: mr. schlesinger, please stick to the evidence. mr. schlesinger: yes. the court: none of this is in evidence. mr. schlesinger: twenty -- go back up there. the first number, the first one. twenty million people are dead. that is harm to others. i wanted to try to give you a way of thinking about it in terms that expresses the enormity of the harm. they were all parts of somebody's family. somebody cared about them, and they cared about somebody. a parent, a mother, a husband, a father, an aunty, an uncle, a grandparent. mr. furr: objection, your honor. this is improper argument. the court: sustained. this is not proper. this case is about george banks, ladies and gentlemen, as it is set forth in the instructions. this is improper argument. i sustain the objection, so disregard -- mr. furr: your honor, i make a motion. the court: so disregard the remarks. the motion for mistrial is denied. go ahead, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: now to the last one, to that -- to number 9. this is the current posture in our current environment. and it says that the burden of death and disease from tobacco use in the united states is overwhelmingly caused by cigarettes and other combusted tobacco products. rapid elimination of their use will dramatically reduce this burden. let us go to my -- take the first -- the concurring cause instruction, then the pictograph, please. so this is the legal cause instruction. and you are going to hear it, you heard it read; and it says blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. let us go to the next one. let me show you what it means. this is what the concurring cause instruction means. mr. furr: your honor, i object to this board. please take it down. mr. schlesinger: i've used this before, judge. the court: take it down until i see what the objection is. what is the objection, sir? mr. furr: it is inflammatory. i do not know if you saw it, your honor. mr. schlesinger: it is not inflammatory. the court: hand me the slide, please. mr. schlesinger: pardon me? the court: hand me the slide, please. mr. furr: prejudicial, inflammatory. mr. schlesinger: it is my way of explaining what i think the instruction means, your honor. the court: okay. well, you cannot use these -- you can use the demonstrative, sir, but not with those headstones on there. it is not proper, it is inflammatory. so i sustain the objection on that. if you want to use it some other way, you can do that. mr. schlesinger: all right. thank you, judge. all right. put up the instruction. i wanted to give you a visual way of understanding this instruction. the point is this: when you get to the first question on the verdict form, which is whether or not this gentleman was a class member, which you will eventually get to, that is -- you know, i'm trying to plot the way for you to get to the question about punishment damages. all of the other questions are based upon reasonable degrees of probability, what is more likely than not. and we talked about there is no doubt about the doubt. in these questions, george banks gets the benefit of the doubt, because the law says, more likely than not, what is reasonable in terms of what really happened. the unrefuted evidence is he died of esophageal cancer caused by smoking, but there could very well have been a contributing cause by alcohol. and so what i wanted to show was that in order to be regarded as a legal cause of esophageal cancer and death, cigarette smoking need not be the only cause. cigarette smoking may be a legal cause of esophageal cancer and death even though it acts in combination with alcoholic beverages like beer or whiskey -- the court: you can use that slide. you can use that slide in that way. mr. schlesinger: thank you. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of esophageal cancer and death, the cigarettes need not be the only cause. the cigarettes may be a legal cause of esophageal cancer and death, even though it operates in combination with alcohol -- i put a beer up there. it could have been whiskey, beer, what have you. the man drank, there is no doubt about that -- if such beer, if such alcohol, occurs at the same time as the cigarettes and the cigarettes contributes substantially to producing esophageal cancer and death. and they did. and if he smoked a pack a day for 50 years, the minimum amount that, in the most conservative analysis of the evidence in this case, that nobody smokes without addiction, he died of the disease that the engle class says is caused by esophageal cancer, and dr. traube said it was caused by esophageal cancer, and so did dr. difranza, and he said the man was definitively addicted, which is dependent -- and do not forget this: dependence to nicotine does not have to be the only cause. just like this: dependence to nicotine, which is physiological dependence and everything that goes with it, that incredibly hard drug to quit, 20 million people have died, it kills over half of its users, just because you are addicted to the drug, and maybe some quit, or he could have quit, and he did quit, it does not mean he was not dependent to some extent all those years that he was smoking. so it is not an absolute. he could have been dependent and he could have enjoyed smoking, even though the enjoyment of smoking is driven by nicotine. relaxation by smoking is driven by the fact that, as yvonne said, when that nicotine dies down in him, he needed to replenish it, because withdrawal symptoms, shakes, things like that, are signs of nicotine withdrawal, and a lot of the relaxing effects of nicotine are because people are taking the drug to relieve the withdrawal symptoms. however, as long as nicotine -- you can put up the question on the verdict form for class membership, but put up the class membership slide first -- as long as that nicotine was an important cause, a substantial contributing cause to why he smoked; and nobody smokes a pack a day for 50 years -- they say themselves: without nicotine, there is no smoking. that is their internal document from the '60s. without nicotine, there is no smoking. they say that themselves. that pack minimum, pack a day for 50 years, it could have been as much as a pack and a half or more, because he said greater than a pack a day, for 60 years; but, in any event, it was enough to kill him. it did kill him by esophageal cancer. addiction drove it. and the simple statement i told you from that song by the fixx, one thing leads to the other: smoking defective, addictive cigarettes that are unreasonably dangerous, one thing leads to the other. the nicotine leads to smoking, smoking leads to millions of inhalations of toxic, poisonous, cancer-causing chemicals, that leads to esophageal cancer. and, in his case, emphysema, permanent injury to his lungs, and death. you will see a series of questions about emphysema. you are going to be able to probably skip over all of those when you are comfortable with the idea that the smoking was a substantial contributing cause to his -- his esophageal cancer. but the emphysema questions are there if for some reason you decide that in no way did the smoking have any substantial role or significant role in causing his -- his esophageal cancer. there is no evidence to that effect, but the way the law is set up, the judge has a series of questions there; and there is absolutely no doubt the emphysema was caused by smoking, and so you would have to answer those questions, but only if you -- if you did not find that he was killed by the esophageal cancer caused by the smoking. and the evidence is so strong in that regard, we have enough confidence that that will not be an issue, that we are not going to spend time on those series of questions. follow the instructions carefully. it is a lot of like choosing from a menu. if you do 1, then do 2; if you do not do 2, go do 3. there is no way in the world you can understand it when the judge is reading to it -- reading it to you, because you have got to look at it yourself. when you read it yourself, if you read it really carefully, you will understand it and you will follow it. but question 1 is, very simply, the -- can you put up -- can you also put up the definition of the engle class? we will go to this, we will go back. was -- there. all florida citizens and residents and their survivors who have suffered, presently suffer, who have died from diseases and medical conditions caused by their addiction to cigarettes that contain nicotine. now the board about -- (discussion off the record between counsel.) mr. schlesinger: go to that one. so that is the engle class definition. that is the law. all florida residents and their survivors. he was a florida resident, he smoked a lot of cigarettes, he died of a cigarette-related disease under engle, it was addictive, it was unreasonably dangerous and defective. they conspired and defrauded the truth for decades, expecting folks to rely. mr. heimann, whose video we had, said they expected folks to rely. they did rely. their sales went up. the proof is in the pudding. and you can infer from all of this that george banks was entitled to reliance. and here's something you have to understand: how do you rely on something that is concealed? they concealed evidence not -- not known or otherwise admitted. how do you rely on something concealed? well, here's how you do it: you think in terms of what would reasonable men do. you think in terms of, was the lying and denying about addiction, was the lying and denying about the fact that their product was reliably causing cancer and killing their -- their customers, was that -- was the fact that they hid it the kind of information that would be important to a reasonable man? was it material? would a reasonable man have wanted to known that -- to know that? and had they have known that, would it have given them a chance? with the -- the benefit of the doubt in their favor that they could have made a different choice sooner and not succumbed to the horrible tobacco illness that took this man's life so precipitously and so surprisingly that his family had to come running to figure out what happened. and fortunately we have the autopsy that proves it. right here, it says what class membership is not about. there should be no confusion. class membership is not about the fault of either party. it is very important to remember this. on that question 1, was george banks addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of esophageal cancer and death, that first question, it is a -- it is -- it is simplicity. it is that picture i showed you of the hand holding the smoke. it is drug addiction. it is all of the surgeon generals' reports, saying it is the fundamental reason people smoke, and that is why they get diseases. it is that series of boxes in the surgeon general's report, saying how addiction leads to cancer. it is easy. it can be made confusing, it can be made complicated, it can be made to raise doubt and uncertainty; but bottom line, bare minimum, not-in-dispute evidence gets you -- what happened? oh, okay. oh, sure. a picture is worth a thousand words. let us go back to where i was. let us go back to where i was, please, the last one, quickly, please. remember this. and here is what i call a trick. the engle progeny class members from one end of the state to the other are entitled to be in the class, and are not to be excluded out of the class for any reasons that this judge does not advise you on. he is not going to give you -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. that is a complete misstatement of the law. mr. schlesinger: he does not -- the court: hang on, mr. schlesinger. mr. furr: excuse me, sir. please do not talk when i'm objecting. the court: mr. schlesinger. ladies and gentlemen, class membership is defined in the instructions. you will follow the instructions as i have given you guidance on. go ahead, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: if i may. you will not hear a definition of the term "addiction" from this court. addiction is how it appears to you to be. and dependence on a drug and addiction on a drug -- and you heard it from henning -- you heard it from cummings; you heard it from traube, he said our man was addicted. you heard it from the real expert, dr. difranza, who studies brains and permanent changes said it was -- said he was addicted or dependent. you are not going to hear the judge say this is the legal definition of "addiction." you are not going to hear the judge say this is the -- this is the medical consensus definition of "addiction," because there is many different ways to define "addiction." and it can be defined from the single symptom alone of smoking a lot of cigarettes for a long period of time. so it is like -- you know, like some people say, it is like mountains and seasons. you know it when you see it. and you have a business that is based upon the center of their universe being nicotine addiction. they are in the nicotine addiction business. and you have a customer, george banks, who acted in total compliance with everything they expected him to do, all the way along his life. so he was the customer, just like many others, that they expected him to be. class membership, that first question, is he a class member, was he addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine, meaning was that defective, addictive nature of that cigarette that was in the cigarette such that it caused him to get these diseases? he did; we proved it. however, class membership is not about fault. the first question is not about money. the first question, when you answer it "yes" and you move on, you have not awarded any money, you have not compensated them, you have not tried to restore the family for the loss that you are going to measure, the loss -- you are going to evaluate the relationship, the good of the relationship, the bad of the relationship, you are going to contextualize it in terms of nuclear families like the brady bunch that are together all the time, and families for whatever circumstances that are not together all the time, and you are going to decide, did he love them, did somebody love george banks, did katrina love george banks, did she make enough of a -- of a description of her feeling about her father that you know he mattered to her, and do -- is it normal and natural for people to care about their parents even if they are imperfect? so class membership is not about fault. fault comes in the next set of questions. and you can compare relative degrees of responsibility. and we said we take some responsibility -- the family authorized us -- in combination with what they did, which we say is far worse, because it was on purpose. our man was an innocent, whose human weaknesses, his human imperfections, perhaps, prevented him from trying harder to do a better job to quit. and you can assess it and you can assign percentages, but not on question 1, which is merely, is he in the engle class that embraces all americans, all floridians who fit the description. and it is got nothing to do with fault. do not be -- do not be distracted by that, that business about, even if he was addicted, he could have quit. whether he could have quit goes into whether or not there is fault. reliance on a statement from the tobacco industry, that is not class membership. whether addicts lose total control over their minds, that is not class membership. whether addicts can quit, we know they can, they can still be addicts, and they can still be in the class. how often george banks drank alcohol, that does not enter into the class description. you have to take that into consideration when evaluating and measuring the harm to the family, and measuring what role that played and whether -- and to what extent he is partially at fault. if george, yvonne and katrina always lived together in the same home -- some folks go off and work on the alaska pipeline. some folks are overseas. some folks are comfortable in a place where they grew up, and it is a slow, quiet place, and they decide to stay there. and for whatever reason, they were apart. they were not separated; they were together. they were together in enough ways that when you know that all the way to the very end, right before he got really sick and decompensated, that you have letters going back and forth to katrina all the way up to mid-november, right before they saw him and right before he really became sick and died. and, quite frankly, even though those envelopes are empty, the envelopes are worth more to this family than what was in them. and they are also evidence of an ongoing relationship with the person that was loved in both directions. that father, in those letters, always expressed love to his daughter; and his daughter always expressed love to him. so that is a real family. they were not separated, they were not divorced, they were not together. and you will probably say, we are not going to award as much money as we would, we are not going to compensate with as much money as we would if it was a different kind of family that was more nuclear. and he was 81 years old, so he only had so many more years to live anyway. he was not going to live, in any likelihood, to a hundred. he would not have been here today, anyway. but those last few years, and those few visits, and whatever it was that they could be together, she was still a minor in the eyes of the law, at age 23, because minority ends for wrongful death cases at 25. they were still entitled to that consideration. and when you lose someone suddenly, it hurts, and i think you saw, from katrina, genuine ongoing pain that exists today. i think she told you in a way -- mr. furr: objection to counsel's personal opinions. the court: your personal opinions do not matter. you can comment on the evidence, sir. mr. schlesinger: i think the evidence shows that you can adjudge katrina yourself. so it does not matter if they lived together for class membership, and it does not matter how much time they spent for class membership. that is fault and amounts of money. and i'm going to ask the court to indulge me and i'm going to continue on. i am going to skip over the percentages of fault, i'm going to skip over the -- the amounts of money for wrongful death, and i want to show you these other questions that you have to talk to and answer. do you have the next one ready for me? the court: you have about 20 minutes, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: thank you, judge. i'm going to help you navigate your way. if you want to -- if you believe punitive damages are warranted, if you believe that this company was off the moral compass, placed profits over human lives, and that there is sufficient evidence from dr. proctor and all the documents you will have, the internal truths that they admitted secretly they thought would never see the light of day, i'm going to help you navigate how to get there. and there is a couple of questions here which you looked at: did george banks reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact made by r.j. reynolds and/or philip morris that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, if so, was reliance a legal cause of mr. banks' esophageal cancer? yes. the answer to both of those questions should be "yes," as they should be to the next question with -- which is: did any of these statements happen after 1982? and we can play horrigan, who is one of the guys in 1984, saying, we still do not know what causes cancer; we do not know if it does. you could play those chief executive officers who, in '94, said, we do not admit it is -- nicotine is addictive, but they were still denying, they were still lying all during this period of time. and i want to show that reliance board, okay? so the reliance can be inferred. you do not have to put anything particular directly in the man's hands, because there was nothing personal about the public doubt campaign, there was nothing personal about the traveling truth squad, the college of tobacco knowledge, anne browder, and all these different folks that went around the country saying that it is an open controversy, can we have an honest debate, the case of cigarettes is not closed, that was meant for a population in whole, of which mr. banks was a part, of which the evidence from the federal trade commission says the surgeon general has no chance against the immersive, overwhelming advertising that reaches every single person. so this is an instruction where it says: it is not necessary that a direct statement be made to george banks in order to give rise to the right to rely upon that statement. it is immaterial whether the statement passes through a direct or circuitous channel in reaching mr. banks, provided the statement is made with the intent that it reach him and be acted upon him. however, george cannot be found to reasonably rely upon a statement if he knew of its falsity or it was obvious to him, or if the facts allegedly concealed was already known to him. let us show what he could not have known. now, you may infer that there was nothing personal about what the tobacco companies were doing. they were going for an overall message to get people to continue smoking, to give addicts a psychological crutch to rely on, things like an illusion of filtration. and, in fact, it worked. their sales continued. their sales did not stop. it worked, and it worked with george banks. george banks quit in 1988, when the surgeon general said that nicotine was addictive. is not that interesting? that is in the records. that is reliance. and that is all you need to know for george banks to be qualified, as one of many others like him, to get to be able to have you consider whether punishment is warranted, whether the company did what the engle findings say they did, what all those internal documents showed they did, and what proctor called, you know, just an -- a wall-to-wall conspiratorial effort to defraud the american consumer. so here's the thing: how would things have been different if the tobacco companies came forward and admitted filters were a fraud? r.j. reynolds and philip morris manipulated nicotine and added chemicals to make them more addictive, like ammonia, things like that. he did not know that. they did not tell him that. that would have been material. would that have been important information? could he have relied on that to give him a chance to stop smoking, that smoking is not a choice, that, rather, the nicotine in his cigarettes were as addictive as heroin and cocaine? nobody told him that before 1988, when the surgeon general told him that. would that have been important information? would that have been a responsible thing for a responsible company to do to tell him? by smoking camel and marlboro cigarettes, that he had a fifty percent chance of dying? no other product in the history of human civilization, when used as intended, kills half of its customers. it is an anachronism in this country. it is -- it is incomprehensible that such a thing could exist, and yet we have been enured to it. you know, they say it is a legal product, and it is, but it is not. it is not legal to sell to underage people, and -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. excuse me, sir. the court: ladies and gentlemen, i instructed you on cigarettes being a legal product. you will follow my legal instructions. mr. schlesinger: and not -- and -- and you do not -- underage smokers are the business -- replacement business, absolutely. if they wanted to be responsible and they wanted to do something different, and they said -- because we are under the fda now, whatever -- cigarettes are a drug, they are a drug-delivery device, it is hard to wrap your mind around it, but they are nothing but a drug, which, as i showed you that hand, it is drug addiction -- say, we are going to put them behind a pharmacy counter, we are going to have the pharmacists release them, and nobody under 21 is ever going to get a cigarette, and you would knock smoking -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. this is -- mr. schlesinger: -- down by ninety percent in this country. mr. furr: this is not a comment on the evidence, your honor. the court: i agree. this is not. i sustain the objection. ladies and gentlemen, these comments are confined to the evidence. your deliberations are confined to the evidence, not the personal comments of either -- all -- all three attorneys in the case. mr. schlesinger: dr. -- the court: you may proceed. mr. schlesinger: dr. -- mr. furr: make a motion, your honor. the court: motion for mistrial is denied, sir. mr. schlesinger: dr. proctor testified that the things you could do to make the product safer and less dangerous is to make it not addictive by taking out the nicotine to a level below the ability to sustain addiction, or to raise the ph so it was not inhalable. so you would have mouth-puffing instead of lung-sucking, and the poisons would not get in, and you would not smoke as many, you would not have to smoke a pack of cigarettes a day and take in all those nicotine hits to the brain, and associated carcinogens. he also said you raise the ph, it stays in the mouth, it does not go in the lungs, it is not nearly as addictive. they would still have a business. it would not be as big a business, but it would still be a business. so there are responsible ways that they could even stay in business and think of ways to go forward, help their customers instead of consuming them. and i say america is this industry's ashtray. they stub out a -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- half a million -- mr. furr: excuse me. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger, that is a completely improper argument, sir. mr. furr: your honor, i make a motion for mistrial. the court: i sustain the objection. your motion for mistrial is under advisement, sir. you may continue. mr. schlesinger: the material information concealed and omitted from george banks, that would have mattered, it says here that the statements of scientists were giving psychological crutches, doubt about health risk and self-rationales, were paid for by the tobacco industry to keep addicted smokers smoking their deadly product. the tobacco -- george banks did not know that. the tobacco companies expected him to rely upon their lies, to continue smoking their addictive, cancer-causing cigarettes, their defective, cancer-causing cigarettes. heimann admitted it, and it is an engle finding. what they did, their lies, their conspiracy, their defraud, was with the intent that smokers would rely. the proof is in the pudding. the sales went up. that all of their efforts were carefully planned, carried out, and successful, according to their very own documents. they were. he did not know that. they chose not to go out of business even though they promised to do so. they made a promise. they said, we will stop making it. several times by james bowling and several others. in -- on television, in writing. but that promise -- the real reason for that promise was to give false reassurance. and then they did not remove the carcinogens and harmful chemicals even though they promised to do so. let us play that tape, that montage, please. we have a brief montage of some of what the folks said after 1982, because the question after 1982 is -- essentially, you check that "yes" to get to punitives. and the important reason why is because the conspiracy never ended until at least 2000, when they finally had to admit it was addictive and caused cancer. but in an unbroken arc from 1953, all the way through 1994, when you saw the chief executive officers lying to congress, and all the way through the year 2000, it was an unbroken conspiracy. so for -- for certain technical purposes i cannot even explain, the judge has given this ruling, you want to get to be able to determine that punitive damages are warranted, you must check off post-'82 on one of the two questions that allow you to do so. let us play this, please. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: and as far as i'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply do not know. voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced? voice: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. voice: do cigarettes cause cancer? voice: i do not know if they do or not. voice: i'm not in a position to give you a "does" or "does not" answer. voice: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. mr. gdanski: we have a couple more. mr. schlesinger: go ahead. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position, but your position, that cigarettes were not injurious to health. is that accurate? voice: through my tenure? voice: yes. voice: yes, that is so. voice: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe, is that correct? voice: yes. voice: it is a statement that american tobacco takes great reliance -- voice: we -- voice: -- on? voice: we issued that statement, yes. voice: and as far as -- voice: we believe it. voice: as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? voice: yes. voice: truck driver dennis gaines, a grandfather, says he is been smoking for 30 years and is still not convinced cigarettes are dangerous. voice: you know they say it causes cancer and heart disease. do you believe that? voice: no, i do not. not in my heart, i cannot believe it. voice: you cannot believe that it is bad for you? voice: no. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: is that it? technician: yes, sir. mr. schlesinger: look, folks, all too often the choice between physical health of consumers and the financial well-being of the tobacco industry, concealment was chosen over disclosure, sales were chosen over safety, and money over morality. and i ask you to consider who are these persons who knowingly and secretly decide to put the buying public at risk solely for the purpose of making profits and who believe that illness and death of consumers is an appropriate cost of their own prosperity. i ask you to consider that. i ask you to consider this: because they -- they talked about george. and there is another board here i wanted to use on how he died and -- united reporting, inc. 954-525-2221 447b68cb-553a-4b68-a004-836416c53f6f (discussion off the record between counsel.) mr. schlesinger: do you have it? where is the other one? there is a separate one. you can put it on the elmo if you have to. i told you there was a couple of things that they said -- i want to do this real quick. this was one of the opening boards. and during opening, you know, there was -- there was a moment there -- i mean, it had some -- it had some -- it had some power. jeff furr, i said he is a powerful lawyer. he said something that -- that -- it made my heart -- it made -- i could imagine that the evidence would make a person's heart sink for a moment, until i thought about it. and he said that -- he pointed out a medical record, and it said that they called the banks family to advise them of his deteriorating condition, and that he was advised that he was not going to live many more days and they should come visit soon, and that yvonne and katrina banks did not go back to that hospital, and mr. banks died alone. and i thought about that, and i looked closely, just like i looked closely at the 1915 surgeon general's report. and when you look at the record and you read the record, where it says he was advised he was not going to live many more days and they should visit soon, actually what it says is: she was advised that the patient may not live many more days -- this is a quote from the record in evidence -- she expressed a plan to visit him as soon as she could, but had some fear she might not be able to visit him within the next several -- within the next days. she was assured that the patient's comfort needs were being met, and that the staff would provide gentle, comfort care in her absence. it does not say she was told to come in, and it does not say he was not going to live many more days. it said he may or may not live many more days. and george banks did not die alone. he died in the care of caring hospice people. the family was sending their love. this was after they had gone to the hospital and they had stayed with him for days, and they transferred him to a different hospital. and then, because of circumstances -- not everybody can afford to do things. different people have different hardships in life. this is -- this is america. different families go through different levels of difficulty. they did what they had to do to bring a daughter he wanted to see get through college, back to college to continue her classes. they wanted to be back; and saying the man died alone derogates the loss to these -- to this family, because they buried him, and they went to the funeral, and they were there, and they grieved for him. there was nobody named lampe or hall or anybody else there. it was just his family, the next of kin that is documented in the medical record. when they said, who is the emergency contact, it was somebody else. that same record says, next of kin, and identifies -- identifies yvonne banks. so i say, you can consider, is that a fully candid appraisal -- you can take it down -- in assessing, trying to say that this man was neglected and died alone? he became terribly, suddenly ill. he had a sudden, catastrophic deterioration that dr. traube says is common in such horrible cancers as esophageal cancer. and they had letters up till mid-november, proving they had ongoing contact, and they have a marriage certificate and a birth certificate and they fit everything you need to know about class -- belonging into a class. the court: you have four minutes, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: thank you, judge. i guess i'm going to have to talk about the amounts of money for -- for -- and the comparative fault. i think that because the philip morris cigarettes -- he clearly smoked the marlboro cigarettes over a prolonged period of time, but there is also evidence that there is some confusion there. katrina said he smoked them a bunch. you know, they are a part of the conspiracy. and on the punishment claims, they cannot get away with being a part of the conspiracy even if they did not -- even if he did not smoke a lot of cigarettes. so they are not going to get the same level of percentage of fault as rjr is, but i still say that he is an innocent, and he was better than they were, and whatever the fault breakdown should be, it should be greater for them, in total, than for him. he never knew at any time until at least the '60s, when the surgeon generals came out and the warning labels came out. even the ftc, in 1967, said the warning labels were useless. they never changed. they have not changed since 1985. so that is not the be-all and end-all. and the man was addicted well before they were warning him. but the point is, we bear some responsibility. we want to bear our fair share of blame. we want you to give us our fair share of blame as long as you recognize it is in the context of a man with a sixth-grade education, that did the best he could. but one thing he was not was -- he might have been weak. he was not a liar. so if you give him ten, 12-and-a half or 15 percent of the blame, and you give at least fifty percent of the blame or more to r.j. reynolds, you can give the rest to philip morris. but as long as their individual blame exceeds his blame, that is a powerful message, saying what he did wrong is not nearly as bad as what you did wrong. so fifty percent for philip morris (sic), ten to 15 percent for my client, and up to 35 percent for philip morris. they have been nice and quiet over there, and that is fine; but they are still part of the conspiracy, and you saw a lot of their documents that talked about what they did. now, as far as money is concerned, it is -- what? (discussion off the record between counsel.) mr. schlesinger: oh, and by the way, when you get to those intentional torts, the on-purpose things, the things they did to lie to him and deceive him, that he could have reasonably relied on like a reasonable man, if you award an intentional fault check mark, he will not get any reduction for the percentages. i know it is a little complicated, and you do not really have to trouble yourself with it, but he will get full benefits. he will not get 15 percent knocked off, is what i'm saying. if you award -- if you move forward through the punitive damages, to get to the punishment, i say, which is why we are here, which is where i want you to be, and i want to see you on monday, if you see this case our way, if we have stitched it together the right way, that is how it will be. and then i want to just tell you this: we have to come up with an amount of money. it is an unknown thing. it is a human amount. it is whatever you guys think it is. it is not what i think it is. and i -- and i do not want to suggest to you -- yvonne is never going to see any of this money. she is not going to live to see this money. this is an award where you measure the magnitude of the loss, and you say to the -- to my clients, through your verdict -- through your verdict, we see what happened, we place value on your loss, we measure the magnitude of your loss, we place value on it, we recognize it was hard, we recognize it was not perfect. we recognize the man drank. the duration of drinking, the precision of the quantity of drinking is very unclear from that record, but we acknowledge he had an alcohol problem. it is contributing. it contributes to the relationship, it contributes to the smoking, it could have been a part of how he got esophageal cancer; but it is a distraction. you should keep your eye on the ball. it is not what this case is about. you could award them any amount of money you want. i do not even know what a fair amount to suggest is. you could award them a million dollars apiece for the loss of their family member. if that is -- you could award them two, or you could award them three. if they -- if this was a super nuclear family, with no problems, no issues, nothing, i would ask for six or eight or $10 million apiece for the family member as restoration for what they lost. this is a different situation. he was not going to live that long, anyway, maybe into his 90s. they were only going to have a few years with him. so it is up to you. you could award him five -- you could award them 500,000. you could decide it is 500,000 apiece. i am not sure. but you dignify the loss if you believe it was an unnecessary, premature, preventable death because of a deadly, dangerous product. and it is a number from which you will then calculate punishment. the punishment must be related to the compensatory damages. so if it is in your heart and in the proofs, and you see it our way and you can consider providing a meaningful level of compensation, you know, it is -- everyone says it is all about the money. if it is all about the money, the experts, my clients, if it is all about the money, what is it to them? if it is all about the money, who is it the most -- who is the money the most important to in this courtroom? and i say it is the cigarette companies, and that is why the fine is a way of you telling them, we do not approve of this, this is indecent human behavior. and i want to end with this last thing. and i thank the court's indulgence for letting me go over. i want to say this one thing: there is a great author, and i thought about it in this case, because francis bacon said that knowledge was power, but george orwell said that ignorance was strength. and dr. proctor explained the nature and power and the strength and the success and the money tobacco companies have made from sowing the seeds of doubt and ignorance for decades. ignorance is strength. orwell was a post-apocalyptic version of how topsy-turvy the world could get. war is peace. ignorance is strength. and here's something he said, and i want you to think about it if -- if you feel this case has validity, if you see it our way. and the scene was played by richard burton and john hurt, in the movie "1984," on the book by george orwell. it is standard reading. some folks have read it, some folks have not. our man, with a sixth-grade education, he did not see any high school books in georgia. but this book, george orwell, famous book, john hurt is laid out to be tortured by big brother, richard burton, he is a powerful actor, powerful, powerful men that provoke great emotion on the screen, and the words on the page are every bit as powerful. winston was the man played by john hurt, and he was the one that was about to be tortured. he said we -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: all -- mr. heise: "torture" references. this is not in evidence. this is entirely improper argument. mr. schlesinger: forget "torture," judge. i take that back. the court: all right. go ahead and finish, sir. mr. schlesinger: above all, we do not let a -- excuse me. richard burton talking to john hurt, so you have a mental picture. above all, we do not allow the dead to rise up against us. you must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, winston. posterity will never hear of you. you will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. we shall turn you into a gas and pour you into the stratosphere. nothing will remain of you; not a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain. you will be annihilated in the past, as well as in the future. you will have never existed. and i suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that cigarettes and tobacco took this man from his family before his time, and that some of the things in this courtroom, where they blamed the victim and ran him down because of this issue about drinking -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. objection. the court: overruled. finish, please. mr. schlesinger: -- tries to take away some of the memories that katrina has of the father she loved. and it is not what somebody else thinks about you that defines your worth. and he was worth something to somebody. he was worth something to his family. and no matter how little his worth, as exemplified in this courtroom, he was better than them; and you will send them a powerful message by saying, you cannot do this to people, even -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: that is completely improper, mr. schlesinger, and you know that. this is not -- mr. schlesinger: i wish i could agree, judge. the court: this is not about sending a message, ladies and gentlemen. you will disregard the comments from the attorney. the motion for mistrial is under advisement. mr. furr: thank you, sir. mr. heise: thank you. the court: wrap up, please, mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: if you see this evidence our way, and you decide that we are right and it should be stitched -- stitched together in the way that we said, and you get to find that punitive damages are warranted, it will allow you to express moral -- an expression of moral condemnation for intentional -- mr. furr: objection, your honor, it is the same -- it is the same argument. the court: finish your answer -- finish your statement, sir. mr. schlesinger: it will allow you to express moral condemnation, which is justly deserved, for quasi-criminal acts. and these things lead to deterrence, and that is one of the things that we want you to consider doing. and i thank you for your time. mr. schlesinger: counsel, thank you. got 20 minutes in ya? all right. so very first thing i want to let you know. the trial and the deliberation is yours. when we turn this case over to you, we hand it to you, it is yours to do as you please for the period of time you feel necessary to go through everything. what i mean by that is, when i said get us to monday, it is because, again, the conduct of the tobacco companies, which you may have noticed, they did not talk about what they did, not one solitary word about it. they did not talk about or discuss anything having to do with all the years of the things they did to deceive the public and cause deaths by addiction of tens of millions of people with documents, not one single document that they put in front of you that shows something different than what the truth is in their own internal secret reports. but when you get to deliberate, because we are later in the afternoon than we meant to be, and we always are, and it is friday in the afternoon the judge is going to give you a lot of leeway in deliberations. and deliberations can take days. so you can deliberate monday. if you cannot finish today you can come back. it will be at the court's pleasure. we will be at your pleasure to take the time you need to get through what you want to get through, because you could get hung up on some of these questions. i think some of them do not need that, but you just need to know you have as much time as you want. if we get to where we want to be, which is where we hope the evidence takes us, which is this warranting of punishment for this long wrongful conduct then we have no evidence to put on except for net worth of companies. and the only evidence they will put on is a single -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. objection as to the what the evidence will be. mr. schlesinger: he talked about putting on witnesses -- the court: proceed. mr. schlesinger: i think they have a single witness named dr. figlar, who is a corporate rep that will talk to you about other things going on. so you will hear a brief witness from them then you will be able to go out and do punishment damages. the only reason i say it is that i just do not want to think on friday afternoon you are like, let us just get out of here. if the case warrants the full consideration the court is going to let you come back on monday and continue your deliberation. it will still be done in well under three weeks, which is what we thought we were going to do. now, let us look real quickly at this important instruction, because i want the instructions to be clear. and i do not know, can you put it up, baron? mr. schlesinger: in any event, punishment damages considerations, there is no doubt about the doubt campaign. i say there is no doubt. that is why i'm proud and i embrace the standard of clear and convincing evidence that you arrive at without confusion, without doubt. that is the beautiful rebuttal to the doubt and the confusion that decades of company misrepresentations cause, the tirc, the ctr that they are telling you was a good organization are co-conspirators under engle and they have been disbanded. they are co-conspirators, those front groups. so it says here, "you may consider harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongness of a defendant's act. "you may consider harms by persons -- other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing reprehensibility wrongfulness of the defendants' acts." why do you think we put in evidence of 20 million deaths? and i tried to give you the kind of language so you could understand what it means. i try to take you through a little walk around florida. as a florida native, i thought we would talk about florida. and imagine an empty state. that is how many people would have met their demise. but what is important, you also heard is, that more than 40 million americans are caught in a web of tobacco dependence. remember you heard that yesterday in cross-examination from the current surgeon general? 40 million people. that is essentially all the smokers. nicotine dependence is 80 to ninety percent or more of all smokers, and 80 to ninety percent of all smokers begin in youth, adolescence, teens. i'm sorry we inadvertently would say words like "kids" and "children." we are not supposed to say it. that is not what we are talking about. that is what the judge's instruction was, but he let us put in evidence. i want to show diane burrows -- of what they do and who they study, replacement smokers. all business is based on youth. and they have replacement smokers and they have 12-year-olds. and you know what a 12-year-old is to a tobacco company? a young adult. a 12-year-old young adult. that is what they call them. you see who they are seeing, they are watching and marketing and studying, 12 year olds, 13 year olds, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, in there, two-thirds of smokers are starting in youth. and my client george banks was an age cohort and dr. difranza testified he probably started in his teens because ninety percent of them do and all -- according to this book, which is on preventing tobacco use among youth and young adults, all, all tobacco smoking begins in adolescence. mr. furr: your honor, objection. that book is not in evidence. mr. schlesinger: an excerpt is, judge. the court: do not show the book if it is not in evidence, but you can comment and it will be up to the jury to determine -- mr. schlesinger: there is an excerpt from the book in evidence -- mr. furr: your honor, no excerpt from the book in evidence. the court: again, the jury will be cautioned to remember the testimony from the witnesses. if it is not in evidence do not show it. you can proceed. mr. schlesinger: during cross of dr. hoge i referred to the book. one of the things they talked about, the website, and it had links that give you a link to the surgeon general sites, rjr showed their website. that gave a link to 2008 and 2010. they do not link to the 2012 report. that is not linked. and here is the surgeon general's report that is in evidence, because we caught mr. furr and he responded. but the fact of the matter is is he did something, and i submit to you the evidence shows it was misleading. this is the official annual report of the surgeon general of the public health service of the united states for the fiscal year 1915. and the man's name in here is dr. blue, it is not that long symenanski [sic] name, who was a surgeon, not a surgeon general. this is the congressional official report. dr. proctor said that guy you are talking about, i think he was a surgeon of some kind. look in this report. it does not have a warning about tobacco being addictive. and it is inconsistent. in 1964 they said it was a habit. what would have happened? it does not appear in here. tobacco is not a warning. it was not warned to be addictive in 1915. you can look through this. this is in evidence. and it is not what they purport it to be. it is not the surgeon general's report, the document they quoted from, not a surgeon general's report. it is a report based on garment workers and it did not even have the quote correct the way he said it had it. he said there was a warning that smoking is addictive. even the document he showed you did not say smoking was addictive. it talked about tobacco being the most popular form of tobacco addiction, a colloquialism. it was not, in my assessment of the evidence, and hopefully yours, a completely candid way to show this to you. but let me move on. in this courtroom as we start, there is also already an established baseline of the defendants and their conduct. they already have been convicted of being conspirators, fraudsters -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- liars. mr. furr: it is absolutely an incorrect statement of the law. the court: ladies and gentlemen, again, the jury instructions dictate how you are guided in this case. objection is overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: right out of the box they come into this courtroom having lied, having deceived, having defrauded the american public, and they do not ever want to talk about that at all. they just want to talk about mr. banks and they want to quote from roosevelt hall. what were they doing going out to roosevelt hall's house, more than one of them, two or more at a time -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- unannounced four times. mr. heise: it is a pretrial ruling. mr. schlesinger: that is in evidence. the court: sustained. i take that back. it is overruled. it is overruled. mr. schlesinger: thank you, judge. "did this individual who came here, what, three or four times? "three or four times. "how many times did the individual come to your home? "one time he came here with a man twice and he came with a lady twice. "so that is four times. "uh-huh. "did he ever call ahead of time to ask you when a good time would be? "he asked for my phone number, but he never called because i never talked to him on the phone. "so on each of the four occasions the investigators came to -- the tobacco companies came to your home, they came unannounced. "yeah, unannounced." that is a neutral independent witness. did you see any witness statements, recordings? do you see the -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: did they put on the witness stand the people that met with him? mr. heise: objection, your honor. the court: objection is overruled. mr. schlesinger: and by the way, if a person goes to work every day day in and day out or goes through a starbucks, how many folks or acquaintances of ours that do not know anything about our life, that do not know if we have kids or do not know if we smoke or do not know if we drink? and lampe, hall and hall never saw him drink. they said they saw him drunk. nobody gave an amount of drinking. mrs. hall did not live with him, was never up in his apartment. they never got close enough to smell him. and they have taken people that do not know anything about this man in particular. and it was particularly inappropriate to suggest that mr. lampe, who was a different race, they did not mix. he said, we did not mix. mr. furr: objection. excuse me, do not talk over the objection. the court: sir, do not make those comments. it is improper. the objection is sustained. continue, please. mr. schlesinger: there is evidence in the case when they read from mr. lampe's deposition, we were not social friends. the man came to work. we did not mix. this is back a long time ago. what do you think they were talking about? mr. heise: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: they were not social friends. the court: mr. schlesinger, that is not proper, sir. i sustained the objection. disregard the remarks about mixing. mr. schlesinger: it is in the case. the court: i sustained the objection. mr. schlesinger: yes, sir. diedrich lampe also said that despite what he knew about being a mental paraplegic that he knew there was confusion out there with regard to what people knew about how dangerous health [sic] was. and here's what my client mr. banks was faced with. he was faced with a reality of a warning that said it might be dangerous to your health and it is dangerous to your health but did not say specifically how it is dangerous. he did not have details. he did not have specificity. and he had overwhelming countermeasures in his face at all times from tobacco trying to block anybody from really coming to that conclusion. and here's the thing, if everybody knew it was dangerous, why did not their clients know? why did not they know? why did not the tobacco executives know? why did not the scientists at rjr know? why did they keep saying it is not dangerous, it has not been proven, it is an open question, here's a filter, it will work for you? why did not they know? why is it everyone was supposed to know in the '30s and '40s and '50s and '60s but the tobacco industry executives did not know? that is an interesting conundrum. they knew. you saw the documents. let us look at some of them. let us look at -- let us look at this one, 49. please. "as the lawyers remind us" -- this goes back to 1980s. "as the lawyers remind us, we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." this is while they are still denying addiction. all the way through the engle trial in 1999, denying addiction, not admitted until the year 2000. "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." because they knew that they had to deny addiction. they knew they had to continue to deceive the public. and they did. and they admit it internally. we got no defense if it turns out this is an addictive substance. and there it is in their own words. next. let us do 51, please. this is claude teague. remember i said we would shine a spotlight on claude teague. i've got another board for him to do that. but, look, i call this document the chiller because when i read it i see how cold-blooded -- mr. furr: objection. the court: mr. schlesinger. mr. schlesinger: you said that was appropriate closing argument. mr. heise: we move, your honor. mr. schlesinger: i have a ruling from you. you said it may be appropriate in closing argument. the court: objection is sustained. you may continue, sir. mr. schlesinger: i apologize. mr. furr: could you rule. the court: your motion is under advisement. mr. schlesinger: i do not have to characterize this statement, and i'm sorry if i did, but i do not have to characterize it. i'm just going to read the language and you can decide yourself what it means and if it is inhuman and indecent. mr. furr: objection, your honor, same issue. the court: overruled. continue, sir. mr. schlesinger: because you are allowed to consider the wrongfulness to others as to the degree of reprehensibility, that is what this case is about. "we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine; hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try. instead we must somehow convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking in the hope that he will for himself then discover the real 'satisfactions,'" in quotes, "obtainable." and we know they use code words and we know satisfaction is a code word for intent. and that is the deliberate, intentional knowledge aforethought business of addicting youth into a lifetime of smoking and then replacing the dying smokers with new smokers. let us go to the other board. these are just some of the things claude teague, more than anybody else you can shine a spotlight on this man who spent a lifetime, an illustrious career at rj reynolds doing nothing but things which are not appropriate for decent humans who follow a moral compass. he knew that if your company is to survive and prosper over the long term you must get your share of the youth market. happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is habituating and unique in its physiological action. nicotine is the sine quinon of smoking. and they know how to induce a pre-smoker -- right, the 12-year-old young adult -- induce a pre-smoker or a nonsmoker to become a habituated or a hooked smoker. they want to hook them. nobody chooses addiction. they do not know what they are getting themselves into. by the time they hear something about it being dangerous it may be harmful for your health. mr. banks is hooked for decades. the man is hooked for decades. it goes on, this is all teague. nicotine, a potent drug. our industry is based upon the design, sale and manufacture of attractive doses of nicotine. and then teague is involved in the suppression research. i destroyed all the formal reports. and we have tons of documents in evidence suppression and burying reports. then he goes on to talk about getting the nicotine kick with the ammonia compounds to release the full potential of this powerfully addictive drug. and he indicates how you can instantly perceive the nicotine kick with the ammonia compounds, the soul of the marlboro cigarette. down here he says, we cannot be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could, that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open we could be out of business overnight. now what is the discomfort? the discomfort is that if somebody -- let us put up this one. the discomfort is if we have a business and if there is a way for someone to figure out how to get our hooked patients, our consumers not hooked, we could be out of business overnight. and what are they uncomfortable with? are they uncomfortable with the cigarette being used as intended and killing half their customers? no. are they uncomfortable with addicting them to the point where they smoke millions of hits of nicotine and poisons for decades and die? no. they are uncomfortable with losing their business. what is a moral compass? what does an ethical person do in a situation like that? they are uncomfortable with the fact that their product is killing somebody. that is what you are supposed to be uncomfortable with, not uncomfortable with the prospect that something could happen and you could be out of business overnight. that is a rutterless ship on a moral sea, rutterless ship. and here is something that is also important to look at. this is when they were first starting to develop ways to put drugs that might block nicotine. like i said, why does it have to be so hard? if the cigarettes are not addictive, if you do not have cigarettes, if you stop making them like you promised, why do we have to go through this unbelievable contortion in this country for people to get off cigarettes? why does it have to be so hard? why? because it is so addictive. why else? they do not want people to quit because people that quit quit buying. quit smoking means quit buying. they do not want people to quit. and they do not care if they die. and when they die they replace them, with youth. i mean, really. mr. furr: your honor, i object. the court: one minute, mr. schlesinger. mr. furr: inflammatory and prejudicial. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: if you look at this it says, if we go forward with this research to block nicotine, we are going to be in the process of digging our own graves. and we are not going to do it because it could put the tobacco manufacturers out of business. and let us put this up real quick, because i saw this and i said, there is just no way. i brought awesome, excellent, highly qualified experts. they brought nobody. i brought dr. traube. they did not touch dr. traube on cross. he said in no uncertain terms the man was addicted, he got esophageal cancer principally from smoking. he candidly, like a scientist, acknowledged that alcohol played a role. and then mr. furr got up here and put up a slide. the slide had no reference to the page and line. and when i pulled it it said, if he quit smoking, if he quit drinking -- mr. furr: your honor, i object. this is wrong. mr. schlesinger: that quote is not in this record. the court: mr. schlesinger, when there is an objection please stop. your objection is overruled. you may continue, sir. you need to wrap up. mr. schlesinger: just like the business about he died alone, just like the business of the record saying you better get back here. there is no record that says you better get back here. these are the things they do. this is the evidence and you can consider -- mr. furr: objection, your honor -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. he is again just disparaging the defense. the court: the motion is under advisement. the objection is sustained. mr. schlesinger: you can consider whether or not this is incomplete reference to the evidence in a way that could confuse you or cause doubt or make you uncertain. but this is what it says. "if he had quit smoking -- excuse me -- if he had quit drinking when he quit smoking in 1988 he would have cut his risk for esophageal cancer by fifty percent more likely than not." highly qualified expert, he gave excellent explanation as to what happened. dr. difranza also said he died from esophageal cancer from smoking and that he was definitely addicted. and dr. traube said he was definitely addicted. they did not bring anybody except for dr. hoge, who even admitted that the nicotine contributed to his smoking [sic]. and dr. hoge, like i said, you have got the power to reject his opinions and take him out of this courtroom. one more. let me just see here. oh, this i have to touch base on. this i have to touch base on. okay. here's something contemporaneous. put it up. i saved this. i wanted to prove the case to you by the medical records. they definitively with virtual certainty document the most important witness in the case, mr. george banks, who for no reason other than he was asked by a doctor when he had a broken hand. which by the way when his hand was broken he could not write a not, so a friend wrote a note expressing love to his daughter. like that is some sort of mystery or maybe an insinuation that there was an affair. there is nothing like that in this case, nothing like that in this case. but most importantly, most importantly, and i saved it and i wanted to show it to you and i wanted to bring it out, because i wanted to prove my case with experts who have been world renowned and sought by the surgeon general and people all over the world. and i did it with dr. difranza and cummings and traube and proctor. proctor, a hero who -- his book is a revelation what he is revealed about the secret wrongdoing of the tobacco industry for decades, something we cannot accept in this country as a proper corporate activity. but here is a document, this is a contemporaneous medical record. and mr. furr said yvonne said give me a letter that says smoking made him die. where is the evidence of that in this case? there is no such testimony. let us look at the letter. the letter says, "dear mrs. banks: this is in response to your inquiry about the cause of your husband's death while hospitalized at lake city virginia [sic] va medical center between the 29th and the 15th." [sic] right down here, "the cause of lung cancer and emphysema is most likely related to smoking." and he had had the autopsy report. he knew the cause of his death was cancer of the lung and esophagus food pipe. he knew the esophagus food pipe cancer had spread to the lung. read the autopsy report. you will see it in there. by the time it spreads and it is fatal in your lung when you cannot breathe and the fluid is building up, you die from that spread of cancer. he explains it. this is a totally independent witness. they did not bring him. they did not depose him. they brought no expert to contradict -- mr. heise: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: -- him. and this is a very simple medical record, contemporaneous within a few weeks of his death, within days or a month after the autopsy was completed and reviewed by the treating doctor that was there with him in february of '96 at his bedside who was asked by a family that was surprised by weight loss, which in two or three months was dramatic. and it was not 50 pounds. look at the record. it was about 40 pounds. because there is other weights in there of 122 pounds. he went from 160 to 122. it said in the record, 40-pound weight loss in the last several months. it is in the record, look at the record. and it says right here, "the cause of lung cancer and emphysema most likely related to cigarette smoking." treating doctor, totally independent. dr. siri. a medical record in the case documenting that the man died from cigarette smoking. and back at the time in 1988 and 1990 when he was in the hospital -- in 1990 he had quit smoking. why would a doctor write down in the chart, you have a smoking addiction? he said he quit smoking two years earlier. mr. furr said, nobody wrote down that he was an addicted smoker. first of all, nobody writes that down, you do not see that in medical records. just like i showed you the new autopsy report. the new autopsy report talks about whether smoking contributed to disease. that is the modern way, but back then it is not common for someone to write that down. and what is more, why would you write down that a man has an ongoing tobacco addiction if in 1990 when he is there for a broken hand he says, i stopped smoking two years ago, but i smoked for 50 years before that. there would be no medical need at that point to document him as an addicted smoker. but here is a totally independent, not a witness that anybody hired in the case, a treating doctor at the time, contemporaneous. dr. hoge said contemporaneous records are so valid. the man died from smoking. the court: you are at the end of your time, sir, you need to wrap up. mr. schlesinger: i told you first i said i do not know how much to ask for and i said maybe a million a piece would be appropriate, but, again, the six of you can make the decision. that is why i said you can give as many as 2 and a half, 2 -- i said 2 million or 3 million a piece. you can give 500,000 a piece. you can give any amount you want. your life experience and my life experience can differ and so when i make a recommendation, it is just to give you someplace to work. and you can decide based on what you think the strengths and weaknesses of the relationship were what is fair. but, quite honestly, if you watch katrina testify and she always consistently said the man smoked marlboros, by the way. if you watched her testify and you saw what you thought is the ring of truth, an honest, appropriate, emotional responses at honest moments in time. that is why we have a trial here in a courtroom live as opposed to just something that you read about or hear about. when you see folks live you get a chance to see how they really are. look, you have given us attention over and above and beyond the call of duty. i always say i wish my jurors the best of luck at arriving at justice. what we look for is justice. the system gives us a chance at justice. we have a fervent prayer that we get to justice. and i say to you, you hold in your hands this decision. it is a wonderful opportunity to continue this jury system. you hold great power and please discharge it wisely. and we will all be thankful for that no matter what decision you make. thank you.