25 case. mr. furr: may it please the court? ms. banks, katrina, counsel. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. boy, have i been anxious to get up and have a chance to talk to you. but i've got to start -- i'd like to jump in, but let me say one or two things preliminary first. first, we have got to thank you for your service, and most importantly, i want to thank you for your patience, because you sure have had to be patient. this case should have taken about three or four days to try; instead we have spent almost two weeks here, and the reason is you spent day after day listening to evidence and witnesses that have nothing to do with the issues that you are here to decide, as the verdict form will demonstrate, once you actually see what you are here to decide. this morning you listened to an hour and a half closing argument that was designed to make you angry and to distract you from the issues that you are actually here to decide, designed to make you angry -- mr. schlesinger: judge, i object. they cannot derogate the plaintiff's case in this courtroom. the court: overruled. you can continue, sir. mr. furr: -- designed to make you angry at the tobacco companies so you will overlook the plaintiff's complete inability to prove their claims in this case. because this is a case about george banks. it is not about generic smokers. it is not about all smokers. it is not about any other smoker. so let us refocus on what the issues will be here for you to decide, what the evidence is and what the legal instructions are, so that you have a roadmap. and i'm going to start with the first question, not the eighteenth question. i'm going to start in the beginning where you all will have to start. but let us remind ourselves, the case is about mr. banks. the clearest, easiest way to see it is about mr. banks is you are going to get a verdict form that the court read to you and that is going to be your verdict. you fill out this form. i've highlighted them, you will see this, there are 18 questions; 17 of them have the name of george banks in the question. in several of those questions his name appears more than once. this is a case about mr. banks. it is a long verdict form, there are lots of questions, but there are actually only a few issues that just repeat themself throughout the verdict form. so what i'm going to do is focus on those issues and try to give you a roadmap as to how those issues appear sequentially in different parts of the verdict form. but i want to be clear about something. there has been a complete failure by the plaintiffs to meet their burden of proof. they have to prove their claims to you and they have not been able to do it. let us talk about what was done. you all probably know what a red herring is. a red herring, that is a figure of expression. a red herring is something that is designed to distract you and to mislead you away from the real issues in the case and then take your eye off the ball and get you looking somewhere else as opposed to what you are supposed to be doing. i submit, ladies and gentlemen, that what was done during the last two weeks is the plaintiffs have poured a barrel of red herrings in the courtroom that will not help you decide the case about george banks. and i could talk for a long time about it, but it is going to distract us from what we are doing so i'm going to try to do this briefly, because i think it is important to understand a few things. because the red herrings that the plaintiffs poured in the courtroom really fall into three categories. for each of those categories we need to take a step back and look at, what was the actual evidence on this issue and what did it have to do with mr. banks, because your inquiry should always come back to what does this evidence have to do with mr. banks. that should be your yardstick for every piece of evidence you look at you say, what does this have to do with mr. banks. the red herrings go into three general categories: addiction design, youth marketing and generic evidence. mr. schlesinger: objection, take that down for a second. your honor, can i approach? the court: yes, you can approach, sir. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: what is your objection? mr. schlesinger: i object to them denigrating the offense in this case. they are so intensively arguing to your honor that we may not run down the defense or attack the defendants for defending the case. now they are attacking the plaintiff for bringing the case. and every one of those issues is instructed by your honor. you let all that evidence in and that is not argument, that is attacking the plaintiff's case. and if they are going to say we cannot attack them, then they cannot attack us. the court: you can attack the evidence just like they can attack the evidence. mr. schlesinger: i agree, but that is not what he is doing. he told the jury that we waste the court's time, we took too long to do the case and that our case is a red herring; that is attacking the -- mr. furr: i'll rephrase it from attacking. the court: you will rephrase and you can cover it in rebuttal. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. furr: may i proceed, your honor? the court: you may, sir. mr. furr: what i'm focusing on, ladies and gentlemen, is the evidence before you and whether it is helpful or not or whether it is a red herring that causes you to take your eye off the evidence that does help you decide the issues in the case. there are three general barrels these red herrings fit into. one is this idea of addiction design. i'll tell you all what i mean by that in just a minute. second, youth marketing. and third, this concept of using generic evidence to prove mr. banks' case. we will look at that and we will look at the facts real quickly and then what it has to do with this case. addiction design, what i mean by that is you have heard over and over throughout the case that tobacco companies do something to design the cigarette to make it more addictive. there is been suggestions that they use additives to make it more addictive. there is been suggestion that they have done something to the nicotine to make it more inhalable and that makes it more addictive. and suggestions that they have done something to make the nicotine pass through the blood and get to the brain faster in an attempt to make it more addictive. let us look at what the evidence actually was as opposed to the arguments that were made. and we will use their own witnesses because their own witnesses disprove all of these things. you remember dr. proctor, the historian from from california, and dr. difranza, the internal medicine doctor from massachusetts. first both of them told you that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature. tobacco companies do not make them dangerous and addictive. if you burn a leaf it has all the same carcinogens in it as a cigarette does. it has even more nicotine in it than ultimately the cigarette does. that is the nature of the product. when you think about this claim that the tobacco companies did something to make cigarettes more addictive, if that were the case then some cigarettes should be more addictive than other cigarettes. common sense. here's what dr. proctor admitted to you. filtered full-flavored, light low-tar and additive-free cigarettes are equally addictive. he told you that additive-free cigarettes are equally addictive as cigarettes with additives. it cannot be the additives that makes it addictive. this whole issue of inhalability -- excuse me, roll-your-owns. you know, they keep reading things to you saying today's cigarettes are more addictive than ever were before, but listen to what their own expert said. roll-your-own cigarettes and cigarettes from the 1800s are just as dangerous and addictive as manufactured cigarettes, cigarettes from the 1800s. if that is the case, which their own expert admitted under cross-examination, then all these theories about what is been done to make cigarettes more addictive fall down. they have had no effect. their own experts admit that. they have also told you that cigarettes cannot be made safe. this morning there was an argument made to you about here's what the tobacco companies should do: they should do x, should do y, should do z to make their cigarettes safe. dr. proctor told you they cannot be made safe and the only safe cigarette is the one that is not lit. that is their own expert. what else did their experts tell you? inhalability, throughout the case you have heard that the tobacco companies did something to make the smoke inhalable and that is what caused cigarettes to be dangerous. well, that is not what their expert said. their experts told you that cigarettes have always been inhalable. dr. proctor told you that back in the 1800s people studying tobacco recognized that cigarettes were more dangerous than other forms of tobacco because they were inhalable, nature of the product. dr. difranza shot down both of their theories about cigarette design and addiction. he told you first that the inhalability of cigarettes is not what causes them to be addictive. and he explained to you that chewing tobacco is addictive too. therefore, it is not the inhalability. dr. difranza also told you that the speed in which nicotine is inhaled and goes to the brain has nothing to do with making smoking addictive. and, again, he used the common-sense explanation that chewing tobacco is addictive too. their experts rejected both of those theories. let us turn to youth marketing. you have seen this trial. you have seen plaintiffs attempt to insert the word "kids" and "children" into this case -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. mr. furr: -- over and over. the court: overruled. mr. furr: over and over. we objected and it is been sustained. in fact -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: do not comment on the evidence that is been sustained, mr. furr. sustained. mr. furr: let us look at what the court told you. judge tuter told you on february 13th -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. mr. skwrao: ladies and gentlemen -- mr. schlesinger: take that down. your honor, your instruction -- mr. furr: take it down. take it down. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. that is not an appropriate use of the record. the court: what is the legal basis of your objection, please, mr. schlesinger? mr. schlesinger: it is not the jury instruction. it is not argument. it is not evidence. the court: what was that, mr. furr? mr. furr: the curative instruction you gave the jury, a transcript slide of your instruction, your honor. the court: let me see it. you can use it. overruled. mr. furr: cliff, if counsel or anyone ask you to take it down, do not wait for me to take it down. as soon as an officer of the court asks you to, okay? video tech: okay. mr. furr: all right, ladies and gentlemen. you might recall judge tuter clearing things up for us when he told you, "ladies and gentlemen, this case is not about kids or children. it is not about kids or children. it is about mr. banks and the two defendants that they have sued." let us look at youth marketing a little closer and why it is a red herring. first of all, there is zero evidence that mr. banks started smoking because of advertising. who told you that mr. banks started smoking because of advertising? no one. no one. it is entirely speculation. second, the medical records, and mr. schlesinger candidly admitted this in his closing this morning, the medical records indicated that mr. banks started smoking when he was about 24 years old. now, their expert said maybe it was a year or two before because he might have had -- he might have started at a lower amount of smoking before he got to a pack, but the experts, even on cross-examination his expert said, might have been a year or two before. clearly an adult when he started. there is zero credible evidence that mr. banks started smoking as a youth. there is just not any. but i'm going to be comprehensive and we are going to talk about the evidence they do have and talk about what it means. you all might not even remember this. but yesterday afternoon on the cross-examination of dr. hoge at the eleventh hour the plaintiffs asked dr. hoge: did not mrs. banks say that he started smoking as a youth? now, she never told you that. she did not testify about when he started. and there is a good reason for that. because you heard the redirect that mr. keehfus did of dr. hoge and dr. hoge told you what mrs. banks actually said in her sworn deposition testimony. here's what she said. she was asked, "did you ever ask him when he started smoking?" and her answer was no. "did you ever have any discussions about his smoking before you two met? "no. "do you have any knowledge of when he started smoking. "no." that was all that you heard from her 2012 sworn deposition testimony that she gave before she got sick. and she is sick and we all feel sorry for her and it may have affected her memory. and nobody's criticizing her for that. but that is why we keep bringing to you the evidence from her deposition that she gave before she got sick. that is why we spent so much time showing you what she said when she was in better shape and her memory was in better shape. generic evidence. you know, you keep hearing this theory, he was a generic smoker, he was a generic smoker. he was not. he was an individual whose biography whose personal story are the facts you need to decide this case. what kind of evidence was brought to you? dr. proctor from california came. we had some fun talking to him. it is obvious he and i have talked about these issues before, but it is important what he told you. remember, he is been paid almost 2 million dollars to testify against tobacco companies. and yet he came here and provided to you only generic evidence. he did not know when mr. banks started smoking, what cigarettes he smoked. he did not even know what disease -- he came here and said he did not know what disease he had, but then i reminded him that in fact he knew it was esophageal cancer -- and that is important, we will get to that in a moment -- and he told you that he did not review the deposition and he did not review medical records. i mean, dr. proctor, with all due respect, he sort of willfully chose not to learn the facts of the case. because what he also told you is that -- you remember what his testimony was about; his testimony was about the tobacco company's conduct, and he said they advertised and they hid the truth and they confused people about the dangers of smoking. i'm not here to debate all those issues in the abstract. that was the class action. we are not here to challenge the class action findings. what we are here to do, what your tasked to do is to figure out how those findings apply to mr. george banks. here's what dr. proctor told you. he knows of no evidence that mr. banks started smoking because of advertising. he knows of no evidence that mr. banks relied on statements by any tobacco company. and he knows of no evidence that mr. banks was ever confused about the dangers of smoking. and you know that the reason he does not know of any evidence is because there is none. there is no evidence of any of those things. you did not hear it during the trial. you did not hear it this morning. instead the plaintiffs spent the whole case reproving the engle findings. the general findings at the class action where really what they spent the majority of their case on. they do not have to reprove those findings. you heard the instruction this morning, they do not have to be proven, they cannot be challenged. now, they have some limitations how they can be used. they cannot be used to determine class membership. they cannot be used to determine whether punitive damages should be awarded. mr. schlesinger: objection. the court: once again, ladies and gentlemen, i instructed you on that. if the lawyers say anything that disagrees with my instructions always follow my instructions. you may proceed. mr. furr: they cannot be used to determine legal causation and they do not prove anything about whether the tobacco companies are liable to mr. banks, that is why you are here. but why did they spend their whole time reproving those cases and taking two weeks to do it? here's the answer. because they have the burden to prove their case to you, but they have no evidence about mr. banks. they have no evidence about mr. banks. and i'm going to go right back to where we started in opening statement, because there is a huge gap in this case. nobody knows anything about mr. banks before 1970 when he is 57 years old. he lived virtually a complete life. he was on the verge of retirement when mrs. banks met him. here's what we know. well, let us look at it from this perspective. think back before this case started. had you asked yourself: what do we know before the case starts about mr. banks' smoking from 1914 to 1970, i think your answer would have had to be nothing. you would not have known anything. what do you know at the end of this case after you have heard all the evidence that the plaintiffs have? same thing, you do not know anything about his smoking between 1914 and 1970. and there is a reason for that. nobody ever saw mr. banks smoking before the 1970s. now, i acknowledge the medical records take his smoking back to '38. i'm not challenging what the medical records say about when he might have begun smoking. but the point is, there is no eyewitness that can tell you why he started or what he started smoking or who he smoked with or how much he smoked or anything like that. there is no witness who saw what brand he smoked before 1970. here's a case where the plaintiffs are alleging they should be awarded, it sounds like they are really only asking for $500,000 now, you heard millions during voir dire, but in any event, they are asking you for a large sum of money to be awarded against rj reynolds and philip morris, but no one knows whose cigarettes mr. banks smoked before 1970. could have been another company's, could have been roll-your-own, no one knows. here's what we do know. here's what we do know, though, in a case where the plaintiffs are asking for a large sum of money from rj reynolds and philip morris we know that every pack of rj reynolds' cigarettes and philip morris' cigarettes that anyone ever saw mr. banks smoking carried a warning, carried a warning that said, "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." think about this. one of the basic claims in this case, and it is throughout your verdict form and i'll show them to you in just a few minutes, is that mr. banks died because he did not know that smoking was dangerous because rj reynolds and philip morris concealed that from him. that is a claim. how can that be? every pack of our cigarettes that anybody can testify to that he ever smoked had this warning on the side of the packs. and we are going to talk about what mr. lampe said about this warning and, more importantly, what yvonne said about this warning to george. and by the way, i have to refer to yvonne and katrina during the course of my closing. it is kind of a little awkward because they are in the courtroom and they are human and they are there. and i do not mean any disrespect to them and i'm not trying to be rude to them, but we have to talk about the evidence that they gave, that is why i'm talking about them. i mean no disrespect to these ladies who are sitting right here to my right. what else do we know? you know, the claim in this case is that mr. banks was a compulsive chain-smoking nicotine addict. that is the basic claim. they are claiming that because he was a compulsive chain-smoking nicotine addict that they should be given money. who ever saw mr. banks smoke a cigarette in his entire life other than the two ladies that are here asking you for money? nobody. not his best friend, not his acquaintance that he borrowed money from, not his landlady who he lived above for somewhere between three and five years. nobody ever saw him smoke a cigarette. again, i'm not questioning he was a smoker, that is not the point. but was he a compulsive chain-smoking nicotine addict? if that is the case, why did nobody else ever see him smoke? how many neutral witnesses did the plaintiffs bring you? how many witnesses did they bring to you who either they were not paying for their testimony or who were not here seeking money? zero. the only body that brought you neutral witnesses were the defendants. and you know who they are, roosevelt hall -- mr. schlesinger: your honor, i object. may i approach, please? the court: yes, sir. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: what is it now? mr. schlesinger: you cannot say you are paying for testimony, judge. the court: sustain the objection. mr. schlesinger: can i get a curative? (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, the testimony about paying for testimony is sustained. you are to disregard the remark. go ahead, mr. furr. mr. furr: and i apologize. i said that the wrong way. witnesses who are being compensated for their time testifying. did not mean to disparage them in any way, just a shorthand to things. but i do not want to lose this point. the only body who brought you any witness who did not have some skin in this game were the defendants. so as we go through and we are trying to reconcile competing views of what the facts were, one of the sources you can always turn to are neutral witnesses who do not have a stake in how this case comes out. on page 3 of your instructions there is a believability of witnesses instructions and you will see that one of the things you can evaluate is whether the witness had an interest in the case, because of course an interest in the case may influence the way you testify. that is in your instructions. the evidence demonstrates a very telling moment in the case was dr. difranza's testimony. you might remember dr. difranza has testified he told you first time he testified against the tobacco companies were 25 years ago. he is been doing this for a long time. and what did he tell you about this case? he was asked "and you have never had another case where you had less information about the smoker from the period of his birth until age 60, right? "right." there is just a complete failure of proof because the plaintiffs do not have the facts they need to prove their claims to you. let us organize ourselves around the legal issues so that as we look at the evidence we can work through how that evidence applies to the case, because there are three fundamental sets of issues. i told you you have got 18 verdict questions. it sounds awful. but you can group those verdict questions around three fundamental issues; the first is whether he was a class member. they failed to prove that to you. the second is whether mr. banks died because he did not know that smoking was dangerous after may 5th, 1982 because of something the defendants did. that question actually appears about three times on your verdict form. we will look at that. finally, this issue that mr. schlesinger raised with you this morning, and that is whether yvonne and katrina are entitled to money damages for the loss of mr. banks, and that primarily deals with really what the nature of the family relationship was. we talked to you about that in voir dire. you have heard evidence. and mr. schlesinger acknowledged that that is important for you to consider. so we are going to work our way through that and remind ourselves of what those facts were. class membership. first, plaintiffs have the burden of proof of class membership, first thing to understand. there are basically three components of class membership. first, the plaintiffs have to prove to you, and i'll deal with esophageal cancer and emphysema separately, although they are basically the same except for the first element. the plaintiffs have to prove to you that mr. banks died from esophageal cancer caused by smoking, that is number one. second, they have to prove to you that mr. banks was addicted to nicotine. and finally, and this is a separate piece of proof they have to offer to you, that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of george banks' death. the important thing to understand here is these are like three boxes that they have to check off. if they miss any one of them he is not a member of the class. so they have got three different burdens they have to carry even to establish that he was a class member. and we are looking at each of these three separately to parse them out so you can evaluate what the evidence actually was. and we will start at the beginning with esophageal cancer. first part of class membership, on the esophageal cancer claim, they have to prove that he died from esophageal cancer caused by smoking. well, what was the evidence? dr. difranza, first medical witness in the case, told you that mr. banks had at least four risk factors that could have been related to his esophageal cancer. he told you that gender and age are important risk factors. if you are a male and you are over 50 years old your chance goes up, that is life, that is how things are. he also told you that alcohol and cigarettes are the largest risk factors for esophageal cancer. dr. traube, the other medical witness, agreed with that. alcohol. let us talk about what was said about alcohol, because it is actually the key to understanding the case. it is the key to understanding both medical causation and addiction causation, because really this case is in fact more about alcohol than it is about tobacco when you understand the facts of the case. dr. proctor, dr. traube, both witnesses called by the plaintiff. on cross-examination here's what they both told you, that alcohol is a major cause of esophageal cancer and the more you drink and the longer you drink the greater your risk is. then we asked dr. proctor this question, i asked him, "would you agree that about 70 percent of the esophageal cancer cases are attributable to alcohol consumption? he said, "ballpark, i agree with that." ballpark, i agree with that. think about what that means. 75 percent? that means 3 out of 4. so if you have four cases of esophageal cancer before you and nothing more, dr. proctor has conceded that 3 out of those 4 cases would be attributable to alcohol consumption. smoking cigarettes can cause esophageal cancer also. nobody disputes that. but there is a very important concept to understand, and it is pretty common sense. why do doctors tell people that they should quit smoking? because when you quit smoking, your risk of developing a disease goes down. and the longer you quit, the longer it is been since you quit the lower your risk is. so in evaluating whether smoking was a cause of the esophageal cancer it is important to understand how long after he quit smoking that that esophogeal cancer developed and what does the science tell us about what his risk from his cigarette smoking would have been by the time his esophageal cancer developed. and dr. difranza told you what that evidence is. he said based on the surgeon general that within five years of quitting, five years, your chance of cancer of the throat, mouth and esophagus is cut in half, is cut in half. another way of saying it is cut in half, another way of saying it is is that in five years after you quit it is more likely than not that you will not develop cancer from that exposure, because it is a fifty percent level, more likely than not you will not develop. so we need to look at mr. banks' smoking when he quit and when the cancer developed. because after five years, after he quit smoking, dr. difranza told us that his risk would have been cut in half from smoking. what do we know? we know from the medical records, they are very clear, that he quit two years prior to the 1990 admission. you all remember when he fell down, hurt his hand, went in, gave a history multiple times. both the admitting nurse and the anesthesia nurse -- anesthesia doctor who did a probing interview because they are getting ready to administer the man anesthesia, they need to know what is going on with him so they know what drugs to give him and how much to give him, both of them had found out he had quit in 1988. yvonne and katrina came in here and told you he never quit. they came in and told you he never quit. but their experts did not agree with them. their experts, who read the depositions, and our expert, who read the depositions, looked at the medical records, considered all the evidence in the case, all three experts who testified on this issue rejected that testimony. dr. difranza, dr. traube, the plaintiff's experts, both told you that they believe based on the totality of evidence in this case that mr. banks quit in 1988. and dr. hoge told you the same thing. and, frankly, the truth is ms. banks told you the same thing if you look at her deposition testimony and not her trial testimony. you know, in trial ms. banks told you that he only quit when they put him in a casket. but you might remember during cross-examination she acknowledged that in 1988 -- excuse me, she acknowledged in her deposition, she said that she did not know whether he smoked after 1988. so really when you go back to when her memory was better, she did not know either. there is just no credible evidence that he smoked after 1988. he quit not five years but eight years before he developed esophageal cancer. in 1996 he had been quit since 1988. so as the witnesses explained to you, the longer you quit the lower your risk was. his risk would have been decreased by more than fifty percent from the smoking by the time he developed esophageal cancer. so what causes esophageal cancer? what did he continue to do during those intervening eight years that we all know is a major risk factor and causes 75 percent of the esophageal cancer? you heard this morning mr. schlesinger told you that mr. banks was a problem drinker and they acknowledged that. so did all the experts. the experts said he was a problem drinker. mr. schlesinger said he was a problem drinker. all of the medical records that you are going to have and be able to look through them all you want say that he was a problem drinker, that he was a heavy user of alcohol, that he had substance abuse and alcohol abuse. and by the way, the substance abuse is etoh, it is not any other substance. but the medical records say he was a heavy drinker. and remember who wrote these. these are the folks who were taking care of him, who asked him about his smoking -- excuse me, about his drinking and who used their professional judgment to determine what significance that was for him. his own doctors thought he was a problem drinker. the neutral witnesses told us that he had been drinking for a long time. remember diedrich lampe, his best friend, ms. banks told you, his best friend, knew him since the '40s all the way through the '80s, even kept checking on him as he got older, because he was fond of him, told you that even back in the '40s when was working for diedrich and his father and both at work at jacksonville liquors and in their home that sometimes mr. banks drank more than he should and he would not make it to work. by the way, i'm not doing a character assassination, as was suggested this morning. we are just talking about the evidence as it relates to the issues you have to decide, medical causation and addiction causation. roosevelt hall, mr. banks' acquaintance, told you that he saw him about 150 times between 1965 and 1977 and mr. hall told you that he observed -- would tease mr. banks about being under the weather and that most of the time he saw him, most of the time he saw him mr. banks had been drinking. and then helen hall norman, his landlady, the dates were a little confusing, but the best way to piece them all together, because it looks like she was his landlady from 1980 to 1985. so she was his landlady both when katrina and yvonne were still living in jacksonville and after they moved to miami. what did ms. hall tell us? that she saw mr. banks intoxicated, that he would drink with his roommate melvin austin and that when she saw him coming and going, remember, she lived right below him in the same building, and she said she could see him coming and going as he approached the building, when she would see him coming and going that he looked like he had been drinking. then we had another episode where -- you know, the fact of the matter is yvonne also told you that he was a frequent drinker. let us look at what happened during this trial. during this trial in front of you yvonne testified that i never saw him drink. i never saw him drinking. but as dr. traube explained to you, the plaintiff's expert explained to you that the february 1996 medical record says that mr. banks drank beer, liquor and wine very frequently, and it says, wife gave info. wife gave info. that is what dr. traube told you. so that was -- i'm not picking on ms. banks in any way. that was 18 years ago, 18 years ago. but we have a medical record from 18 years ago where mrs. banks told the health care providers that he was a very frequent drinker. i want to talk about what dr. traube told you. because you might remember dr. traube, the doctor who came down here from new york. what you might remember was that dr. traube was also a lawyer, that he was not a practicing lawyer, but he would been through law school. well, you saw him testify and you get to evaluate his demeanor and how he handled cross-examination, because you saw, basically dr. traube knew all the tricks. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. not proper argument. sustained. mr. furr: dr. traube would not admit that anything was authoritative. he would not admit that any source was authoritative and thus he avoided being cross-examined. but what happened? frankly, in the end he broke, in the end he broke. and let us look at his series of admissions that he made that taken together completely demonstrate that it was the alcohol that was the only legal cause of mr. banks' esophageal cancer. the first thing he told us on cross-examination was that "mr. banks' alcohol use enormously," his word, "enormously increased his risk of developing esophageal cancer." then he broke a little more and he candidly admitted that the alcohol consumption was a cause, a cause of mr. banks' esophageal cancer. that is the plaintiff's medical doctor that they brought to you. he also told you that had mr. banks quit drinking when he quit smoking he would have decreased his risk of esophageal cancer by 50 percent, fifty percent. but then he went further, he went further. the final, the final admission that dr. traube made is that if mr. banks had stopped drinking when he stopped smoking he could have avoided esophageal cancer, he could have avoided esophageal cancer. now, you will see when you read your instructions, page 4 of your instructions there is a lengthy instruction about causation. and here's the part i want to focus on. this is class membership instruction. in the third paragraph down you will see that -- this language, "but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such as emphysema, esophageal cancer, the death would not have occurred. [sic] little abstract, but the point is it is but/for causation, but/for causation. and by this admission dr. traube has admitted there is no but/for causation for nicotine addiction, that it was his drinking that was the cause of his esophageal cancer. the other theory that you heard during the case, and i want to talk about all the theories you heard. you heard, well, maybe it was some synergistic reaction between smoking and drinking. mr. schlesinger: your honor, can i approach, please? the court: yes, sir. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: with all due respect, you cannot put up testimony without giving a page and line. we are in the middle of a trial with the trial transcript. the court: it is overruled, sir. the jury can remember it, disregard it, whatever they want to do. overruled. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the united reporting, inc. 954-525-2221 0dbf17df-fc10-4733-840d-3f3c4a4ca47d following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. furr: final theory you heard about causation was that, well, maybe it is synergy, maybe it is alcohol and tobacco acting together. well, in order to act together they both have to be present at the same time. you know, you have heard he quit smoking in 1988, developed his disease in 1996. so for the last eight years there could not have been any type of synergy because he was not smoking any longer. but he continued to drink, and it actually looks like his drinking accelerated. and the evidence demonstrates that the only cause of his esophageal cancer was his problematic abuse of alcohol consumption. now, let us think about what the evidence was even further. the treatment records, the medical records do not say that smoking caused his cancer. the autopsy does not say that smoking caused his cancer. the death certificate does not say that smoking caused his cancer. in the process of providing care none of the records say that smoking caused his cancer. the only record that says anything about smoking caused his cancer was this record that was created at mrs. banks' request two months after his death. and if you look at this letter you will see that mrs. banks requested a doctor to send her a letter that smoking caused his cancer and you will have to decide why this letter was requested. let us talk about the emphysema. you know, this is the easiest issue in the case by far, because the emphysema was a complete nonissue in this case. dr. difranza told you that he was of the opinion that mr. banks might not have even noticed that he had emphysema. dr. traube told you that mr. banks did not complain of symptoms, that none of the treaters that took care of him saw his symptoms, that it did not affect him in any substantial way. could i have the elmo, please. thank you, baron. your first two questions are class membership. ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to suggest to you that even before we get to addiction and addiction causation that the plaintiff's proof has failed on both of those. and if you agree, no, your foreman goes to the back of this verdict form, signs it and we all go home. back to the monitor, please, baron. thank you. but that is not all the plaintiffs have to do to prove he is a class member. they have to prove that mr. banks was addicted to nicotine, that mr. banks was addicted to nicotine. so let us look at what the evidence was on that issue. because really the only thing that was proven to you is that mr. banks was a smoker, that for some period of time he was being observed smoking a pack a day. the question for you is, is that enough for the plaintiffs to satisfy their burden? their own witnesses told you it is not. they told you that not all smokers are addicted and that the latest, greatest best -- did i hit something, cliff? -- the latest, greatest best available information is that about fifty percent of regular smokers are not addicted. you were told that people smoke for other reasons. i mean, it was belittled this morning but both of these witnesses, dr. difranza and dr. hoge, told you that people smoke for enjoyment, pleasure, relaxation, concentration enhancement. it is a habit for some people. it is a habit for some people. so let us look closer to see whether mr. banks fits in the fifty percent category of addicted smokers or whether he fits in the other category of nonaddicted smokers. again, let us look at what the neutral fact witnesses told us. mr. lampe, his best friend, never saw him smoke a cigarette in over 40 years. they worked together. mr. lampe visited him, checked on him. they worked side by side, shoulder to shoulder, riding in the same truck together moving that equipment for a couple months at a time in the 1940s. he never saw him smoke a cigarette. he never smelled smoke on mr. banks or in his apartment. he never saw him bum a cigarette. mr. hall saw him 150 times when he would come see mr. hall. never saw him with a cigarette, never saw him smoke a cigarette, never smelled cigarettes on him. ms. north, his landlady, of all the times, she told you she saw him every three or four days, that he would be coming and going, going up and down the steps. she would see him every month when he would come down to pay his rent, never saw him smoke. if he is an addicted smoker smoking compulsively, as a nicotine addict, how could it be that every neutral witness in the case never saw him smoke? how can that be? both experts in the case, dr. difranza and dr. hoge, admitted to you that mr. banks could control his smoking. they both told you he was not a chain smoker, that he did things like he always went outside to smoke, he would not smoke around katrina, he would not smoke in church or meals, places that he was supposed to not smoke he was able to control himself. he was not somebody who was controlled by nicotine. he controlled his smoking. let us go to the medical records. no doctor who ever treated mr. banks while he was alive diagnosed him with addiction to cigarettes or nicotine. there is no medical record that says that mr. banks was addicted to cigarettes with nicotine or abusing tobacco. he was never diagnosed as addicted to cigarettes before this lawsuit. eighteen years after his death is the first time that anybody had ever diagnosed him as abusing -- or excuse me, as a nicotine addict, which you know that his treaters were sensitive to issues of dependence and abuse and addiction because they documented in the medical records that he was abusing alcohol. so it is not like they missed this issue. they knew the significance of evaluating addiction issues for their patients as they treated him. they identified that he was an alcohol addict or abusing alcohol, but there is not a single notation that he had any problems with nicotine. finally we brought you dr. hoge. you know, this is a case where the plaintiffs are asking for significant amounts of money. it is your decision as to what being addicted to nicotine means. my suggestion to you is that at a minimum it should mean that a smoker meets medical diagnostic criteria that are used by health care providers to diagnose whether someone is addicted to nicotine. and dr. hoge just yesterday walked through his careful, elaborate analysis of whether mr. banks met the medical diagnostic criteria embodied in the dsm-5, the text that psychiatrists use and psychologists use to diagnose people. he told you the first problem is the threshold requirement. mr. banks had no significant clinical impairment. there just was no evidence that smoking was interfering with mr. banks' life. you can imagine a smoker who hated it, who tried everything they could do to quit, who was tormented by their smoking, tortured by it, who talked about it, who thought about it, who was obsessed with it, who was driven crazy by their inability to quit. that is not mr. banks. there was none of that evidence for mr. banks. dr. hoge told you, as we just discussed, he controlled his smoking and there is no evidence whatsoever of compulsive smoking. no evidence of compulsive smoking. so i suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that on the second prong of class membership, whether mr. banks was addicted, that is another independent reason -- can i have the elmo, please, baron -- another independent reason of why mr. banks is not a member of the engle class. now, remember there only has to be one x on the no side for any of these three things the plaintiffs have to prove. they did not prove any of them, so they failed three different times. thank you, baron. if i could go back to the projector. third, the plaintiffs have to prove that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of mr. banks' death. it is kind of a strange concept. how could addiction to nicotine be a legal cause? submit to you there is only one way that addiction could be a legal cause of somebody's disease and death, and that is if the addiction prevented that person from being able to quit in time to avoid their disease, if the addiction was so strong that it compelled somebody to continue using the substance and it rendered them unable to quit and ultimately caused their disease. mr. schlesinger: judge, i object. violates preclusive findings, not the law, not the instructions. the court: again, ladies and gentlemen, all of this is set out in the instructions and you will follow the instructions as i've given them to you in those instructions. you may continue, sir. mr. furr: so i'm suggesting to you that the question you can ask yourself is, was he rendered unable to quit and avoid his disease? well, you know that is just not the case. let us remind ourselves generally about how smokers quit then we will look at mr. banks. and i'm going to use only the surgeon general's quitting statistics, not somebody else's, not the tobacco companies', but the surgeon general's quitting statistics. dr. proctor told you about all of this. by 1965 17.6 million americans had quit, before the first warning went on the pack, they quit because of the information about the dangers of smoking, dr. proctor told you. in the 15 years between '64 when we had the surgeon general's report and '79, 30 million more quit, 2 million a year on average, about 5 or 6,000 people a day. and today we know that about 60 million people have quit, a much larger number than number of people who currently smoke. well, okay, were these quitters light smokers? were they nonaddicted smokers? next logical question. it is a fair question. here's the evidence. dr. difranza and dr. cummings, who you may not remember, he was a video that you saw early on, and dr. hoge all told you the same thing; of the 60 million americans who quit, ninety percent of them they thought would have been addicted. dr. hoge told you the new statistics are fifty percent, but dr. difranza said ninety percent would have been addicted, 90 to 95 percent quit cold turkey. being addicted does not compel you to smoke yourself to death. it just does not. dr. hoge told you an addiction diagnosis is not a person. there is more to a person than a diagnosis. there is that person's decision-making, their willpower, the choices that they make. dr. proctor told you that in fact heavy smokers quit. from the '70s on dr. proctor told you that the average smoker who quit smoked more than a pack a day, more than a pack a day, so it is the heavy smokers who can quit. one of the ways you can evaluate this, because, you know, during the trial it was depicted to you that smoking is a horrific thing to try to quit and it is torture for people, and i'm not disputing that it can be hard for some people, but let us look at what the plaintiff's experts say outside the courtroom, outside the courtroom. dr. cummings. "and when smokers come to your stop-smoking clinic, you tell them that the success rate for quitting among people who really want to quit and stick to it is a hundred percent, right?" "answer: yes, i do say that in my literature." dr. cummings wrote a stop-smoking guide for the american cancer society. "do you have what it takes to stop smoking? there is no magic cure that can help you stop smoking. take this short quiz. find out if you have what it takes. do you want to stop smoking? are you motivated? are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? "if you can answer yes to all three questions you can stop smoking." again, what is said outside courtroom. dr. difranza outside the courtroom. "and you certainly would never tell one of your patients that they cannot quit smoking? "answer: i would not." so now let us turn to mr. banks and this final component of class membership, this issue of addiction causation. suggest to you that here's the way to think about it. was mr. banks compelled to smoke so that he was unable to quit and prevent his death, or was he a problem drinker who did not quit smoking before 1988 because he chose to drink and smoke daily? it is an either/or. it really cannot be both. well, you have heard the plaintiffs have admitted that "mr. banks' acts or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of these efforts to quit smoking were a legal cause of his death." were a legal cause of death. you will see it that in the instructions. you heard it this morning when mr. schlesinger told you we take responsibility. let us take a step back, because you are allowed to draw inferences from the evidence. you are allowed to consider, what does this really mean? and as you think through what this admission really means, i'm going to suggest to you that it means this. it means it is implicitly an admission that mr. banks knew that smoking was dangerous but continued to smoke. because why would someone ever admit on behalf of their family member that they were a cause of their own death if they did not know? if they did not know you would not say they were a cause. second, it means that he had the ability to quit smoking, the ability to quit smoking earlier. because if he was hopelessly addicted and unable to quit why would you ever admit that he was a cause of his own death? finally, that admission implicitly means that he had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death. because the admission is that he was a cause of his own death. that admission would never be made if they did not believe that he could have quit in time to prevent his own death. important piece of information for you to consider, not just the literal words, but the inferences, what actually underlies that admission, so you can think through what does that mean for the issue you have to decide in this case? well, let us zero in on mr. banks, because that is where we should be. could he quit? of course he could. we know because he did quit. we know because he did quit. we know with 100 percent certainty that he could quit. he quit in 1988. dr. hoge explained to you that being addicted to nicotine does not mean -- simply does not mean that a person loses the ability to control their smoking. and he told you that based upon all the evidence nicotine addiction was not a cause of mr. banks' esophageal cancer. if it was not nicotine addiction, what was going on? you know the answer to that question. alcohol causes a loss of control. dr. difranza, dr. traube, dr. hoge all told you that alcohol use lowers inhibitions -- everybody knows that -- reduces willpower and makes it more difficult to quit smoking. that is why he did not quit before 1988. although clearly when he was drinking, he demonstrated he still had the ability to quit. 60 million smokers quit. why did not mr. banks quit earlier? why did not he quit smoking earlier? were the cigarettes he was smoking more addictive than other cigarettes? no evidence of that whatsoever. was his brain affected differently than smokers who quit? no evidence of that. was he exposed to advertising different than the smokers who quit? no evidence of that. was he exposed to tobacco company statements different than other smokers? no evidence. did he smoke more or longer than smokers who quit? no. you just saw that the average quitter smoked a pack a day. what was the difference between him and other people who quit sooner -- because he did quit, but who quit sooner? because he was a problem drinker. his problem drinking was a barrier to him quitting smoking. the court: one hour, sir. mr. furr: thank you very much, your honor. why did not he quit? he did not do the types of things that people need to do -- that people do when they want to quit. he did not -- you know, you were told that motivation and persistence is the key to quitting, you have to want to quit, you have to try to quit. that is how people accomplish most things in life, including quitting smoking. you were told he did not do any of the things that people do. he did not ask for help. he did not go to the doctor. he did not even throw away his cigarettes. he did not go to any clinic. he did not go a single day without smoking. there is simply no evidence that he was motivated to quitting smoking and persistent in his efforts to quit smoking. if this were a case where the smoker had tried to quit 30, 40 times and went through just an awful time every time you would have a different case before you, but that is just not what you have, and mrs. banks told us that. here's what she was asked: "ma'am, this first time he tried to quit smoking he actually stopped smoking for less than an hour; is that correct? "answer, yes. "question: okay, ma'am. when you were living in miami from 1983 to 1992, you do not have any knowledge about mr. banks trying to quit smoking, do you? "answer: did not i just tell you that he tried to quit smoking once? "yes, ma'am, you did. "well then, you got the answer." mrs. banks, one time for one hour in a 50-year period of smoking and the claim is that his smoking -- nicotine compelled him to smoke and left him unable to quit in time to avoid the disease? it does not make any sense. one hour in 50 years? i'm going to suggest to you that the third prong of class membership the plaintiffs also failed to prove to you, and that is this idea of addiction causation. there is no evidence that he had an inability to quit smoking in time to prevent his death, if the smoking was even a cause of his disease. could i have the elmo. thank you. so, ladies and gentlemen, there is actually three reasons why class membership fails in this case, three independent reasons. there only has to be one for esophageal cancer and emphysema, but there are three on each of them. and if that is what you find based on your evidence and analysis then you go to the last page, sign and date your verdict form and we all go home. but of course i'm obligated to discuss all the other issues in the case with you so that is what i'm going to do. i want to go through this concealment issue, this issue of whether mr. banks died because he did not know that smoking was dangerous. you are actually going to see that it disappears in verdict form questions 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13 and 14. like i said, we can group these questions together. it is the same analysis for all of them. you have concealment questions related to both esophageal cancer and emphysema. you have concealment questions related to both concealment and agreement to conceal. there ended up being eight different concealment questions. they all really boil down to the same thing, and that is whether the plaintiffs have proven to you, have they proven to you that mr. banks died because he did not know that smoking was dangerous because that information was concealed from him by the tobacco companies. and there is a very important instruction for you to look at in that regard. on page 11 of your instructions in the third paragraph you will see the last sentence of the third paragraph on page 11 says this, "however, george banks cannot be found to have reasonably relied upon his statement if he knew it was false or its falsity was obvious to him or that the fact allegedly concealed was already known to him." already known to him. what is all that mean? it means you cannot conceal something from somebody who already knows it. pretty common sense. if you already know something no one can conceal it from you, it is already information that you have. so we need to look quickly at what was known about the dangers of smoking in general and what mr. banks knew to determine whether, in fact, his failure to understand that smoking can be dangerous was a legal cause of his death. the question becomes: was the dangers of smoking a secret? if it was a secret and people did not know about it that would be an important thing to know. you know that is not true. i'm going to have to go a little faster than i would like to through this, but you know that tv, radio, newspaper, magazines, public health authorities, doctors, churches, schools all were important sources of information about the dangers of smoking beginning back in the 1800s. and dr. proctor told you just that. i will not go through this busy slide but he told you that beginning in the 1800s it was widely discussed that smoking is bad for you, contains nicotine, that school textbooks from the 1800s warned people that smoking could shorten their life and addiction was being discussed. florida health notes 1906, though eight years before mr. banks is born, "today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. it is generally inhaled." generally inhaled. and i had not planned on doing this, but i think there is an issue i need to address. can we have the elmo again, please? this morning mr. schlesinger told me that i hurt his ego during opening statement. i did not mean to do that. he also suggested to you that i misled you. surely did not mean to do that and i did not do that. please write this exhibit number down, aws 000054, 54. i told you that the surgeon general of the united states had written a document in 1915 that said that cigarette smoking can be addictive. here it is. first, this is from the united states public health service, the branch of the government that publish surgeon general's reports. the health of garment workers by a doctor who is the surgeon from the u.s. public health service, prepared by direction of the surgeon general. in 1915. if you turn to page 28 of this document, you will see this sentence, "it seems that cigarette smoking is by far the most popular form of tobacco addiction among male garment workers." and as if that were not enough, we cross-examined dr. proctor on this very subject. he was asked, "sir, you were asked the question and gave the answer: '1915 the surgeon general of the united states took the position that smoking is addictive, right? "and your answer was 'yes.' correct? "yes." complete sideshow, has nothing to do with any important issue in this case, but i just wanted to make sure the record was clear about whether anything has been misrepresented to you all by me during my opening statement. could i go back to the projector, please. okay. i got a little click happy. do not have much time to go through all these general things. you have heard all this. it was in textbooks in the 1920s. dr. proctor told you that beginning in the 1950s people began quitting in large numbers. why? because the major reason was the fear created about smoking and their health, right? mr. banks would have been about 40 years old in 1954, 40 years old. public health authorities of the day, 1957, mr. banks is 43 years old, the surgeon general, dr. heller both testified in congress that just like we have been discussing, the public had been informed through radio, television, tv, newspaper, the public was being told what was going on, people got to make choices, the information was out there, they heard they made their own choices. in 1964 the surgeon general's report came out. front page news. this is the newspaper that mr. banks read. "cigarette smoking held grave hazard to health in the u.s. heavy cigarette smoking is the principal cause of cancer of the lungs and the larynx and the health hazard so grave as to call for remedial action." the information was everywhere, radio, tv, newspapers, magazine covers. you saw all that. you saw the press conference. the message was everywhere. florida public health organization the very next year said, "nearly all floridians have heard about this." and soon after that the warning label went on. 1966 the first warning label went on the packages of cigarettes. dr. daniel horne, the public health authority responsible for distributing information about the dangers of smoking in the 1960s said this, and i'm going to read it because it just speaks volumes. "you could stand on the rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs' and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." how could mr. banks miss the message? take a step back from this, ask yourself, search your minds, there has not been one single piece of evidence, not one piece of testimony, not one document, nothing, no one has ever said that mr. banks did not know that smoking was dangerous. that is the claim before you, that he died because he did not know it. who said he did not know? yvonne did not say that. katrina did not say that. it is not in the medical records. there is a complete absence of proof. not one witness ever uttered a syllable to the effect that mr. banks did not know that smoking was dangerous. instead what were we told? yvonne told you that he might have had limited education but he kept up with current events, he watched the news, he read the newspapers. and more importantly, yvonne made sure that he knew. she made sure that he knew that smoking was dangerous. here's what she told us: while living in jacksonville before 1982, she told him about articles that she saw about smoking in her magazines. she told him about things that she had seen on tv about smoking, including anti-smoking commercials, including anti-smoking commercials. i was going to show you one. in the interest of time i'm going to skip past it. you remember the type of public health service announcement being played. you saw it during dr. proctor's examination, things like the american cancer society talked about warnings and how quitting benefits your health. the information was everywhere. yvonne saw it. she told george about it. and then maybe one of the most important pieces of evidence in the case. 1970 this warning label went on the package of cigarettes. no dispute, also no dispute that it is accurate as a matter of federal law. "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." is dangerous to your health. a seminal piece of evidence in this case because of what happened after this warning went on packages. first, did people about it in general know [sic]? well, let us look at what diedrich lampe, mr. banks' best friend, told you. mr. lampe knew him from the '40s to the '80s. mr. lampe told me that he quit smoking when the dangers came out and he said something, maybe it is a little bit crude, maybe it is a little bit insensitive, but this was mr. lampe's testimony and this was a common guy speaking about what was commonly known about the dangers of smoking by virtue of that warning being on the pack. mr. lampe told you, warnings were printed all over the pack. it was obvious that smoking is harmful to your health. when he was asked whether he knew smoking was harmful, he said, i'm not a mental paraplegic. now, what did he mean by that? again, it is a little insensitive and crude, but this was his words. he meant that it was obvious to anyone. it is on the side of the package. how could you not know it? and certainly mr. banks could not have known it, because mrs. banks told you that when she saw the warning label that the surgeon general had determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health, when she first saw it she brought the label to the attention of mr. banks. she warned him to heed that warning. and what else did she tell you? she told you that he knew it was not good for him. she told you that she explained to him that smoking was not healthy for him, that he would be healthier for him if he quit. healthier for him if he quit while she was in jacksonville. and then ultimately the single most powerful piece of evidence in the whole case was this testimony by mrs. banks. "he knew it was not good for him." "he knew it was not good for him." all of the verdict form questions related to concealment, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12 -- let me make sure i got the numbers right. could i have the elmo again. starting with 4, i will not read it all to you, but 4, 5, 6, 7, and then again related to the emphysema 11, 12, 13 and 14 all essentially ask you the same question, whether he died because he did not know that smoking was dangerous to him, especially, and this is critically important, the issue is whether he knew after 1982, after 1982. and you just saw, you just saw that the warnings that he was provided all occurred in the 1970s by mrs. banks, by mrs. banks. only one possible answer to those questions related to concealment. may i ask where i'm at on time, your honor? the court: you have about 12 minutes. mr. furr: 12 minutes. would mr. heise be able to give me some of his time? (laughter.) mr. furr: not that i'm pressuring you. mr. heise: just putting me on the spot. the court: i'll give you a little bit more time and i'll give mr. schlesinger a little bit more time on rebuttal to be fair to both sides. mr. furr: thank you. another question, do not know whether you get here or not, obviously no class membership you do not get here. there is a question about allocation of fault, allocation of fault. a few important things to understand. you know, it was suggested to you that at a minimum the tobacco companies' fault should be more than mr. banks'. i guess the argument was that the request to you at least assign the tobacco companies 51 percent and mr. banks only 49 percent. let us talk about what this allocation of fault really is, but this appears at questions 3 and 10, 3 and 10 of your verdict form. some very important things to know. baron, could i go back to the projector. this question of fault is not a -- questions 3 and 10 are not a generalized comparison of conduct. it is not a comparison of who was better, mr. banks or the tobacco companies. that is not the legal issue before you. this assignment of fault deals with a specific legal concept, and that is, the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of george banks' death, a legal cause of his death. and rj reynolds and philip morris can only be assigned fault for actions -- excuse me, cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of his death. so it is a very narrow focused inquiry. first thing to understand, not a generalized comparison of conduct, has to be conduct that was a cause of the death. second point, it is sort of a natural human inclination to say, okay, well, let us start at 50/50 and adjust from there. that is not how it works, because the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. they have already admitted to you that mr. banks was a cause of his own death. your instructions will tell you you have to assign fault to mr. banks if you get to this question. but they have to prove fault by the tobacco companies. the tobacco companies start at zero. they have to prove with evidence every single percentage point of fault that you are going to assign the tobacco companies if you assign them any at all. that is the plaintiff's burden of proof. mr. schlesinger: judge, i object. there is no burden of proof on fault. the engle findings preclude that. that is an incorrect statement of law. the court: ladies and gentlemen, the law is set forth in these instructions, and if the law differs from what the lawyers argue you will follow the instructions as set forth by me. thank you. you may proceed. mr. furr: thank you. please examine the instructions very carefully. please examine them very carefully. they are your roadmap on how to decide this case. let us look at what the evidence shows us. when you compare conduct that was a cause of mr. banks' death, let us look at what the evidence shows you about mr. banks' role. the court: can you show it to them, too, please? mr. furr: sure. there is already an admission that he is the legal cause of his own death. we know from their own experts they have admitted that his -- by the way, that legal cause was due to his failure to quit smoking sooner. that is the plaintiff's admission. mr. schlesinger: judge, i object. your honor, there is no such admission in the case. your honor read the -- the court: all right, mr. schlesinger. ladies and gentlemen, you have been instructed on what the law is in this case. if the lawyers arguments differ from the law, please follow the law as set forth in these instructions. you may proceed, sir. mr. furr: you see that this admission is based on his failure to quit smoking. you also know that daily drinking caused his esophageal cancer, that he knew that smoking was dangerous, every pack of cigarettes that he smoked ever from rj reynolds and philip morris carried that warning, every pack. did he smoke other company's packs before the warning? we do not know. the only evidence is that every pack it appears. what did the defendants do? what evidence did they offer you to connect mr. banks' death to what they did other than selling a legal product that caused his disease and can be addictive which is legal to sell as long as it carries that federally-mandated warning? that is the only evidence you have. they have not linked in any way mr. banks' death to some act by the defendants other than selling cigarettes, which cannot be the basis for liability. his drinking. here's what dr. traube told you about his drinking. "sir, as a physician, you are of the opinion that if a patient drinks it is the patient's choice and the patient is responsible for their drinking, correct? "yes. "sir, today you acknowledge that his consumption of alcohol played a role in the development of mr. banks' esophageal cancer, correct? "answer: yes." could i have the elmo, please. ladies and gentlemen, if you get -- could i have the elmo, please. if you get to this question on 3 and 10, ladies and gentlemen, respectfully, i will suggest to you there is no evidence that the tobacco companies did something wrongfully that was a cause of his death. and if you get to allocating fault the evidence demonstrates that that should be the allocation. if you get to question 10 it is the same analysis. the evidence demonstrates that that, that should be the allocation of fault if you get to these questions. need to talk to you about damages. in case you get to this issue we have got to talk a little bit about damages. first thing to remember is the legal principle you see in your instructions are that any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence, in light of the evidence. what evidence is relevant to damages in this case? as mr. schlesinger explained to you this morning, it is the nature of the family relationship and what that loss meant, given the nature of the family relationship. and although it was uncomfortable at times and we had to cross-examine yvonne and katrina on what are normally private matters that do not belong in the public, when you come to court and you make a claim for the loss of someone, those issues become something that has to be asked about for the jury so that the jury has the evidence that they need to make decisions. that is why those questions were asked. and mr. schlesinger acknowledged to you this morning that that is a reasonable thing for you to consider when you evaluate damages. so let us remind ourselves of the damage issues in the case. i have to go back to the projector, please. it is important to understand what the two claims are. there is a claim for loss of the relationship for yvonne and katrina. they have separate items and you will see they have separate different instructions, but basically it is for loss of mr. banks, his companionship, protection, guidance, things like that, that is one set of damage claims. the second set of damage claims is for mr. banks' claim for emphysema. and that involves the pain and suffering that they have attempted to claim that mr. banks incurred as a result of his emphysema and their loss as a result of his emphysema. i'll say it first, we will dispense of these emphysema claims quickly. there is no evidence, zero evidence that there were any damages caused by emphysema. as dr. difranza told you, there was no shortness of breath. there was no cough. he probably did not even know he had it. it was incidental. his primary finding on autopsy, he was never treated for it, he was never diagnosed with it during his life. it is a nonevent. if you happen to get there, respectfully there is zero damages either for mr. banks or katrina or yvonne related to emphysema. there is just not anything there. you have not heard a shred of evidence that emphysema affected his life or their lives, none. so let us focus on esophageal cancer. and, again, the only way to do this is to discuss what the evidence was with respect to what their relationship was, because their claim for $500,000, i guess it is now, is based upon their claim that his smoking caused them to lose their relationship. here's what we know. it is important, i think, to bracket that relationship about when it existed and when it did not exist. we know that between 1914 and 1970 mrs. banks did not know mr. banks. so he was 57 years old before she ever meets him. we know that from the time they met until the time yvonne and katrina moved to miami mr. banks always kept a separate apartment, always kept a separate apartment. we know that from 1983 on for the rest of his life mr. banks always lived alone while they were in miami. and we know that when we cross-examined yvonne and katrina they pretty candidly admit that they saw him two or three times a year for two to three days at a time, and so, you know, somewhere between a few days a year and nine days a year. that was the extent of the relationship for the last 13 years of his life. what else do we know? let us talk about the beginning of the relationship. ms. yvonne told us that she was not sure she wanted to marry mr. banks. she told us that after they got married they kept the marriage a secret. why would they keep the marriage a secret? she also told you he always kept a separate apartment but she told me she does not really remember how often he stayed in his apartment versus how often he stayed with her and katrina. so we asked other people what they knew about the time that mr. banks spent with yvonne and katrina. mr. banks' best friend, diedrich lampe, told you that he never met yvonne banks. how can your best friend never meet your wife? he also told you that he did not stay with her a lot, he did not stay with her a lot. roosevelt hall saw mr. banks between '65 and '77, did not know he was married, never saw him with a woman, said he was always alone. his landlady from 1980 to 1985 did not know he was married, never saw a woman or child go to his apartment. she did say he did not take care of himself and she said he looked and acted like a homeless person. and when asked what she meant by that, she said, he had nowhere to go, he did not have people to go to, he did not have people to go to. neutral witness. no stake in this lawsuit one way or another. no reason to believe she is slanting her testimony in any way. what happened next? well, we know that when it got to 1983 yvonne and katrina left mr. banks in jacksonville and moved to miami. mr. banks was 69 years old, 69 years old. he had been retired since 1975 or '6, so seven or eight years. and we know that they never asked him to move to miami with him. what happened after they got to miami? did they maintain a close, loving relationship? did mrs. banks know the things that a wife knows about her husband if she is in constant communication with him and continues to be involved in a close loving relationship? here's what mrs. banks told us. she did not know who his friends were. she did not know who he spent time with. she did not know that he had a roommate. she did not know how he occupied his time. she did not know that he was a problem drinker. she did not know when he went to the hospital. and she told me that she did not know he had lost weight and he was unable to take care of himself. you have to evaluate what the nature of the relationship reallly was using your common sense and good judgment for a wife not to know those things about her husband, who she described to you all as the love of her life. katrina gave you an explanation as to why they moved to miami and left him in jacksonville. she told you that his life was in jacksonville, odd jobs and friends, that he said he never wanted to come to miami and that he did not like miami, he liked jacksonville. you have to evaluate whether this testimony makes any sense, whether that is really how families work. let me suggest there are more questions in this case than answers about what was actually going on. ask yourself these questions: why would yvonne and katrina leave george in favor of going to stay with her side of the family that they did not know well in yvonne's case or had never met in katrina's case? why would mr. banks stay behind to, quote, work when he was 69 years old and has been retired for seven years? why would yvonne and katrina set up another house in miami when mr. banks had been unable to pay for their house in jacksonville? more questions you might want to ask yourself. why would yvonne move 350 miles away and leave the love of her life to live alone doing odd jobs and yard work? does that make any sense? katrina gave you an explanation that they stayed because she liked school. and you have to ask yourself, why would a 9-year-old girl want to leave her father because she liked the way she was being taught in one school versus the other? and why would mr. banks choose to live as a loner, which is the way mrs. hall and roosevelt hall described him, as a loner in jacksonville instead of joining his wife and daughter in miami? you have to ask yourself those questions as you consider this relationship. but let us look a little bit further and ask yourself what was going on? you saw that when mr. banks was admitted to the hospital in 1990 when he fell and broke his hand he was asked to identify the person to be notified in case of emergency. he did not identify yvonne or katrina. he identified his landlady, his landlady. further he was asked, and this document is in evidence, the medical records are in evidence, you can look at them all you want. he was asked to identify the person who should receive his belongings, who should receive his belongings in case something happened to him and he died when he was in hospital. he identified his landlady, not yvonne, not katrina. what was really going on in the relationship? something else happened i think is important for you to consider. you were told about letters from mr. banks to katrina. you are going to have those letters and you can look at them. but there is a couple things that jump out from those letters that you will have to consider what these facts mean with respect to what was going on in mr. banks' life vis--vis his life versus yvonne's life. these were letters that katrina got. they are in evidence. when you look at the birthday card you will see that the birthday card is written in a different handwriting than mr. banks'. the one on the right appears to be mr. banks' handwriting. the birthday card is written in a script that appears to be a woman's handwriting. and you will see on that birthday card that, quote, cat sends her love. cat sends her love. in the next letter written by mr. banks you will see ms. kats brother is in miami and maybe you can contact him for something. so the question is, who is this ms. kat that is writing letters for mr. banks and who is sending her love to katrina, sending her love, obviously suggesting an existing relationship where they knew each other, knew of each other and were fond of each other. she is sending her love to katrina and when we asked katrina who she was, katrina told you it did not interest me to know what her full name was, it did not interest me to know what her full name was. you have to sort through these facts and ask yourself what was going on, what was going on here where another woman was writing these letters for mr. banks and sending her love to katrina. just a couple more things on this issue. when mr. banks showed up in the hospital in february of '96, the medical records say he was in awful shape. he was disheveled. he had massive wasting and weight loss, failure to thrive, unable to keep himself. his teeth were almost falling out. that is what the doctors and nurses observed. yvonne told you that she did not know he had lost weight prior to the hospital. katrina told you that she did not remember he lost any weight and she did not remember any problems with dental hygiene. how close were they? how often were they seeing him? what was the nature of the relationship that they would not know these things? let us talk about this weight loss, because katrina told you all that weight loss occurred in the last week of his life. let us look at how much weight loss he actually had and you can evaluate what to do with that testimony. we have a baseline medical record from september 20th, 1990 that shows mr. banks is five eleven, 160. when he goes into the hospital in 1996 you will see that he weighed 108 pounds, 108 pounds. a five eleven man, 108 pounds? he was emaciated. as the medical records said, he had massive wasting and weight loss. he had a 50 pound weight loss, and you are being told that that happened over the course of a week. what happened further when he went in the hospital? he started in methodist hospital. yvonne and katrina said they came and spent some time with with him. then he was moved to the va, and here's what katrina told us happened in the last two weeks of his life. he was transferred to the lake city va on february 29th and that they spent one night in the va with him and then they both returned to tallahassee, about 100 miles away. keep in mind that katrina was 23, 24 years old at this time. she was in graduate school. why did yvonne have to go back to tallahassee with katrina as opposed to staying with mr. banks? katrina is 23, 24 years old. they told you that they received a call from the hospital on march 12th telling them that they should come soon but that they never went back. bottom line is, you know, i do not want us to go off track. he spent the last two weeks of his life alone in the hospital and died as an 81-year-old man who had been left alone and unable to take care of himself and lost 50 pounds and showed up five eleven 108 pounds. and they are requesting that you award them $500,000 or more for the loss of mr. banks. the court: you are just over your expiration. mr. furr: yes, sir, thank you very much. i'll finish in 10 minutes or less, if that please the court. the court: go ahead, sir. mr. furr: the last topic i want to go to is this issue of punitive damages. it was really almost all that mr. schlesinger talked about this morning. they told you that mr. banks was a conduit, a conduit that they were using to try to get to punitive damages. the holy grail of punitive damages has been what this case has been about from the plaintiff's perspective from the beginning. that is what the case has been about, that is how it was argued to you. let us look at what the law is on punitive damages. by the way, if you find that he did not die from concealment you never get to punitive damages. you see in your instructions you never get to question 18. but if you do you need to understand what you are really being asked, because in addition to the $500,000 or more that you are being asked to award, you are being asked to award them more money unrelated to any loss. more money, that is what this case has been about. couple important principles to understand. can only be awarded for concealment that was a legal cause of his death. they can only go to yvonne and katrina. they can only go to yvonne and katrina. and that they are in addition to damages that you are being requested to fully compensate them. they want you to fully compensate them and then they want to come back on monday and ask you for more money. that is what this claim is about, pure and simple. because it is such an extraordinary claim you are being asked to give them money unrelated to their losses, more money, even after you have made them whole, if you would happen to do so. as mr. schlesinger told you, the highest possible burden of proof in civil law, clear and convincing evidence. they have to prove to you that they are entitled to punitive damages based upon your review of the evidence without hesitation. on page 26 of your instructions you will see the punitive damages burden of proof, clear and convincing, "in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue." that is the burden they have taken on to come back here on monday and ask you for more money. and it is only related to concealment. so let us look at what the evidence was. we will go through this quickly. important to remember that the engle findings, you will see in your instructions, cannot be used. mr. schlesinger: objection. the court: overruled. mr. furr: the engle findings cannot be considered in any way. the court: this is all set forth in the legal instruction. mr. schlesinger: it is not in the instruction, your honor. may i approach, please? this is not in the instructions. the court: if it is not in the instructions then the jury will disregard the remarks by counsel. mr. furr: you will see that the engle findings do not establish that yvonne and katrina are entitled to punitive damages. mr. schlesinger: your honor, could we have this corrected so it is not left confused? mr. furr: your honor, please. the court: it is corrected. if it is in the legal instructions, that is what they will follow. if it is not, then they will not follow it. okay, that is corrected. go ahead, sir. mr. furr: this question, should the defendants be punished, should they be punished, based on concealment? a big part of what you were told about at ctr as an arm of concealment. well, there is another side to the story. ctr did some very important work on behalf of the tobacco companies and the plaintiff's witnesses admit it. tobacco companies gave ctr 350 million dollars to fund research. they funded thousands of scientists who wrote thousands of articles. you were told they were distraction research but then dr. proctor admitted over 600 times these surgeon general books that they have read from so many times, over 600 times they cited ctr, ctr-sponsored research. nobel prize winners were sponsored. it was prestigious universities all over the country. dr. cummings told you that when scientists were given ctr money they were given complete scientific freedom. you were shown this article by knapp. it is in evidence. 1963, ctr funded research that concluded that heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts, true addicts. tobacco company money. you were told about larson, haag and silvette by dr. cummings. he said he disagreed with some of the conclusions in larson, haag and silvette, but you were told, remember he called it the green monster? he said it was a compilation of all the research that had ever been done funded by ctr money and that it was cited on and relied on, it was cited by and relied on surgeon general 1964 in that famous 1964 report. you heard about premier and eclipse. you are entitled to look at mitigating evidence, that is evidence that goes the other way. mitigating evidence is evidence that suggests that punitive damages are not needed. what did dr. proctor tell you? he told you about two very novel cigarettes that rj reynolds developed called premier and eclipse. he told you they spent a billion dollars, that they were commercial failures because of the poor taste, but he told you they were less carcinogenic cigarettes, less carcinogenic cigarettes. what else can a tobacco company do and stay in business? they can put a warning on the pack. they can try to develop less dangerous products. that is what reynolds did. dr. proctor told you that both philip morris and reynolds tried hard to reduce nitrosamines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, two categories of chemicals that are thought to be very important with respect to tobacco carcinogenesis. and finally, mitigating evidence, you are being asked to punish them for concealment. are they concealing? this is the only evidence you have of current day. the website that the plaintiffs put into evidence yesterday, rj reynolds' website states: "rj reynolds tobacco company believes that individuals should rely on the conclusions of the u.s. surgeon general, the centers for disease control and other public health officials when making decisions regarding smoking." and to make it easier for people to access that information they actually provide links to surgeon general's report and other public health reports right there so the smoker can click and get the information from the authorities that they have used throughout this trial. ladies and gentlemen, if you get to question 18, if you get to question 18, whatever else you have done, i submit the answer to that question should be no, we can all go home, the case is over. if you say yes, we will come back next monday or whenever that day is so that we can have a second phase and more evidence. let me wind up. wind up with three more things. this case is actually pretty simple. you knew everything you needed to know to decide this case before you ever walked in here in some ways. and these things have always been known. let us go back to 1955. dr. hammond, one of the early researchers who was studying -- doing the epidemiology studies and reporting to the public about the danger of smoking, let us look at how smoking has always been viewed throughout time. dr. hammond, 1955. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: in my opinion people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not is their own business. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: people had the information, they get to make their own choice. harry reasoner 1964 when the surgeon general's report was released. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: in this kind of a country it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: people have information, they make their own choices, that is the way it is always been. one final thing to look at. i selected this because i do not think that anyone could ever say it better. dr. koop, we have seen him several times, the surgeon general in 1988, was the surgeon general responsible for the report that concluded that smoking was addictive. as you heard during the cross of dr. proctor, dr. koop maintained a website where he provided advice to smokers about smoking. and here's what dr. koop had to say about smokers 14 years after the 1988 surgeon general's report. "the choice to light up is always yours." "ultimately you are the one that has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth." this is the surgeon general responsible for the report that found that smoking is addictive. it does not change anything. people still make choices, and in our society we have to take responsibility for those choices. i've talked too long. thank you very much for your attention throughout the trial and today. i appreciate it very much. and i ask you to return a complete verdict in favor of rj reynolds and philip morris. thank you. mr. heise: good afternoon. it is my pleasure to be here finally, have the opportunity to talk with you. i know you all have not forgotten about me sitting over there in the corner, although occasionally sometimes i'm forgotten. you know my name is mark heise. you know i represent philip morris. you know i'm going to be brief and you know if i'm standing up here we are getting towards the end and that is true again today. so about two weeks ago we got together and i told you at that time i was going to give you a preview of the evidence, what we expected based upon discovery and depositions that have taken place. in fact, that is what has happened here. and we went through that evidence carefully. and i've sat here and listened carefully as mr. furr went through the presentation. and to put everyone's mind at ease, i'm not going to repeat what he said. i'm going to do what i've done throughout this trial and that is to focus on additional reasons to find in favor of philip morris. but to be clear, i completely agree with what mr. furr said and what he said applies with equal force to philip morris. and one thing i probably should have said to start this off with is i've been watching and noting that all of you have been taking notes during all of this, paying attention, being diligent, upholding your service as jurors. and as the other lawyers did, i want to thank you because it is an important part of the american fabric and society for the service you are giving. we deeply appreciate that on all sides. as i said, one of the key issues i've focused on throughout this trial, you saw it from my questioning of witnesses, is how long did george banks smoke marlboro cigarettes. and the evidence that came in the trial was exactly how i thought it was going to come in based upon the prior sworn testimony. but there was one instance of evidence that came in that was completely different than what we heard at trial. and because of that difference i need to take a few moments to walk through with you the evidence that we got before trial and the evidence that you heard here today. because i think it will put in focus for you the additional reason why philip morris is not liable in this case. what i did is i prepared a brief timeline here to highlight for you the evidence. this is before trial you know on february 17th, 2012 ms. banks swore under oath when she answered interrogatories. and i had it on a flip chart, but i put it on the big screen here. those are the five brands of cigarettes that she put down in her answers to interrogatories. camels, chesterfield, lucky strike, pall mall and bugler. as you see, chesterfield was the go-to brand whenever camels were out. and you heard that chesterfield is no longer in this case, because they are a small company and they are just suing the two big companies. you also see on this list bugler. what you do not see is marlboro, one of the most popular brands, a brand somebody would not forget. and what i think is important, and mr. furr emphasized this, is that these are the sworn answers given before ms. banks got sick and before her memory failed. this is what she knew at a time when she was feeling well and did not have any memory issues. these five brands, and as you know, i've said it every time i've stood up, none of them are marlboro. you know from the testimony you heard on the witness stand that she went to a lawyer's office, sat there, looked over, she wrote out her answers and had them typed up. and you heard on the witness stand when she got these she had all the time in the world to answer them. it is not a situation like this where you have got people looking at you and you feel a little stressed and you are hurrying through them. she had whatever time she needed. she made sure to look over them very carefully as she testified. "and after the answers were typed up, you looked at them very carefully to make sure they were accurate? "right." and then importantly for your purposes the last question and answer. "and you knew it was important to give complete and accurate information when you gave those written answers, right? "that is right." so that is what she knew at that time and there was never once a supplemental to these answers in writing, not once. then continuing on, what happened before trial ms. banks' deposition was taken. and in that situation, because you heard a lot of her deposition testimony because it was read to her to remind her what she said, these two things were told by her at her deposition. on page 205, "and how long did he try the marlboros?" and this is when defense lawyers were asking her questions. "he tried it a while, tried it. he tried it a while and went back. i do not know. and went back to chesterfield and camels, chesterfield and camels. but camel was his main brand. "did i read that correctly? "i guess you did. "i see. okay. "no problem. "tried it for a little while." then when her own lawyer was asking her questions at the deposition as you can see she was asked by her own lawyers asking about this for a little while. "do you know if he smoked these marlboros for a little while, more than a week? your lawyer asked you questions. "more than a week, yes. "do you know if it was more or less than two weeks? "it was about two weeks that he smoked them." so that is what i told you the evidence would be and that is what she said. as you know we took the deposition of katrina banks as well. and what did she tell you at deposition? you heard three different portions of her deposition were read to you when she testified. all three times she said, when the store was out of camel he would get marlboro or pall mall. pall mall of course is another unfiltered brand. so when the store was out of camel that is when he would try the marlboro or the pall mall. you have to think about that, how often is a store going to be out of one of the leading selling brands of cigarettes, the camel cigarettes? that is like a store running out of pepsi or coke. it is not something that happens all the time. and of course she never mentioned his go-to brand, the chesterfields, in her deposition. she mentioned these other brands including marlboro. so then you heard -- we took the deposition of dr. difranza and i explained to you in the opening what i expected his testimony to be based upon his review of the entire record, all the medical records, all of the depositions, not just the three excerpts where ms. katrina banks said he only did it when the store was out of camel. he read her entire deposition, he read all of yvonne banks deposition, he concluded it was as little as one week, perhaps up to two months. and that was the state of the record when we got here to trial. so what happens when we get to trial? this is before we get here and here is when we get here. we know the written answers to interrogatories did not change. those are the only five brands listed under oath in writing. dr. difranza came in based, again, on his whole review of everything and he says one week to two months. and, specifically, what i want to alert you to is he told us, "you read the daughter katrina's deposition, right? "right. "and from there, based on your review of everything you gave yourself as little as a week or as much as two months." so he said exactly what we expected him to say because that was the state of the record. then of course we all know dr. traube came in and told everybody in the courtroom five years is not enough smoking. and i'm going to talk about that in more detail in a minute. then you heard yvonne banks go on the witness stand. and really it did not change much of what she said. i had to remind her of what she said before, before she had the memory problems. and she agreed that he tried them for two weeks then he went back to the camels and the chesterfields, so that stayed the same. but the one thing that changed was katrina banks' testimony. for the first time ever we hear that mr. banks smoked marlboro for a very long time. now, why would somebody do that? we all know why. because dr. traube said five pack years is not enough. five years of smoking a pack a day of cigarettes is not enough to cause esophageal cancer, it is not enough to cause emphysema or copd. so when all the testimony was it was a week or two weeks or two months, that was the end of it for marlboros. but suddenly we got this new statement that it was for a very long period, almost 20 years. she had the opportunity to correct anything that she said was wrong in her deposition. you saw the errata sheet that the doctor had filled out. he was very careful to review his deposition. there was no such errata sheet. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: legal basis. mr. schlesinger: cannot comment -- not in evidence. the court: sustained. you can only refer to things that are in evidence, sir. mr. heise: so what did katrina banks tell us? she now remembers for the first time ever that when she is two or three years old she is got this distinct memory of her father smoking marlboros. she remembers that almost 40 years later. and she said that he smoked marlboros all the way through 1992. that is four years after mr. banks himself said he stopped smoking, because we saw the medical records. mr. banks told his doctors, i stopped smoking two years ago in 1988, but she happens to now in this court remember for the first time ever he smoked it until 1992. that is also four years after their very own expert said, plaintiff's expert, his conclusion that he stopped smoking in 1988. so one of the instructions you are going to be given in this case is you have to determine credibility. who is it that you believe? and you are asked by the court to follow this instruction and to look, does the witness have any interest in the outcome of the case? are they looking for money? do they have the means and the opportunity to know the facts? do they live in the same city? is their testimony reasonable? is it reasonable that somebody could remember 40 years ago when they were two years old what their father smoked, what brand? is it reasonable to go from no marlboros, based on the answers to interrogatories, to almost 20 years of smoking marlboros? you have to decide what is believable and what is not. when you do, you will be presented with the verdict form. you are going to be asked to go through all 18 questions. you will be asked to go through them in order. you do not start with 18, you start with 1. and mr. furr went through very carefully questions 1 and 2 about class membership, that is where he put the three xs because there is three independent reasons why you should answer no to all those questions. i do not have anything to add to what mr. furr said other than to again remind you that we agree with what he said and that it applies equally to philip morris as it does to reynolds. so the next question, and it is actually questions 3 and 10 on the verdict form. you will see question 3 and there is a similar one for question 10, it talks about the percentage of fault that was a legal cause of george banks' esophageal cancer and death and number 10 talks about emphysema. but it is the exact same question. mr. furr outlined for you why it is that mr. banks is one hundred percent responsible and that the other two are zero percent. but i suggest to you there is an additional reason as to philip morris why philip morris has to be zero percent. and that is the medical testimony that you heard in this case. the doctors came in and they told you what you probably knew from your common sense, that smoking two weeks of any cigarette is not enough to cause disease, but the amount of marlboro cigarettes that mr. banks smoked is not the legal cause of any of his injuries. and that is why this question is divided up between philip morris, reynolds and george banks. so that is an additional reason why you would put a zero for philip morris. and what i would put up -- it is probably the only time in history this has ever been done. i'm going to put up my entire cross-examination of dr. traube, their expert. baron, can you flip it back, please. thank you. this is my entire cross-examination. i asked him two questions. "you would agree that if someone smoked a pack a day for five years or less that is not enough smoking to cause esophageal cancer, right? "correct. "and, likewise, if someone smokes a pack a day for five years or less, that is not enough to cause copd or emphysema?" he says what you already knew. there is no evidence that he smoked more than a week, two weeks or two months. there is certainly no credible evidence that he smoked a pack a day of marlboros for five years or more than five years. because their other doctor, dr. difranza, said it takes much more than five years. and that is an additional reason why philip morris would be zero percent. mr. furr went over the other portions of the verdict form, the concealment and the agreement to conceal. again, i'm not going to belabor the same points he did. everything applies to philip morris, but i will make two additional points, one is there is a jury instruction that is important for your consideration on this. baron, if i could have the elmo, please. and this jury instruction is the legal product instruction. and what it says is, "the manufacture, advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities, therefore, i," the court, "instructs you that defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes." why do i bring that to you? because what have you been told george banks saw? you were told there was some marlboro ad sometime in the 1970s or '80s that nobody can identify whether it was in a magazine or a billboard or any of that. but that is all you have been given with one other important fact. that ad wherever it was had the surgeon general's warning on it. but this is an additional reason why philip morris is not responsible under the agreement to conceal or the concealment is because all you have been pointed to is this advertisement for marlboro. and he is tried the marlboro for two weeks and then he went back to what he wanted. he did not like them. it is not the legal cause of any of his injuries under these claims for concealment or an agreement to conceal. and so then you have the question of damages. mr. furr covered that at length. i'm not going to get into that any further. but then it concludes with punitive damages. and i want to make an observation here. as i said, i agree with mr. furr, but what mr. schlesinger told you in opening is exactly what happened again in closing. he told you that this is about a generic smoker. this case is not about a generic smoker, it is about george banks. and that is important when you are considering the evidence and when you are looking at answering these questions, particularly this issue of punitive damages. because, as you were instructed by the court, for punitive damages, "punitive damages are warranted against a defendant if you find by clear and convincing," that heightened standard, "that the defendant was guilty of intentional misconduct which was a substantial cause of mr. banks' injuries and death." so what is the first thing you heard about today? menthol. you know from the evidence in this case george banks never tried a menthol cigarette in his life, but they spend their first 5 or 10 minutes talking about menthol. it has to be intentional misconduct which was a substantial cause of mr. banks' injury. and on that score all you have heard about is this marlboro ad. advertisement is not intentional misconduct, it is trying to get people to buy your product. as you saw from the jury instruction, advertising is entirely legal and we cannot be held responsible or liable for that. the other thing you heard a lot from the -- mr. schlesinger on was the nicotine, that that is the evil in the cigarettes. and remember when dr. proctor was on the stand one of the questions i asked him was to tell this jury, philip morris tried to get nicotine out of tobacco. they bought the company sanka that took the caffeine out of coffee beans. and they thought, what a great idea, we can take the nicotine out of tobacco. and they marketed that. they put it in stores. they tried to sell it and nobody bought it. it was a big flop. they made the effort to do exactly what is being suggested here, that is not conduct that should be punished in any way or any form. so let me say it is been about two weeks and about the length of time that mr. banks smoked the marlboro cigarettes. it was not enough to cause him any disease. it is not enough for him to be a member of this class. ask you to fill out the verdict form as mr. furr went through it with you and find in favor of philip morris and rj reynolds on all counts, but in particular for the reasons that i outlined for you with philip morris. and i will end where i started by thanking you very much for your service. i do appreciate all the time and attention you have given all of us. thank you very much.