mr. bigger: just a second here to get organized. good morning. the jurors who responded: good morning. mr. bigger: good morning, everybody. and you all were in the much it is three weeks ago almost today exactly. i obviously, the first thing i have to say is thank you. guess we had the hardships on the first day. but three weeks ago today was the day that we kind of started this process. more uncomfortable seats over there, the benches, going through jury selection. and we went through that process, and you all were the people who everyone realized you all are the right folks to decide the case. prejudices, you are going to listen to the evidence, and you all were you are going to follow the law. and i chosen to sit as the jurors on this case. just have to say thank you on behalf of my client ms. barbose, on behalf of my team, on behalf of everybody here in the courtroom. hear that thank you from all of us. you did not have biases, i'm sure you will you heard from his honor, but service on a jury is second only to some of the most serious commitments people make. it is our responsibility as a citizen. the constitution. appreciate that. it is very important, so we i mean, it is our right and it comes from this trial has had a lot of testimony. you 3608 you have had a lot of frankly, you should all and you have all been so attentive during received it over many days. evidence. this whole process. probably receive college credit for how attentive you were. everyone was listening very closely. informative and well-qualified witnesses, and there is documents you got to receive. that -- all of that evidence will be back there for you to consider. i mean, i saw everyone taking notes, and you had very and all of all of the time and the effort you spent over and you will probably never the last few weeks now boils down to the opportunity for you all to go into that room over there, that door that you have not gone into yet. you are going to go into the deliberation room, you will be able to decide the case. have an opportunity to do something like this again, sit on a jury. confident saying that you will not have the opportunity to sit on a jury with tobacco companies involved again. guarantee you beyond doubt is, you will never have a chance to sit on phyllis barbose's jury again. this is her case. this is her only case and you are her only jury. and one thing i can almost you may, may not. i'm pretty 3609 you have in your hands a tremendous responsibility and a tremendous opportunity. you will be actively doing justice through what you do today through your verdict. a verdict is a french word that means to speak that is what your verdict will do, speak the truth. the truth of this case. that deliberation room, you will have three jobs. the first is to answer the questions on the verdict form based on the evidence you received here in the courtroom. and when you go back in the second is to follow the law that his honor instructed you on, which you have copies of and you have heard from the court. but the third -- and it is important -- is, before you answer the questions on the verdict form, sit down together and sit around the table there. there is a table back there. sit around the table and discuss with each other how you feel about the questions, how you feel about the evidence, deliberate. do, is collectively and unanimously reach a decision in this case. because that is what we ask juries to as i said, the documents you receive -- there are some of them over there in the binder, there are 3610 you are going to have documents. some in that box. they are going to be -- our documents will be in folders that have those pt numbers that you have heard in trial, and you will see them in my closing argument when there are certain documents. that is what look at them, talk about them together. we want the jury to do, is look at the evidence and decide the case based on the evidence. pull them out, now, for the next hour or so, i'm going to talk to you about how we believe the questions on the verdict form should be answered. and the verdict form is -- you know, we will walk through it a little but you will get, you know, a more together. and you will have one of these, and it verdict form. will have a series of questions on it. okay? and so we are talking about the verdict form and talking about answering questions. talking about. through them in my closing argument today. you will probably see them again with mr. geise and ms. yates as well. these -- one of you will have these, and one of you will become the foreperson, and they will answer the questions for all of you on the verdict form. now, early on in this case, there was a and you will see these as we walk but you will have one of that is what we are i'm sure 3611 okay? well, let me just say at the outset suggestion to you that a whole bunch of information and testimony you were going to receive in this case had nothing to do with john barbose. and there was this idea that you needed to have in your mind this question of what does this have to do with john barbose. that the only thing you see in this courtroom is relevant evidence, evidence that his honor decided you should see because it is relevant to the case. anything that has nothing to do with john barbose does not ever come in this courtroom in the first place. remarkable how that attitude and a callous attitude like that so perfectly sums up what the evidence has shown in this case about the tragedy of the century of lost lives and needless premature death, 20 million since 1964. but leaving that aside, i think it is willful indifference to the consequences of these companies' choices and their role in that epidemic. of epic proportion. compared to what tobacco has done and the lives it has cost. and make no mistake, it was an epidemic polio, black plague are nothing and even though reynolds and philip morris knew when this trial started what you did not know, they 3612 knew exactly what they lied about, they knew exactly how they designed cigarettes to be addictive and to addict people, they knew that they designed cigarettes to addict john barbose. entire lifetime, they knew why they did it. told you we would prove this through their own documents, through their own words. yet, someone somehow had the audacity to suggest that they were just two ships passing in the night and that john barbose was just on some other ship. during his and we folks, these tobacco companies were the authors and it is a story that was written in of this story. nicotine and blood. throughout the 1900s, the time when john these companies built this ship. barbose grew up, it was literally their world and he was just a kid who was born into it and he grew up in it. they made it attractive to children and loaded the kids up onto the ship. they sent a generation of kids sailing full speed ahead into the night at an iceberg. did not just know the iceberg was going to be there down the road, they built the iceberg. the iceberg. cancer. it does not exist without cigarette smoking. the worst part, as you now know, they they invented this epidemic of lung they created 3613 and they did it for money. and when these -- how do these companies the companies blame respond when someone like phyllis barbose has the courage to bring this lawsuit and bring these companies in here to be judged? the passenger for getting on the ship as a kid. they blame the passenger for getting addicted to the product just as they designed it to be that way. they blame the passenger for doing everything exactly the way they wanted until he inconveniently died and stopped buying their cigarettes. our society has always protected children. it is something at the moral core of all of our and as a society, we do not tolerate when souls. people or companies target children or put them in danger, especially not grave danger. but what they knew when we started this trial and what you now know straight from the mouths of the executives themselves, they needed kids to sustain their business model. prospects, to devour every year to keep their product going, keep the model working. in their words, today's teenagers is tomorrow's potential regular customer. are viewed by this industry. they needed kids, a new crop of replacement smokers were how kids 3614 they always knew that if they could not get their hooks in the kids by the time they turned 18, they probably would never get them. the kids just do not start smoking after that. people start smoking after 18. very, very few and john barbose's parents may not have wanted him smoking as a teenager because he was too young. that was not ever a problem for reynolds and philip morris. teenager. cigarettes acceptable, normalized, available, and attainable. they did whatever they could to make he was exactly who they wanted as a when john from the beginning of the cigarette century, reynolds and philip morris were looking for high schoolers to be their brand ambassadors. was just nine, ten years old, world war ii was in full swing, 1944. kids, young boys that age were idolizing soldiers who were at war fighting for our country. and reynolds was giving these fine men and women free cigarettes, addicting their generation to become smokers and bringing them back as smokers. they were even using these soldiers in advertisements as brand ambassadors. was inescapable for these kids growing up in this generation. they desperately desired to get him everywhere, it smoking as a teenager, and they succeeded. just like they needed him to, he started he became a regular daily smoker at least you heard that from his he saw him smoking at smoking at 15 years old. brother sam, who was there. that age. by the time he graduated high school, as sam knew. and he was well on his way to a lifetime of addiction for him and profits for the companies. after high school, john served our country honorably in the reserves and then in the army as a private first class. honorably discharged from the army and he went on to live a good life. after his service, he was these companies do not know the first thing you know that you have seen what they did and what they knew about honor or valor or integrity. now. in their own documents. trial started. they knew it when this from the beginning, you heard this case and you heard from his honor that this is an engle progeny case, it derives from the engle class action. so you have heard from all of us, since the beginning of the trial, the first question you have to answer is was mr. barbose an engle class member. and i think it is helpful in answering that question to just make 3616 it clear what class membership is not about, because there has been a lot -- a lot of this trial about fault and choice and all these other concepts, awareness. class membership is not about fault or it is not about whether addicts lose awareness. total control over their minds or whether they cannot quit. those will never be questions on your verdict form. it is not about the fault of john barbose. there is a part of the verdict form for that. not in class membership. share some responsibility. to his detriment on their concealment. question for that too. it is not about whether smokers it is not about reliance there is a and when you think about that, reliance to his detriment -- detriment, he died. cancer that, there is no dispute, was caused by smoking. that is as detrimental as it can get. that is detriment, folks. he died of lung so throughout the -- all of the questions you have to answer -- and i told you this from the very beginning, our burden of proof -- and we are happy to prove our case. evidence to prove our case. and all the evidence we brought you is important to answering the questions we brought you all of this 3617 on this verdict form, especially the concealment questions, the conspiracy questions, and the punitive damages questions. the beginning, this is a case about punitive damages. you heard from his honor that if you answer yes to that question, there is a brief additional phase. because we said from a marathon is 26.2 miles. you all have run 26 miles, okay? if you answer yes on punitive damages, you have got 0.2 to go to get to the finish line. it will be a very brief phase. it will probably be a there will a little bit more evidence, day or less. and then you will have the case to decide that part of the case, too. you have done the 26 miles. it is not going to be a lot. just a little bit more. we would encourage you, look at the evidence in this case and go to the punitive damages phase where you will have a chance to hear from some of these representatives in this courtroom, most likely, and answer some questions to you at that time. but on all the other questions, our burden of proof is the greater weight of the evidence, okay? and this is -- you heard it in your instructions. it means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. when you look at everything you heard over the last three weeks or two and a half weeks, what is the more persuasive and convincing force of all of it? what is greater of all that you heard? did we prove our case? who brought you the evidence? what is greater? the other very, very important part of your instructions that i want to call your attention to is this concept of concurring cause. you saw it in every single one of the instructions on legal cause. there is this other part that says, in order to be regarded a legal cause. if it is the class membership question. smoking for the second question -- whether smoking was a legal cause. there is concealment, there is conspiracy. and then there is addiction there is for those four questions that have that legal cause, every single one of them has this concurring cause section. and what it means is, it is exactly what -- and dr. hayes finally even admitted it. everybody has knowledge, she finally admitted it too. it can be both/and. it is not either/or, okay? it is not either/or. there were a lot of different things that were going on throughout the history of john barbose and 3619 they were playing a role enjoyment, addiction. conspiracy and concealment, liking it, yeah. throughout his lifetime. in why he did what he did. sure. absolutely. isolation. what the law tells you. combination with. these things were not working in they are working together, and that is they can operate in so the addiction can operate in combination with the conspiracy, the concealment. mr. barbose's fault, it can operate in combination with that too. that is what concurring cause means. and you will see it in all of your instructions. that. it is very important. do not move past so the first question you are going to have to and the question on the answer is class membership. verdict form is "was john barbose addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" well, what this really boils down to is, was he addicted -- first part -- and if so, was the addiction a legal cause of lung cancer and death? the addiction is a legal cause of his lung cancer that is addiction causing the smoking, and death. smoking causing the lung cancer and death. you have 3620 heard that from us from the very beginning of the case. you heard it from the witnesses in the case that we brought you. no witness came in here and said otherwise, except for dr. hayes. to her a little later on. and we will get but the medical experts in the case, let us start with that, because i think it is the easiest part, okay? you had dr. stein and you had dr. villa. and and i would submit to both of them came in here. you it is undisputed that mr. barbose had lung there was some -- i forget what the words cancer. were, iffy, or there was some question about that, maybe, from opening statement. there should be no question that john barbose had lung cancer, and there should be no question that his lung cancer was caused by a lifetime of heavy smoking. we brought you the witnesses who sat here and and, who talked to you and who told you that. again, this is a situation where it does not have to be the only cause. even if you had some questions or some doubts, if smoking was a substantial contributing cause to his lung cancer, then we met our burden of proof. okay? and it is not just us that has this idea that 3621 addiction causes smoking which causes lung cancer. it is the united states surgeon general. once, finally, we got ahold of the documents, once we finally got to know what this product is really all about and we caught up with the tobacco industry, we realized that addiction is the key to everything. it starts this whole process. it leads to the cigarette smoking. it is right here. and then this is all of that sort of medical side of it that dr. villa talked to you about as far as what is really going on, how it takes dose-response, because there is all that damage that goes on year after year after year, dose after dose, as the addicted smoker smokes for his nicotine. he is also getting all those carcinogens and all those toxicants as well. to lung cancer and how nicotine addiction causes disease. that is how addiction leads now, you heard from our experts in the case. dr. stein, a treating physician, he did not have a dog in this fight. mr. barbose's treating physician. pulmonologist who came in and did a consult. when john was having all those horrible problems, went to the doctor in april of 1996, and immediately he was just -- he was just he was the 3622 dr. zimmerman sent him for a pulmonary consult. dr. stein was that doctor. said about this issue as far as smoking being the legal cause of his lung cancer. and you remember what he "dr. stein, based on the history, the physical, the chest x-ray, the chest ct scan, the bronchoscopy, the biopsy, and the brushings and washings, were you able to arrive at a diagnosis of mr. barbose's condition within a reasonable degree of medical certainty? a. q. a. q. yes. what was that, sir? adenocarcinoma, lung cancer. all right. based on the information that you reviewed and accumulated in connection with your care and treatment of mr. barbose, in your general background and training and experience, do you have an opinion, sir, within reasonable medical probability as to whether or not mr. barbose's 50 or so pack-year history of cigarette smoking was a cause of his lung cancer? objection. ms. yates: and what is that opinion, sir? that cigarette smoking was the cause of his q. a. lung cancer." 3623 dr. stein, i mean, there is no doubt in his mind what he reviewed and what he saw. he was a treater. we brought you dr. villa. dr. villa, six board he is an excellent oncologist, he is the one who said, i'm going to remember he explained certifications. hematologist. make you all pathologists. all that stuff to you? explained it. go ahead. (the video clip was published to the jury in again, no doubt in his mind. and he was here and he open court as follows:) a. "well, in a gentleman like this, or any kind of patient where you have a very strong smoking history, at least 40 pack-years, more likely more than that, with this type of bronchoscopic finding, with this type of malignancy, a bronchogenic adenocarcinoma, large cell adenocarcinoma, with this type of progression, with this type of ct appearance, you have got to conclude that by far the most likely cause of this cancer was his smoking. i do not believe there is any doubt about it. were there any other realistic risk factors q. that you were able to see in any of the records, any of the materials, any of the studies, any of the history, 3624 suggesting a different cause of his lung cancer other than cigarette smoking? a. no, sir. there are no significant confounding factors. q. dr. villa, for purposes of this question, i want to ask you to assume that there has been other testimony in this case indicating that mr. barbose was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes and that was a cause of his heavy long-term smoking. addiction as a cause of his long-term heavy smoking, do you have opinion, sir, as to whether that addiction ultimately led to the lung cancer suffered by mr. barbose? assuming a. well, if the addiction means that that was the the longer cause of his long-term smoking, absolutely. you smoke, more likely you are to develop cancer." no doubt about it with dr. villa, no doubt about it with dr. stein, smoking cigarettes caused john barbose's lung cancer. and you saw dr. villa there at the end where we asked him to assume, because, you know, dr. villa, i would submit, is far more qualified than the other experts who came in here and talked about addiction from the defense case. but we asked him to assume it because 3625 we had other experts who were going to talk about that. and knowing that addiction was going to be he explained it established, he said absolutely. the same way the surgeon general does. addiction causes the heavy smoking. disease. for all of these addicted smokers. heavy smoking causes the that is how this whole epidemic is caused even without the testimony of dr. villa and dr. stein, the records themselves settle so many of these things. it did not need to be done, but we had to do it because it was contested. we had to bring this evidence in to you. but looking at the records themselves, it was clear in the records and these will all be back there if you bronchogenic carcinoma, there is no doubt in any of these records this was lung cancer. no evidence of metastatic disease. themselves. want to look at them yourselves. carcinoma. differentiated adenocarcinoma based on biopsy. all of this stuff was already in the records before we even ever started this record. and everyone knew it, but we still had to bring it to you because it was contested. it is undisputed. there is no doubt. there is no doubt about this stuff. they give the impression here, wholly bronchogenic riesdorph 3626 lung cancer. lung cancer. adenocarcinoma. no poorly evidence of metastatic involvement. differentiated adenocarcinoma of the lung. adenocarcinoma of left upper lobe bronchus. differentiated bronchogenic -- that means lung -- adenocarcinoma of the left lung. poorly and the death certificate, leaves no doubt, locally advanced bronchogenic adenocarcinoma. unfortunately, as you heard, john barbose was one of those statistics. deaths. he was one of those 20 million so this idea of challenging metastatic disease, challenging the death certificate, challenging classifications, it is not new. research procedural memo -- 1968, tobacco health mr. geise: (the following bench conference took place your honor, may we approach? outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. geise: it is argument. so i'm fine with saying that we challenged it. it is the plaintiff's burden to prove. but then when he links it to 1968 and said this is not new, this is something we did before, now he is challenging what we are doing in this -- our defense in this case. of proof. we are not challenging anything. it is their burden they 25 3627 have a burden to carry. and say this is what we are doing in this courtroom violates the pretrial order and is inappropriate. and to then link a document mr. bigger: the court: okay. let me look at the exact language and the idea of challenging the death certificate. response? mr. bigger: the document is in evidence, your honor. and if they came in and did the same thing that a document from 1968 does, that is not from my -- i'm not -- i'm not -- they can come in i've told the jury they have the here and do that. right to come in here and say whatever they wanted to say. but let us see what the evidence shows. is this 1968 challenge classification? 1968 challenge we are just commenting upon the death certificate? the evidence in the record. mr. geise: and he is directly violating the pretrial order that the motion went right to this very point. the court: the court -- i do not -- the court's not finding that he is violating the pretrial order. however, the court is concerned about the wording of challenging. mr. bigger: i'll just move on. it is fine. the court: sustain their objection only as to that. thank you. okay. mr. geise: i'll rephrase. mr. bigger: (end of bench conference.) mr. bigger: 1968 document, folks. please the court. this is in evidence. i mean, one in which the death certificates are classification question, one showing that many lung cancers may be metastatic from some other organ. this is 1968, the tobacco and health research it is all part of proposal suggestions made by ctr. that casting doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking. so that takes us through the smoking cigarettes and there is caused the lung cancer and the death. no -- there was no one who came in and suggested lung cancer did not cause his death. diagnosed and he died within ten weeks. of a horrible death, respiratory -- respiratory insufficiency. cancer. there is no dispute about that. he suffocated to death from his lung and he died he was so it is just whether the smoking -- the thing that was disputed was the smoking causing lung cancer. the evidence settles that. was he 3629 addicted? that is the first part of the question. and then that will link up the addiction with the smoking. what was the evidence on whether or not he is well, we brought you we brought you dr. michael cummings mr. barbose was addicted? several people. with qualifications that were impeccable. worked on every surgeon general's report since 1988. he started the new york state smoking quit line and has counseled tens of thousands of smokers on quitting smoking. more. the assessment. what did he say? ten thousand or he knows and not 10 or 15. okay? this man knows addiction. he looked at the evidence. "sir, seeing the evidence about nicotine manipulation and control of nicotine delivery and the importance of nicotine in the cigarette industry's business model, with that thought in mind, did you review all the evidence gathered in this case regarding john barbose with an effort to determine whether or not john barbose was addicted to smoking the cigarettes manufactured by these two defendants? a. yes. i reviewed the evidence as to whether he was addicted to their cigarettes. and what have you determined based on that q. review? a. there is no doubt in my mind that he was an addicted smoker, he was addicted to the defendant's brands, and that he was unaware of the formulas and the way the companies manipulated the brands he smoked." dr. cummings, no doubt -- and one of the things you heard with dr. cummings and dr. drobes is that they tend to find smokers who smoked heavily for 40 or 50 years as addicted. and they accuse them of that as if it was something wrong or odd. being accused of only burying dead people. it is obvious. the evidence was obvious to dr. cummings. it was obvious to dr. drobes. that is why they found mr. barbose addicted in this case. dr. drobes -- we brought dr. drobes in here. folks, that is like a funeral director okay? he has okay? he works at the moffitt cancer center. studied nicotine his entire career. not just a handful of occasions here and there throughout his career. that dr. hayes volunteered at as an intern. a man who has worked with addiction and studied he started the smoking cessation clinic this is riesdorph 3631 addiction and been involved in that area throughout his entire career. what did he say about these issues? we brought him in here. and "in your opinion, was nicotine addiction a direct, natural, continuous, substantial cause of mr. barbose's cigarette smoking? a. i believe that nicotine addiction was the cause of his continuing cigarette smoking. q. and in your opinion, was nicotine addiction a substantial contributing cause of mr. barbose's lifelong cigarette smoking? a. yes." he answered both questions directly on the issue. was it a direct, natural continuous, or whatever the phrasing was that was used in the defense opening. he also answered the important part, the concurring part, the part that was overlooked in the defense opening, but it is in did it contribute substantially the instructions. to his lifelong cigarette smoking? the answer is yes, folks. and, you know, even without the testimony of 3632 the experts, you could use your own common sense to answer some of these questions. you something. let me just show okay? this is one pack-year, folks. this is one okay? pack-year. sixty-five packs, 20 cigarettes in each one of and this is just one pack year. these. three hundred and one. okay? the evidence in the case was mr. barbose had well, let us just say 47 years. use one and a half packs per day, 10,950 40 -- 43, 45, 50 of these, depending on what record you are reading, in his lungs over that time. what does that mean? that number. cigarettes per year, 514,650 cigarettes over the taking 10 minutes per cigarette, 47 years. 5,146,500 minutes of smoking, 85,775 hours, 5,361 days, 15 years. locked in this courthouse, it would take him 15 years to smoke the number of cigarettes that he smoked, only allowing 8 hours a day -- that is 16 hours a day to do that over 15 years. if you had him -- if he was the judge's instructions -- i think it is no. 18 -- says you can use reason and common sense. you do not leave your common sense at the door. looking at this, would anyone but an addicted smoker do this for this long? what does the evidence support? john barbose was addicted to nicotine in he started smoking as a young teenager you heard about how it is important cigarettes. in the '40s. when your brain is developing as an adolescent. not just the receptors that were talked about a lot, but also that executive function part. do not properly appreciate the risk. teenagers smoke, it even makes it worse. that evidence was not disputed. heard about that. no one came in here and disputed that evidence of dr. drobes. teenagers just and when okay? you smoked first thing in the morning. smoked and they knew it. he would they multiple quit attempts. would he was not supposed to smoke one to two packs a immediately before going to bed. day for 47 years. smoke in the bathroom. in the house, but he could not help it. smoke in the bathroom. would catch him. to smoke. smoking. brain every day. be any question? would there be any question if someone was addicted? of course not. family problems as a result of john's three hundred doses of nicotine to the three hundred shots, would there three hundred bumps of cocaine, woke up in the middle of the night 3634 and it is exactly what reynolds and it is what they philip morris wanted him to do. designed their cigarettes to do. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, 1963. they knew it back then. addiction incorporated. for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction in designing any product, is the dominant desire. the dominant specification should be nicotine our industry is based upon the sale and delivery. manufacture of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. put a lever in the put a hungry rat in a cage. the rat will push the lever. smoking they knew that cage. cigarettes is the lever push. smokers like john barbose were just lab rats pushing the lever. that is what they designed their nicotine delivery devices to do is to dispense nicotine and get them addicted. it is a disease. it is not free choice. there is no indication in any advertisement after a person smokes cigarettes for a while that it is no longer a matter of choice. to some extent the argument revolving around free choice is negated on the grounds of addiction. that is their document. that is their words. september 9, 1980, their 3635 cigarette smoking is more document, in their words: addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoked. continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. we cannot defend it is like we opened their diary and read what they knew the little secrets they were writing down that they thought no one would ever learn about. smokers needed to smoke for addiction. surgeon general in 1989 acknowledging that there is a reputation of this idea that smoking is free choice because they start smoking as teenagers and become addicted. up with the industry and announces their major conclusion that cigarettes and tobacco are addictive. in the case. at this time. an opportunity for truth, as you heard no truth was told no truth was told. the lie continued. 1988, the surgeon general finally catches the surgeon general in 2010, "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products." we asked dr. hayes about this, dr. hayes with her impeccable qualifications that they brought in here, do you agree with the surgeon general on this principle? no, i do not agree. 3636 you can ask yourself why would she say that. she had a million reasons to say that, but why would she say that? surgeon general in her vast experience. she does not agree with the folks, they suggested that i did not ask her any okay? if you took your car to a questions about her specific opinions on john barbose. mechanic who knew nothing about how to work on your car, you would not ask them to change your oil, much less give you a diagnosis of what is wrong with your car. qualifications to be coming in here and talking about these issues. time asking her about him. so i'm not going to waste your she did not have the right okay? okay? nicotine addiction is the most substantial without the chemical we would all lose our jobs and our consulting ingredient in their business. compound nicotine, the cigarette market would collapse. that is fees. you saw that repeatedly throughout. all that matters is not losing their jobs. if the exit gates to our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business overnight. they were worried about the exit gates opening up because people were starting to understand. replacement therapies were coming out. they were nicotine worried. the legal cause instruction makes it very and they this is what you have the follow. was clear. say, was the addiction a legal cause? john barbose's addiction a legal cause of lung did it contribute substantially cancer and death? to producing his lung cancer and death? it is okay if you think that it operated in combination with the act of another, with acts of himself, with john barbose, with the concealment, with the conspiracy, whatever the other cause might be. it is a both and. it is not an either or. even the family members that came in here told you, every single one -- there was not a person that came in here that did not tell you that they did not believe that john was an addicted smoker. dyanna. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) a. "and he just said it was -- i asked him if he and he said he was trying, but was ever going to quit. he just -- just could not quit. q. and did he say anything more to you about why it was that, at least from his perspective, he was not able to quit? a. he thought that he was just addicted to the nicotine and the cigarettes. q. a. yes, he did." did he use those words? yes. deborah said the same thing. mrs. barbose, you remember, she said the same thing. and sam. let us play sam. it is been a while since sam was here. "and, mr. barbose, do you have an opinion, sir, as to whether your brother john was an addicted smoker? same objection, your honor. same ruling. ms. yates: the court: the witness: in my opinion, i believe he was an addicted you may proceed. okay. smoker. i believe i was also." the instructions tell you you can judge the demeanor and the frankness of the witnesses. testified here, folks. and his frankness. you remember the family members who they were sam, his demeanor phyllis. dyanna. deborah. 3639 they came in here and they just told you what -- and it was not all consistent. they did not all remember the exact same thing about brands or things like that. they did not change their story and try to align things to make them all make sense. told you what they remember. they remembered and what they saw, what they observed, what they believed. the honesty came from the witness stand. it was just honest. they just they told you what so the question as to whether john barbose was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and whether it was a legal cause, the evidence is far more than just the greater weight of the evidence. the evidence is significantly more than that. it is yes. the answer is yes to whether mr. barbose was a class member, folks. if you answer yes to that first question, the the answer to the first second question is going to be, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? question in many ways answers the second question, because it is all of that smoking you heard about during his whole lifetime that was the cause of his lung cancer and death. but this question asks you as to each of the companies, because you heard that 3640 you may have heard you heard that he he smoked reynolds cigarettes. smoked philip morris cigarettes. something about another cigarette in there, the undisputed whatever, that someone mentioned. evidence in the case is that he smoked years and years of cigarettes from both defendants. these pack-year boards, there were multiple ones of these from marlboros like this one, for the winston, for the camels, for the luckies, for the marlboro lights, for the dorals. manufactured by these defendants. these questions are undisputedly yes and yes. all those cigarettes are the answers to the findings kick in from class membership. so but they kick in. the findings would apply to that second question, and you too, just so it is clear. i'm not going to read them to know these findings. you again. you have them in your instructions. i just want to point out one thing about that first one. specifically adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma." "smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, the only evidence in the case was that mr. barbose had adeno and large cell. only two options. the engle findings establish those same ones are the ones that are caused by those are the smoking. so we get to the concealment questions, right, the essence of this what this question really concealment and conspiracy. from the case, the concealment and the conspiracy. beginning of the case, we have told you that this is a story of the fraud and the conspiracy that existed that went on for so many years, its role and influence on mr. barbose. boils down to is, you have to decide. all these things you heard the companies do, the actively lying, the not telling people, the concealing, all these things they did, the half truths, the mistruths, the lying, the hiding, are all these things just inconsequential? to do with john barbose and his life and what happened to him? that had nothing to do with him? were they some insubstantial thing did they have nothing the evidence is exactly the opposite, folks. the evidence in this case is exactly the opposite. but on these questions, the finding is that reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known. that was not known or available. bunch of stuff about florida health notes and reader's digest or whatever. that is what they hid is the stuff they brought in a what they concealed 3642 was the stuff that was not known or available. that is what we needed. and you will see in the instruction that material information, it is defined in the law as the stuff that john barbose would not have acted as he did but for their concealment. they hid from him the very stuff that he needed to hear to act differently. they concealed the material conspiracy. information. they conspired to conceal the material information with the intention that the public would rely on this information to their detriment. same thing with the folks, you saw a lot of evidence in this case. we know that. you saw a lot of you saw a lot of documents. internal things that they hoped would never be seen. because in you get to see it all. "we do their own words, they invalidated reports. not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files. once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our suits, we will promptly remove all such reports from our files." what did not we see? research over in inbifo. little acronym over in germany, that facility they philip morris doing their remember inbifo, that 3643 dr. osdene, who was one of the senior bought? people in the research department, with this little handwritten note. cologne. check. sent, please send to home. check. destroy. it is checked off. folks. and destroyed it. no. 1, ship all documents to if important letters have to be i will act on them and it is his little checklist. and because that is what they did, they even took the stuff outside of the u.s. act on it and destroy it. because these are concealment or conspiracy claims with the conspiracy, it is important to understand that rjr and pm are legally responsible for every act committed by their coconspirators in furtherance of the conspiracy. now, rjr has merged with american tobacco and brown & williamson. you heard a lot of documents from those companies. they are part of r.j. reynolds now. else you heard from ti, the tobacco institute, from ctr, from tirc, all of those are coconspirators with them. conspiracy. if you heard about lorillard or liggett or any other companies like that, they were part of the conspiracy, too. and their acts are also something these companies are responsible for. they created those entities to further the but anything what did they conceal? they launched their 3644 they hired conspiracy in 1953 to conceal the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking. scientists and doctors to mislead the public about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. remember dr. dimarco, that gentleman they hired? he was concerned. he said -- first of all, he said, i think we have an obligation as a responsible company and then he to do something here. said, our medical scientific witnesses, these ctr special projects people they are putting up -- and you saw that project truth, the doctors who testified before congress and all that sort of thing -- will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lack credibility and integrity. he was hushed. 1987, this is a document that is in evidence, lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes. folks, it went on and on, the concealment. they would mislead the surgeon general and the public health authorities about the health effects. not cooperate as they promised, but they deliberately misled them with the lights and the filters. and then you saw the surgeon general's 3645 and then there is still that suggestion report in 2010 acknowledged that they had been misled. somehow that, oh, but it was what the government was asking us to do. pm, they studied nicotine. the knew it was a they studied teenage smokers highly additive drug. and knew that their smokers started as teenagers. the knew fifty percent would die from smoking-related diseases and they knew that it was killing 500,000 americans a year. remained silent. and they said nothing. they they did not just remain silent. okay? they actually they had they knew that it was in 1953, they knew. in 1958, they had that batco everyone knew it caused cancer. doubled down. claude teague's work before. causing cancer. document which you will see in just a moment. knew. stand silent. they doubled down after that. after that, they went actively harder and more aggressively for teenagers, high schoolers, more replacement smokers. that followed what they knew. they created this controversy, but they did not they all of they manipulated the levels of nicotine. there is the 70 cancer-causing agents. tell anyone about that. the 9,000 chemicals, they did not 3646 arsenic, cadmium, phenols, folks, they created this whole market for cigarette smoking. it did not need there is no market for a cadmium lozenge to exist. or an arsenic mint. people do not go out and do that sort of stuff. attractive form. they built a culture around it. it is an attractive product. and they created it in an okay? the plaza hotel, you know that is where it all those are the statements by the they launched the frank started, the forwarding memorandum when they acknowledged that it is fortunate it is a habit you cannot break. research directors. statement. to reach every single person. john barbose, they wanted to reach every john in the country, including john barbose. forty-three million people. not just reach they wanted it was not -- it was not a sniper rifle. it was like a shotgun approach, folks. there for everybody. confusion internally that cigarettes caused cancer. there was no doubt or they put it out 1958, that was that batco visit to the u.s. when they met with all of those people, the scientific advisory board. research directors from the companies. with all of those folks over that long tour here in they met with the they met 3647 the u.s. something to put in mind, something to help in 1958, john is a private first frame your mind. he is serving our country as a class in the army. he is already an private first class in the army. and they are secretly meeting and addicted smoker. discussing how they knew cigarette smoking caused cancer and not telling anyone at all about it. just contrast those two pictures, folks. okay. all these documents you have seen in evidence, the evidence that the carcinogens they knew about. was accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard was overwhelming. that is 1962. remember they had the opportunity to tell the surgeon general everything? they said, give us all the information you have got. they did not give them that. did not give them that paper at all. they asked for it. the unattractive side effects. that is the same one as the addiction, incorporated, document that they -- that the side effect is causing them -- when dr. figlar, the corporate representative for r.j. reynolds, was asked about these things, he it was wrong. said in his own words this was wrong. (the video clip was published to the jury in 3648 open court as follows:) q. "do you think that it would be wrong to use confusion to the advantage of the tobacco industry to the detriment of the smoking public? a. q. i would. and if the tobacco industry is talking about using confusion to their advantage, you agree that would be highly improper? a. i do not think it would be proper, no." doubt, confusion, deceit, it is what it was all about, just keeping a little bit of doubt in the minds of these addicted smokers. they praised themselves for how successful the tirc was. they knew they had to give smokers that psychological crutch. the most important story is one which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease. our product. were formed for. organization. that was what ctr and ti and the tirc they call them a shield, a front confusion was the key word. doubt is we know what that word means. when the surgeon general finally advances the science without their help at all, but finally, thanks to some good scientists getting some work done, the dam starts to get a few holes in it. and 3649 so what do they do? they go on tv and they continue it and they try and migrate smokers to this new idea of filters that started in the '50s. going to be the key. filters were go ahead. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "we want to be the detective just as much as well, obviously, a filter takes out i do not think the industry the surgeon general and the ama, and we will cooperate in every way. said tar and nicotine. admits there are any bad elements. elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and the like, we hope we may find them. they are found, they will be removed. if there are bad and if we do talk to the question of whether or not we do not believe that we do not accept that cigarettes are hazardous. cigarettes are hazardous. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. do you believe cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe." 3650 hugh cullman was the first one. and something he said was very important to key in on. i do not believe the industry admits there is anything wrong. and that is exactly what it was. they knew there was stuff wrong. admit it. they just did not okay? and then joe cullman, the ceo of philip morris, they already had identified them. on there when, as, and if any ingredient is identified. these were just clear boldfaced lies being made. a holding strategy. it was not a campaign for victory. they had to just keep the holding strategy going so they could keep more smokers smoking and keep the money coming in. greed caused these companies to do this. who the motive is all over their it is their own fingerprints all over ain't for more money? documents. their documents. filters are a fraud. there is no doubt about they do not do anything. it, folks. anything safer. illusion and say the illusion is as important as the their own documents call them an they do not make it is what a filter does. fact of filtration. and yet obviously any person using your common sense is going to think a filter filters. it is what the word means, that it filters something out. water. naturally. i mean, that is what we all understand filtered but they misled the public about that. all the here is our triple quadruple quintuple the smoker of the filtered cigarette is public. filter. getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten in a regular cigarette. there is that winston document, two and a half times the level of carcinogens in winstons compared to camels even though the tobacco is the same. they put the filter on, it actually made it worse. reynolds' ceo continuing to -- this controversy over the years into the 1980s. going on in the information environment that john barbose is living in. all of this was (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most 3652 respected doctors openly challenged anticigarette claims. and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the illness that has been attributed to the cigarette smoking. the cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? it is not known whether cigarettes cause it has not been causally established. cancer. cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. the case is still open. the jury has not come in. you are not convinced. it may not be harmful. it may be or it may not be. do cigarettes cause cancer? i do not know if they do or not. i'm not in a position to give you a does or we do not know. does not answer. they agreed that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? it may. do you know whether it does? riesdorph 3653 i do not. we do not know what causes cancer in so i think that we may find out general right now. what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, but it is -- which has yet to be proven." that last one, remember bill dwyer, one of the last pieces of evidence we showed you? we do not know what causes cancer at all, so how can we say smoking causes it? same lies being carried throughout decades needlessly. needlessly. it is the they in their own words told you that they expected smokers to rely on these statements. they expected smokers to rely upon them as the manufacturer to tell them the truth. geoffrey bible, ceo of philip morris, we read these are the they intended the public that deposition into the record. things that he told you. to rely upon them, consumers to rely upon them. they had a duty to tell what they knew and if they violate their duties, they should be held accountable. dr. figlar said the same thing. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) q. "and they wanted people to be able to believe them and rely upon them; did they not? a. q. i believe, in general, yes. and as late as '88 or '89 or '90, the tobacco institute was saying they still needed to know whether smoking caused cancer, correct? that is what they were telling the public, correct? they did not know. they could not make that a. determination, is what they said in the video. q. and they wanted the people to believe them, correct? a. i would say they would, yes." the lights and low tar. just like that name okay? lights has a the filters, lights are the same thing. was not chosen by accident. significance and a meaning to a person who is trying to make what they are being suggested is the right choice to go to that light product. in their own documents, philip morris knew way back in the 1970s when they introduced this product that it did not work. them. they did not get less. but they promoted it that way. it was not lighter for finally, 2010 surgeon general's report, they they realized what a acknowledged these things. 3655 public health officials had little fraud it was. basis to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow smokers to draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes than was represented by those machine-measured yields of tar and nicotine. we showed you. remember the -- you probably had never seen it before in your life, but we put the filters up, the little paper up, and you see the little laser perforated holes in there, more holes in the lights than there are in the regulars. that is there by design. that is not an accident. and it was there to trick these machines and give different numbers than the smoker actually got themselves. and they make a big deal out of the idea that no one could say that john inhaled more deeply or whatever. who is going to know that about their spouse? but that is why they put those ventilation holes in there is to get people to do that. that is why they do it is so that people will breathe in more deeply and get diseases like adenocarcinoma. that is what happens. dr. cummings, who has reviewed more of this riesdorph 3656 information than anyone else who came in the courtroom, told you addicted smokers, they rely upon these industry lies. "based on your research and study of the industry, and these defendants in particular, do you have an opinion as to whether or not they intended for john barbose and others like him to rely upon their fraudulent concealment and conspiracy? a. yes, they did. that was why they, you know, created the false controversy. rely on that information. they expected smokers to q. based upon all the information you reviewed, particularly as it relates to john barbose, do you have an opinion as to whether or not john barbose did rely upon the campaign to fraudulently conceal and the conspiracy to fraudulently conceal? a. q. a. yes. what is that opinion? based on my review of the testimony in this case, i think mr. barbose said he expected the tobacco companies to be truthful. relied on the information he was getting. the filters and commented about the safety of there is evidence that he he relied on 25 marlboro light filters and so on when he switched to that brand." 3657 john's smoking patterns are luckies and that is exactly the exactly what the industry wanted. camels unfiltered, moves into a filtered product, moves into a light product. migration pattern we showed you in opening as those market shares went up of the filters and then the lights. that is what the industry's messages were. that is what their promotions were. exactly how john responded. messages, which unfortunately were lies. benefit to them whatsoever. and that is he relied on those there is no in 1968, it does not get any clearer than this "our basic position in the acknowledgement. cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." it has been subject to a finding now, folks. and you are applying that finding to this case. the ftc report to congress, 1967. "through the addition of suitable adjectives to the word 'filter,' this impression of relative safety can be riesdorph 3658 enhanced." i'm just going to jump ahead. you have seen dr. figlar. you saw this just the other day. you know what he says here about how they lied to the american public. the manipulations, folks. the manipulations of it was not just the lies and the the product. they were also concealment and not telling people. doing all of these design manipulations to make sure that the product was as addictive as possible and as difficult as possible to quit. these subtle little things that they could control. oh, let me go -- i should go back to that. i apologize. will you play this one? i thought it was a different one. "do you agree, though, doctor, that the manufacturer does have a duty to know its products? a. q. i do. why do you think it is important for a tobacco manufacturer to know more about the components of their product than anyone else? a. because we make it." (the video clip concluded.) mr. bigger: because we make it. he is right. remember they have the obligation to know more and they they make it. about their product than anyone else does. have an obligation to tell people that. the video we played about just merely looking at the ingredients? even getting the ingredients if given to the federal government with a lock and a key, kept in a safe -- and you heard that guy say, the president himself would have to be made a member of the department of health and human services just to see the list of the ingredients, the president of the united states. john barbose was supposed to know all this stuff that they knew about how they designed their product and what they did with it. they expected that someone like they manipulated the nicotine and the smoke ph, that ph, you heard a lot in our lungs, in our body, that our keeping smokers hooked. about that. lungs have a natural ph level, there is some level that is a balance between the acidity and the baseness of our lungs. that if they could get their cigarette smoke to be just the right ph in the way it matched up with those lungs, that it had an important effect on the and what they figured out is 3660 that is why they studied it so much. smokers. that is why it was so important. think -- reynolds thought marlboro was so successful and became the brand of the world that it was. that is why they and when they realized that, they realized how much more sales that could promote, they went after it like crazy. cigarettes john barbose smoked. one that they thought was the most prominent to use this. and it was in the brands of marlboro was the choosing profits over public health. so this doctor, you know, he is working on an antagonist to nicotine, something that would make nicotine not work and not be addictive. they had to shut it down. we are in the process of what did they say? digging our own grave if we continue this research. they never once in any document ever had any concern about digging all the other graves they were digging, the hundreds of thousands of graves every year. the only concerns expressed in their documents are digging their own grave, their financial grave. and they did. nicotine because they were going to put the tobacco manufacturers out of business. they shut down the antagonist of and they had to shut that down. 3661 you heard about the same thing they did with dow with nicorette as well when they went in and tried to put pressure on their supplier to not make a stop-smoking product. ftc report to congress, smoking is no longer a you heard it becomes a matter of matter of choice. need. reynolds and philip morris wasted five decades without telling the truth, from '53 to 1994. they wasted those five decades of opportunities to tell the truth and just come clean. it was growing. that cancer in 1994, during john barbose's lifetime still, unfortunately, as an opportunity to tell the truth. you heard from the evidence in the case from dr. villa, by 1994, it was too late. it was going to start. was there. it was becoming the cancer that it would eventually be diagnosed as, this huge tumor in his lung. but this was still an opportunity for truth, an opportunity for him to know and to be told the truth. go ahead. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "i'll begin my questioning on the matter of 3662 let me ask whether or not nicotine is addictive. you first -- and i'd like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. addictive? just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. johnston? congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. we will take that as a no. and, again, time is if you could just -- i think each of you we just would short. believe nicotine is not addictive. like to have this for the record. i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. i believe nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive." all giving the same response because it was all scripted. it was all part of the 3663 and it it worked incredibly we look back at what happened and how common same conspiratorial plan, the same fraud. worked famously well, folks. well. and prevalent smoking cigarettes was, where you could do it. you could literally smoke everywhere. churches maybe is the only place you could not smoke but it worked. i mean, they back at that time. way back at the turn of the built from nothing. century, cigarettes, the modern cigarette did not even exist. they built it from nothing into this massive industry that is like everywhere. i mean, sports figures. we cannot for people in john's birth cohort, eighty percent of those men who were born when he was born became regular smokers. imagine -- as we think about it today, we cannot imagine peyton manning or eli manning or tom brady walking around the sidelines with a cigarette, sitting in the super bowl halftime smoking a cigarette. about something like that. not only smokers themselves, they were spokespersons. them to promote cigarettes. impressionable on kids? today. what would be more that is why nike does it it would be flabbergasting to think that is why gatorade does it today. it but these athletes were the industry would get them and use works. it works incredibly well. the instruction on reliance on consumer okay? you have john barbose omissions, just a couple things i want to point out to you. so we must show by direct or circumstantial evidence. direct or circumstantial evidence. in this case, we have both. telling two different people in his lifetime and showing them the filter and saying, look, this is why i'm smoking lights, because these things filter stuff out; these are safer for me. these are better for me. you heard the whatever his words were. evidence. okay? up. own. he got that because that is what they were that is exactly the promoting and telling him. message they wanted him to receive. that is the direct evidence that their fraud had an impact on him. he did not make that that is what he said. he does not just come up with that on his the circumstantial evidence? and make no doubt we can sentence people to circumstantial evidence is just as about it. important as direct. death based on a circumstantial evidence case. it is the same evidence. heard throughout this trial of how significant their fraud was, how pervasive it was, how much they did, okay? but all this stuff you 3665 how much they knew, all of this is all of the circumstantial evidence that john barbose was living his life in, that he was growing up in, that he was making decisions and choices in. all of that is the circumstantial evidence that you can look at and say, how could this possibly not have had some impact on him? detriment? died. he smoked all these years and then he how could he not have relied to his that is to his detriment, obviously. it is even more clear with john, the okay? $250 billion, the quarter of a trillion dollars they spent on advertising which we told you about, it was just the amount that the government's agency spent in one year is what they spent in a day. once the message started to get out and the clarity started to get better, the 1985 warnings that you have seen several times -- remember those warnings? they went from it may cause, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health, to cigarette smoking is -- the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is hazardous. rotating warnings that we have today. smoking causes lung cancer. and then in '85, we get those cigarette okay? what does the circumstantial evidence suggest? when did john start trying so much harder to quit riesdorph 3666 at that time, in the 1980s, after 1985, the the message is getting out, would it have smoking that people remembered it and that they saw it? warnings get clearer. and he begins trying harder to quit. made a difference on him if they told him, yes, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in 1953 when he was 19? made a difference if they told him in '58? course it would have. the case shows. that is what the evidence in of course it would have. would it have of and look at what their lies did. i mean, that is 1981 when it finally starts to shortly after that is when john begins folks, it went from nothing -- nothing to almost 700 billion. go down. trying to quit. out. efforts. they are finally being stopped in their the message finally starts to come you remember this one, cannot defend continued smoking as free choice. go ahead. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that 3667 accurate? yes, that is so. correct. that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? yes. it is a statement that american tobacco placed great reliance on. we -- we issued that statement, yes. as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? yes." that was american tobacco. that was reynolds' corporate representative speaking on behalf. we intend people to rely on that, folks. he was being honest in his deposition. had john barbose known the truth, it would have you heard from phyllis. made a difference. asked her specifically, who knew him best. we "based on the time you spent together with john and as the person in this courtroom who knew him the best, do you have any reason to believe that john ever knew these things about the tobacco industry that you were not aware of? a. no, because he -- he loved life. if he knew half of what i've learned through this, he would never touch a cigarette, no matter whether he wanted it or not. he would have fought it. q. do you believe that if john had been clearly told by these defendants back in the 1950s when they knew that smoking caused lung cancer, if they had told him smoking will cause lung cancer, do you think it would have made a difference for him? a. i'm sure. mr. geise: the court: the witness: speculation. object. overruled. i'm sure it would have made a difference. q. at any time during your marriage, did john ever tell you that he knew that the defendants in this courtroom understood as early as 1953 that smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer? a. did he ever tell me that? i do not think he knew it. q. a. q. he never told you that? no. did he ever tell you that he was aware these defendants were misleading the public about the health no. riesdorph 3669 effects of cigarettes -- a. q. a. q. no. -- during his entire life? no. did he ever tell you that he knew these defendants concealed the addictiveness of their -- of their cigarettes, of nicotine? a. q. no. did he ever tell you that he was aware these defendants manufactured and designed cigarettes to control the nicotine delivery of the cigarettes? a. q. no. did he ever tell you that he was aware that the defendants were using ammonia and other additives to enhance or effect the addictiveness of the product? a. he did not know it. i do not think anybody knew it." what this industry did has again, i you heard it in opening everything to do with john barbose. mentioned that question. statement. beginning of my closing. about it, someone who knows best exactly what this industry did, who looked at the record evidence. we i talked to you about it at the we asked dr. cummings riesdorph 3670 asked him directly, what does this have to do with john barbose? go ahead. "we spent all this time talking about it and the jury was asked, too, the question, what does this have to do with john barbose? so i'm asking you, what does this have to do with john barbose? a. it has everything to do with he was, you know, affected by the sure. john barbose. marketing, grew up in era where, you know, smoking was a rite of passage and made that way by the marketing of tobacco products to young people and then to adults as a normal part of, you know, americana. and he smoked the most popular brands of cigarettes, the most heavily advertised that the companies would expect based on their sales. their advertising directly relates to that. he was affected because he began smoking in the early '50s and continued to smoke essentially right up to the time that he passed away, by the concealment of the health information, essentially what i call the 50-year coverup that was orchestrated by the defendants in this case, r.j. reynolds, philip morris, and other cigarette companies where they spent over a billion riesdorph 3671 dollars over that 45-year period to basically lie about what they knew about the health risks of smoking, so not giving the smokers the benefit of the doubt had there been no controversy. john barbose was an intelligent person. he would at least have had the information at that point that was withheld from him. he tried to they concealed the health effects of smoking and addiction, specifically that nicotine addiction, they knew it was going to hold him into the smoking pattern once he got started smoking as a teenager and that it would make it hard for him to quit. and they engineered their products in ways that, you know, basically held john barbose in the market. quit and he failed, as they expected him to fail. it was by design, not, you know, an accident, not a personality flaw or character flaw of john barbose. it was the design and deliberate effort of the defendants. the filter fraud and light fraud, that was just another way of giving people an excuse, an exit ramp to keep smoking. that no. 2, you know, we have got to hold so if you are having a tough time getting smokers in. off the cigarettes, here, we will just make you a product that, you know, gives you, you know, the perception that it is lower in risk, when in fact the design changes that went into those products, the addition of filters which 3672 makes it easier to draw the smoke deeper into the lungs where you see it more on the peripheral part of the lung, where you see most of the adenocarcinomas these days, directly result in the companies -- the companies knew there was no benefit to filters and lights. and then nicotine manipulation, i've talked about that, the design of the product. q. dr. cummings, i want you to assume for the purpose of this question that there is evidence in the medical records that the jury will see and hear testimony about that john barbose died of lung cancer. did john barbose -- assuming that, did john barbose become one of the 20 million people -- a. q. a. yes. -- who died from smoking? yes. john barbose is one of those statistics." you were told to ask the question and you got the answer from the evidence in the case. what is the answer to these questions on concealment, whether it was a legal cause of john barbose's lung cancer and death? reynolds. yes as to philip morris. conspiracy to fraudulently conceal. overwhelming evidence in the case supports those yes as to the the yes as to answers. just because it -- it is the same type of we told this was an entire century evidence that relates to punitive damages, let us talk about punitive damages for a second. you this is not one of those cases where it was just one random act or it was one isolated incident that a person was making. all of these motivated solely for financial gain. horrible things these companies did, all of these lies, all of these activities to design and manipulate their products, all these things were done and they were motivated solely for financial gain. this it is was a campaign. still going on today. it was not just an isolated incident. it went on for a century. the instructions tell you the type of conduct and i would that is worthy of punitive damages. submit to you when you get back there and you talk about it, ask yourselves, is there anyone among you who does not think that what these companies did, what you saw, what they said in their own words, what they acknowledged is not worthy of punitive damages? is and the clear and convincing evidence, it was precise. looking at the standard, what the standard i mean, when it is it was explicit. 3674 it cannot get more precise than that. written down in their own words, when it is in their words on a paper, it cannot get more explicit than that. it is not like someone just trying to argue it and tell you. it is in their words on the paper. the engle findings, you have obviously got those to use as well as part of this process. protect, do not addict. you should protect kids as a society. addict them. works. we want to protect children, not but that is not the way this industry that is not the way they have ever worked. back in 1959, this document from r.j. reynolds, they were taking information that others were trying to gain for good purposes, survey information, and they were using it to study their market and to figure out how many freshmen, sophomores, how many juniors, seniors, were smoking and smoking their brands. this was brand research for high school kids. targeting teenagers, children still, kids that were not old enough to go to war, kids that were not old enough to drink or do anything else. but they wanted to get them smoking. they targeted john barbose and others as replacement smokers. someone else. they wanted john to replace and then when he got sick and died, 3675 it is been in the '50s, they needed someone else to replace him. the same business model throughout all of their documents, calling them a crop of prospects. school days are here, big tobacco business for somebody. this is back in the '20s. encouragingly enough, we have our greatest strength in the 15-to-24 age group. 1953, october 7th, 15 days before john barbose is turning 19 years old. he is an 18-year-old. encouraging age group they are so excited about. he is exactly where they needed him to be, even though they knew what was going to happen. he is right smack in that they studied the 14-to-20 market, the secret of the instant popularity some brands enjoy. create a fad in this market, it can be a great bonanza. they were talking about kids becoming smokers and it was a great bonanza because they got a fad going. if you they represent tomorrow's cigarette business, that 14-to-24 age group, during one of their marketing presentations at hilton head while they were hanging out together. nonsmokers becoming habituated smokers. induce those presmokers? presmoker is in their documents? do you know what a presmokers and how do we like a fifth 3676 okay? that is who the grader or a sixth grader. presmokers are. seventh and eighth graders, based on their documents. that is who they are talking about. those learners, those are the dr. teague, this guy who from '53 to '73, his he was promoted. 20-year tenure in the company, never admonished, never scolded, never punished. even after this, he kept working for them and he was never fired or let go or disciplined for writing these things down because this is what the position of the company was. they moved him up the ranks. we need to get our share of the youth market. let us design cigarettes to deliver that nicotine, to get them smoking and to celebrate the nicotine in our products. this was his thoughts celebrated by the company, promoted by the company, replacement smokers. looking at these ages, they pulled that data -- it was from health and human services or wherever it was, but they were looking at it not for that purpose. they were not just documenting it. they were studying it and they were studying the rise and fall of every major brand over the last 50 years. 1984, they looked at everything. recognized that the key to all of it was kids, from the year john barbose was born until and they 3677 folks. kids. that is the critical factor. okay? now, young adult smokers, they changed that little terminology trying to make it sound better, it is clear when but we know who they are looking at. you look at all of the documents and you look at the data they are studying here and the median age of those smokers being 16 when they start. the surgeon general has obviously captured and you saw "the flintstones." understood. this is the '89 surgeon general's report recognizing that the problem with all of these kids continuing to smoke. you saw these i think advertisements. that in cross-examination of dr. cummings there was some suggestion that, you know, the other advertisers on "the flintstones" were zantac and one a day vitamins or something like that. shows how acceptable it was, that cigarettes, winston cigarettes were considered just as harmless as zantac or whatever, when in reality they had their own documents at that time that told them they were two and a half times as deadly as camels. but in the minds of most people, the minds of other advertisers and the folks who put "the flintstones" out, they had them with one a days and whatever the other thing was. that just they showed you those advertisements for grapefruit juice, i think it was, and chocolate bars that had the same type of advertising that looked the same as the ones for the cigarettes, same style. what that tells you is that they were so successful at doing this, they convinced people that they were no different than grapefruit juice or chocolate bars, they should be treated the same way. knew that was not the case. kids were going to become addicted and most of them were going to die. documents. they knew that in their own but they they knew that these rats in the cages. you remember this document. this is what they thought of their smokers. okay? and it was not just adults. this is what they were getting their kids into, in this cycle, thinking of them as nothing more than lab rats pulling levers on this is a cage. exactly how they talked about it in private when they thought no one else would ever see this. but you have seen it. you have seen it now in their words. knowing that without nicotine, they would lose put the hungry rat in the cage. their jobs, it was solely motivated for financial gain. enormously successful campaign. that is why they did all this. it was an 3679 very important. okay? when you look at this and when you think about what the evidence has shown you in this case, i want you to think about this. 1953, all right. because it is an important year. old. evidence. smoking daily. he started daily smoking, based on the we have talked about that year a lot but he was only 19. john was 19 years he just started okay? okay? they had everything they knew to make the right choice, to come out and say, yes, you know what, we should not -- this is america. we should not just promote products for us to make money even though we know they are going to kill people and they had a we should not do that. addict people. and if they had made that choice, choice to make. instead of they could have changed history. looking like this, instead of this huge wave of lung cancer and deaths that we have in this country, it could have looked like that if they had made the right choice, folks, if they had not been motivated by financial gain, if they had done the right thing. and if we do not say that this conduct is deserving of punitive damages, we might as well pin a blue ribbon on their chest and tell them, good job. that is exactly how you should do business in okay? 3680 america. way to go. you, philip morris. thank you, reynolds. thank folks, this conduct deserves punitive damages. what you have seen in this courtroom, what you have seen as far as why they did it. to him. and why they did it john barbose is just a kid from wilkes-barre, he grew up around there. and in 1954, he met and eventually fell in pennsylvania, that area. okay? love with phyllis. from a small town square dance, you heard. how they started their story together. john and phyllis, just two kids that is the heart of this story -- thanksgiving day, 1957, and private first class john barbose and phyllis become husband and wife in a beautiful little ceremony with the family. you heard about that, folks. the heart of this story and the tragedy of this story because it is a wrongful death case, folks, but it is this couple. they said for better or for worse, until death do us part. and that is exactly what they did. that is exactly and they did it way, way too soon. what they did. way too soon. she is had 20 years without john. she is got another ten years to go. the case is undisputed. the evidence in that is what the mortality it is phyllis and john. table shows. okay? mortality tables, folks, that is just half. if you look at it on so, i mean, she is got what that means is that half of the people will die in that period of time. potentially more than that. balance, she was 60 when he died, 30 years at least she is going to have without him. that is a third of her life to live without her husband because of what they knew and because of what they did and the choices they made. they had two beautiful daughters. you got to phyllis said it was their they are obviously grown women now. they meet them. had a wonderful life together, raising those girls. remember this picture? they had so much promise at that 25th anniversary. you heard time. from every single person in the case that they were a couple who was inseparable. were together all the time. so much excitement. this is 1982. inseparable. they now, some of you may have thought like i did after mr. geise's opening statement, you were probably waiting for the police report for domestic abuse or something. i said to you in my opening that no one will come in here and tell you that john barbose was not a fine man. i should have 3682 qualified that, i guess, and said no witness will come in here and tell you that, because all the evidence from the stand from everyone who knew john barbose was that he was a fine man. they raised their girls in an incredibly close they stayed very close together when dyanna and then as soon as family. had stacey. dyanna and stacey moved down here, john said to phyllis, honey, we are moving. florida. we are coming down to we are going to be near my granddaughter. they stayed tight. they were incredibly involved grandparents. i'm not sure if any of us know grandparents who went to their volleyball practices, their volleyball games, the baseball, all the stuff they did. they were devoted to their granddaughter. have been devoted to his grandsons. with daughters. they were beautiful young ladies. he two of them. had a lovely granddaughter and devoted to her. but great grandsons -- those great grandsons would have been wonderful. phyllis is doing that by herself now, but john would have loved to be there and she would have loved -- and john would nothing wrong he had daughters are wonderful. ms. yates: the court: your honor -- yes. 3683 ms. yates: (the following bench conference took place -- may we approach? outside the hearing of the jury:) ms. yates: your honor, my objection to that line of questioning was sustained when stacey wilson was on the stand, that we were not to stand here and talk about what the great grandchildren may have meant to mr. barbose. i thought mr. bigger was going to make one comment and move on. to move to strike and have the jury admonished. that objection was sustained during the case. i'm talking about it in the mr. bigger: but i need context of phyllis barbose doing it without him there. and that is what i'm trying to say. if i need to rephrase, i can rephrase. not -- i'm not -- i'm done with the point, moving on to something else, as i was anyways. that is fine. it is the court: as to phyllis's raising of the grand -- mr. bigger: the court: understanding -- mr. bigger: the court: right, by herself. that is fine. with the right. that is speculation. 3684 mr. bigger: ms. yates: mr. bigger: the court: okay. what they would have meant to him. i'll rephrase. okay. overrule the objection with that is fine. that understanding that -- mr. bigger: yeah. i'll make it clear. i'll go make it clear right now. thank you, your honor. ms. yates: (end of bench conference.) mr. bigger: please the court. let me make it you all, i think, understand this, phyllis is -- you see in the very clear. obviously. instructions that you are awarding damages for the survivor. phyllis' we are talking about phyllis. loss here. the fact that she is with these great grandsons alone, that she does not have john there to experience that with her, that is the loss that we are measuring in this case. phyllis and the other witnesses when they talked about it. and you heard it from you know, these were the memories and the memories that you saw they had together. graduating high school in 1995, that picture on the bottom left. no one has -- no one has any idea at that time that within a year almost of that picture, stacey riesdorph 3685 you saw stacey come in here. you know at that time, no one knew that. but that is everything he has john would be gone. no one realized that. missed since then. you know she is a much older woman today. the experiences that have gone on since with phyllis without him by her side. you can see the difference in the pictures just from who she was there and all those experiences that phyllis has gone through without john by her side. sam came in and talked to you. and, you know, i want to just -- a point to think about in your minds is, you know, john obviously, you know, succumbed to lung cancer. you saw, i mean, the amount of money that they spent on advertising, promoting, everything else. that money could be spent on research on treating this, on battling lung cancer. instead. talked to you about how important it was and what the end of that was like and what their relationship was like. but it was spent often promoting it and you saw sam come in here. and he go ahead and put that up. "how would you describe john -- john's family 3686 relationship, his relationship with -- with his daughters and his wife, phyllis? a. father. sorry. q. a. john was a very loving, doting husband and i mean, the sun rose and set on the girls. take your time. very caring. very caring. there probably was not anything he would not do for them. think that there are very few couples who are truly happily married. of those couples. but i felt john and phyllis were one great relationship." personally, i (the video clip concluded.) "the jury has heard this already, but you have not -- (inaudible.) a. q. a. no. no romantic relationship for you? never thought about it even. i was not interested in it. q. are there certain times -- john has passed now. it is been almost 20 years. have there been times or experiences where that loss has been felt a lot more profoundly than other times? a. holidays, his birthday, my birthday, because he riesdorph always made such a big deal out of it. was his birthday just before the trial started? yes. we usually had a cake to celebrate his but this year i -- i bought everything for birthday. it. i just did not get it done. q. and then your anniversary is coming up in a couple of weeks. together? this would have been your 58th q. a. a. yes." she had to watch her husband john die a the dreams that they had together that they wanted to live out were taken away. taken away. she had to watch him horrible death of lung cancer. suffocate. you heard her talk about at the end that he ran out of oxygen and she had to race him to the hospital. you heard about how horrible it was. and the instructions tell you you have to consider her damages from the date of his injury through the future losses that she has going forward, all of that period of time, all those things she experienced as she watched her strong, hard-working husband get consumed by this lung cancer. so when you are looking at the damages in the 3688 case, the compensatory damages, the question on the verdict form is going to ask you to compensate phyllis for the total amount of any damages she sustained for the loss of her -- his companionship, protection, and for the pain and suffering -- her mental pain and suffering she experienced as a result of his lung cancer and death. and we all made a commitment at the beginning that this case would be decided on the evidence only, the evidence and the law. we talked about this way back in jury selection. the evidence in the case that you have received on this -- it is something that you know obviously from your own common sense -- is you have to measure this based on the evidence in the case. and so when you are appraising these damages, the way to appraise these damages is to start the way you would measure anything else. if you are going to measure how tall this is, you got to start from the floor and come up. okay? so the smallest amount of money we have in our the smallest amount of time we one penny society is a penny. have in our society is a second. per second. what that amounts to is over the course of an hour, that is $36 around hour, which amounts to $864 a day, because there is 24 hours a day. okay? okay? 3689 no one is going to come in here and suggest and the evidence in this case is undisputed. all right? that there has not been 24 hours a day that she is been without her husband. 1996. without him. she is going to be without him going forward. okay? it is undisputed on that. he died july 17, and 24 hours a day since then, she has been okay? twenty-four hours a day since then and the same thing with the ten more years together that you are supposed to consider their joint life expectancy. the only evidence in the case you have is that she has ten more years based on those mortality tables. you can say that is not it is up to you to decide that. but at long enough. least the evidence in the case is there is ten more. and so you have 30 years total. if you look at the days over those years in the past at one penny per second over 24 hours a day, you are talking about 7,062 days that she is experienced in the past without her husband since he died. and that is $6,101,568 if you multiply it times that metric of $864 a day, a penny per second. okay? okay? in the future, the ten years in the future from today, is 3,652 days into the future. if you 3690 multiply that, same thing, one penny per second as the baseline, $3,155,328 is what that amounts to. and so if you add that up all together on the verdict form on the question where you will write this, which is question 6 as you see up here, okay, the total amount of that figure is $9,256,896. that is what the evidence has shown is the damages that are awarded based on evidence in this case. obviously that is a suggestion. all i can do is make a damages in this case are. suggestion based on what the evidence has shown. but there is no other evidence about that. was not disputed by reynolds. challenge of it. yes, one penny, one second. getting a dime per second based on her rates. their doctor even said, hayes, she is there was not a you decide what the it that is right. that is what the evidence in the case has shown, though, is that $9,256,896 would be consistent with what the instructions are. amount that is fair and just based on the evidence in the case. mrs. barbose has had to live without her husband, the 30 years that they would have spent together. and that will be the 30 years that you have to give an the last thing i want to address is the apportionment of fault. you heard his honor's 3691 okay? if you feel that the conspiracy and instructions. the concealment were a legal cause of john barbose's lung cancer and death, this does not apply. the law says if you are a cheat, if you are a liar, if you conceal stuff from people and you cause their death, you do not get the benefit of this. okay? that is just the way the law works. all right? but on the strict liability and the negligence that is question 2, where this does and if it does apply, obviously you you need to compare -- claims, this does apply. if smoking cigarettes was a legal cause. apply to that. need to compare the fault. for those questions, for strict liability and negligence, you have got to compare john barbose and what he did and what he knew and who he was to who these industries were and who these companies were and what they knew and what they did. suggestion to you would be that based on the evidence in the case, 45, 45, 10 is what the evidence would show at most on that issue as far as the comparison of the fault. and our you look at everything on those issues, on what they knew versus what he knew and everything you saw. and, again, if it is -- the evidence in the case we believe is very clear. the fraud and 3692 conspiracy had a -- made a difference in the life of john barbose. their concealment made a difference. if it does, this it effectively caused his death. gets wiped out. okay? but if you have to write numbers down on there, that is our suggestion what the numbers show based on the evidence in the case. that is the way the law is. obviously, thank you. i just want to say one last thing before i sit and i'll have a chance down. to speak to you again, but it will be very, very brief. just after these folks go, i'll have a few final comments on whatever they end up saying. i just wanted to leave you with one sort of final thought, because you have heard a lot in this case about the evidence. you have heard about 500,000 you heard from his honor, the judicial deaths. notice, that is the population of pasco county every year. 20 million deaths since 1964. population of the state of florida, to put that in perspective. it is hard to wrap your heads around that and say, what do we do with that. you heard that. that is a lot. okay? that is what that is. you heard the that is like the so i want to leave you with one final thought. a person was walking one morning. they walked on 3693 and it was a beautiful morning. the beach. but as they looked down the beach, there were hundreds of thousands of starfish that had washed up on the beach. know what to do. they did not know how they could possibly respond with all of these starfish, the hundreds of thousands of dead starfish. and as they looked upon it, they just did not as they looked down the beach, they saw a and the person was person walking towards them. reaching down and picking up starfish and throwing them back into the ocean. and then they walked and they picked up a starfish and they threw it back in the ocean. and eventually these two people met. first person said, what are you doing? there is hundreds of thousands of starfish. cannot possibly make a difference. doing? and the you know, you what are you and the person bent down, picked up a starfish and threw it in the ocean and said, i made a difference for that one. okay? you can make a difference for this one, you can make a difference for this and i would encourage you to make a for this family. family. difference for this family. 3694 thank you very much. mr. bigger: the trial lawyer in me would want to go for a while, try to excoriate a few of the points, but the sensible human being in me knows you have all been here for a long time, so i'm not going to drag things out needlessly. few things i've got to respond to. your patience a little bit more. just a i appreciate i mean, certainly, if we had more time and you guys were robots, i would go into all that stuff. that i want to make. not necessary. okay. just a few points wish i i mean, first of all, no response to this? addiction. no response to that is what the evidence was all about. fraud. had a bigger marker. you have seen all the evidence. this. wish i had a bigger marker to write all over it, because you know, you saw the evidence in this case. if someone goes back there and tells you -- a few things that i just have to point out from 3821 okay? he wrote (sic) a doctors do not do that. mr. geise and ms. yates. someone goes back there and tells you there is no doctor who ever thought mr. barbose was addicted. prescription for nicotine replacement therapy from dr. wert. you do not give nicotine replacement therapy if a person does not need nicotine replacement therapy, okay? so there is a record talking about that. i wish we had dr. wert's records. them. prescription. that is why you get it. everybody's talked about it. we just do not. but we have the we do not have because the doctor thinks you have tobacco dependence and he gives you that prescription. i mean, he had failed never lost control. he was a compulsive user. quit attempts. smoking one and a half packs of cigarettes per day. losing control. compulsive use. that is what it means when nida talks about smoking 30 cigarettes a day is a that is the loss of control. he was not interfering. of course nicotine interferes with your ability to quit. of the reasons he failed in quitting. have to be the only reason. this repeatedly. that is one does not i've talked about it is a concurring cause case. the -- cannot write prescriptions with clinical judgment? she did not have any dr. hayes cannot write prescriptions she did not have a i mean, they went back to seriously, this is their person, she came in here -- they are allowed to the instructions tell dr. cummings. either. clinical judgment, folks. clinical practice. dr. hayes. dr. hayes. bring in whoever they want. you -- i think it is instruction -- let us see here -- yeah, 19. accept such opinion testimony or reject it or give it the weight you think it deserves considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training, education of the witness. through all that. education, training, and skills were so you could reject that stuff because she had no business coming in here talking about nicotine addiction. final instruction 19, you may you had to see what her that is why i had to go stumped on any fact in this trial. she she did not know did not know who dr. koop was. which surgeon general's report he wrote. talked about that. and certainly dr. cummings and dr. drobes would not have been. she was stumped on that fact. we the surgeon general's report definition, the 3823 his, the heavy of smoking, the fagerstrom, the dsm-5, we use those different tests because if we had multiple experts only using the same test, they could object to it and keep it out. it is called cumulative evidence. different people applying different tests to bring you as many different definitions, as many different people applying different definitions as possible to show you that john barbose was addicted. we used okay. there were obviously several times where -- i mean, ms. barbose was challenged as to whether she she was here. was a credible witness or not. she testified. you she is here now. you saw her. can evaluate that, the approximations that she put on her worksheet versus what she told them in her deposition. challenged her on that stuff. would have shown it to you. because that is how it works. dates on the worksheet. give what your best recollection is. other family members. best recollection is. they find out what their that is how it works. they just accepted it you give approximate and no one in her deposition otherwise they you get deposed. you they talk to people do not -- no one followed john around 3824 and if the only person who could so they did the best that with a diary and wrote down exactly what he smoked, when he smoked. have actually told us that best is john and he is obviously not here. they could and she did the best she could. they want to get into a credibility battle with ms. barbose, if the tobacco companies want to get in that battle, fine. compare ms. barbose to their history, to their pattern of conduct. i'll happily have you you heard the tobacco lobby is very strong. but a lot about that during this case. fortunately, they do not write the laws that you are the judge gave you going to apply in this case. the law that you are going to apply in this case. okay? so when mr. geise is referring to little excerpts of the law and picking little excerpts here and there, you have got it in front of you. each of you has a copy. there is a section called final instruction 17 which is on punitive damages, and it specifically tells you, you may consider evidence concerning harm suffered by persons who are not parties to this case. mr. geise, when he told you that no other smoker should be considered here, he knew this was the instruction of the law. 3825 okay? you can consider you have to consider that because how that is what the law is. that. reprehensible their conduct was, how egregious their conduct was for punitive damages, you have to know exactly what they did, whether this was just some isolated incident, was this a one-off thing, or was this a pattern of practice over and over. so the law tells you you can consider that. considering the qualifications, i've already talked about that. the inference, this idea that an inference is an assumption or some weird thing you are not supposed to do, it is in the law his honor has given you. you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions in this case. inferences from the evidence. it says -- now i've got to find it. you may draw reasonable we did not make that it is not i mean, it is in here. it is in the law his honor gave you. it is looking at the evidence and up. an assumption. what all of it together looks like and saying, you know, we have all lived life. experiences. common sense and you look at the evidence and say, look, i did not see it directly, but the you all come in here with your you all have had 3826 circumstantial evidence is very clear; i can draw an inference as to what happened. same thing with the reliance. okay? i mean, that you are specifically is in the instructions on concealment and conspiracy, that the reliance by john barbose on the conduct of these companies may be inferred from the evidence and the testimony. instructed by the court that that is what the law is. okay? so when there is any questions about the law, do not listen to what mr. geise thinks the law is. go to what it is in the instructions you have. now, i do not know why he put that legal cause up there and went on this thing about but for. okay? the very next paragraph that he did not choose to show you that we did show you says, in order to be a legal cause, it need not be the only cause. okay? only cause is but for; it is the only cause. but for this, it happened. same thing with that legal cause. all right? mr. geise: your honor, objection, misstates the law. the instruction will control. the court: mr. bigger: instruction says. the instructions will control. yeah. in order to be regarded as a here's what the 3827 legal cause of lung cancer and death, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. an addiction may be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with the acts of others -- cause, if such addiction contributes substantially -- if it contributes substantially to producing the lung cancer and death. so the question for you is, is that stuff -- is it some is the addiction just insubstantial? insubstantial thing that does not matter at all, or was it substantial? you an addiction by nature -- addiction by its very nature is a substantial contribution to why someone uses a drug or whatever it is that they are addicted to. addiction. that is why we are worried about and your common sense tells that is why we treat them. same thing on this idea about the dangers you get to that concealment the instructions the court gave being a secret. you tell you that there is a fraud that was perpetrated. question, the finding kicks in. established. challenged. they concealed was the material information. look it cannot be questioned, cannot be they perpetrated a fraud, and what okay? it is 3828 the material it is defined. in the instructions. information, what they concealed is the very information that would have made john barbose act differently if he had been told. it says that in the law. you do not need to guess at it. it is right there. okay? the reliance idea, whether he took some the action he took was the action or whether he -- you know, they left out the other part that he did not take some action, that he did not try sooner to quit, that he did not try harder to quit because of what he was not told. but you have both. filters, the lights, the not quitting sooner. the not trying to quit sooner is what you did not have. and it is -- in the case when he got better warnings, when the '85 warnings came out, when the information started to come out more and more about this, that is when he started trying to quit. that is the inference you can draw from the evidence that is in the record. had he gotten that sooner, you would have seen that chart that -- you know, in 1953, if they had just been honest -- objection, your honor, prior mr. geise: ruling on objection. the court: overruled. 3829 mr. bigger: in 1953, way before any warnings were on packs, if they had just been honest, it would have made a difference. whole point of the case. and that is the last thought i just want to leave you with is okay? no one is asking you for this idea of not rewarding ms. barbose for the choices of john barbose. the instructions a reward in this case. the law gave you, the evidence you have seen and what we argued to you in closing argument is to do what the law says, provide damages, if you get to that question, that are fair and just in light of the evidence in the case. evidence you have been presented is from us. given you the evidence of ms. barbose. given you the evidence. was one penny per second. and what we said to you all right? the only we have we have is reynolds or philip morris really going to tell you that a penny per second is not fair and just in light of the fact that she has lost her husband that she had spent her life with, was going to spend her future with? what they want you to do, though, is to reward pm and rjr and you should not do that. for their choices. the -- i do not one final thought, i guess. no. 3830 folks, you you look at the documents. if anyone even know how to respond to the real doozies. some of this stuff was real doozies. have the documents. you look at what came into this case. thinks that those are real doozies, then whatever. you-all do what you want. but that conduct is not a doozie of a conduct. deplorable. punished. that conduct is and it needs to be okay? it is shameful. and i ask you to do that, folks. thank you. thank you. all very much for your time. service. and thank you. thank you. i appreciate your thank you