mr. geise: it is been a couple of weeks since i've had a chance to address you. we have talked in jury selection and we talked in opening statement. and once again, it is now the bottom of the inning, right? once again, i want to start by thanking you all for your service. as i said in opening statement, we could not have a jury without jurors, and you are a big part of that. there are a lot of ways that people contribute in this country. last week we celebrated veterans day that honored those who served in the military. 3702 in november, we typically vote and some of us go and vote, some of us do not, but it is a way to contribute. and for the past three weeks, you all have made a great service and sacrifice by coming here every day and helping us decide this case. so whatever you decide, whatever the verdict is, you can go back to your homes, to your office, to your lives, to your friends, and you can tell them that you have made a difference and you have contributed, because you have. so on behalf of myself and my team, for your service for the last few weeks, thank you. now, when this case started, i told you that it is not about other smokers, it is only about john barbose. and in particular, the case is about the choices he made when it came to smoking. as this case now draws to a close, that is still what this case is about. a couple of weeks ago, i told you you would hear an avalanche of information about things that have nothing to do with mr. barbose. remember i talked about the ball pit or the ping-pong balls? and you sure did. and you heard about it again today. things that judge stearns told you had already been resolved in that other case, things 3703 that i told you in my opening statement were not in dispute. dr. villa and dr. stein spent a lot of time telling you that smoking causes lung cancer. you heard that from judge stearns on day one. it was not an issue then, it is not an issue now. dr. cummings and dr. drobes spent a lot of time telling you that smoking and nicotine is addictive. you heard that from judge stearns and from me on day one. it was not an issue then, it is not an issue now. and you recall in opening statement that i told you to keep your eye on the ball and focus on the evidence that relates to john barbose. now, when i said that, i assumed that the plaintiff would only tell you half the story on certain things and you would have to wait for us on the bottom of the inning to tell you the rest of the story. and the plaintiff did just that. it started with their first witness, dr. cummings. the general on the war on tobacco; testified in more than 90 of these trials, each time saying he is rooting for the smoker to win, each time saying the smoker is addicted, and each time he sets his objectivity aside. 3704 how many times did we have to show you the rest of the story with dr. cummings? they would plant a seed with you on direct examination and then wait to see if we would expose it on cross. and mr. carter had to do it over and over with dr. cummings. mr. bigger showed you a winston ad in opening statement. mr. clark played it again with dr. cummings while he was on the stand, and they showed it and talked to you about it today, planting a seed that reynolds advertised to youth with that. i called that half story in opening statement. i told you they would do it, and they still did. so on cross with mr. carter, you learned the other side of the story; that the flintstones were originally an adult comedy, that it was modeled on the honeymooners, that it was a nighttime show, not a saturday morning one, and it was sponsored by not zantac, but by alka-seltzer and one-a-day vitamins. mr. bigger asked earlier like, what is that show? what it shows is it was an adult program and those are adult products. kids do not use alka-seltzer. and the other thing you learned is that reynolds never advertised on the program when it moved to mornings. and you learned that mr. barbose 3705 was a grown man with a family and businesses by the time that show aired. and the other thing you learned, there is no evidence in this case that he ever saw it. plaintiff told you about dr. teague and that 1953 report he did with all those articles cited in there. and dr. cummings told you he did not make that research public. but on cross, you learned that research was already public. all 78 articles that were cited in it were public articles. now, some of them were originally in german, but it does not mean they were not in public, and it just means that dr. teague did a good job to get the german articles. another example of only getting half the story is the company research on nicotine. dr. cummings' suggestion -- you heard it again today -- that they are trying to find a level of nicotine to keep smokers addicted or adjust the ph to drive market share. but during his cross-examination, you heard from dr. cummings that this research was done at the urging of public health officials like the national cancer institute. and it was done as a way to try to find a less hazardous cigarette. dr. cummings told you that people at roswell 3706 park were looking at a way to get a higher-nicotine, lower-tar cigarette. and he even used the term they were trying to jack up the nicotine to see if it would be better. the idea, if people are smoking and going to get a certain amount of nicotine, why do not we lower the tar and give them the same amount of nicotine, because tar is where the cancer cause is. now, the plaintiff called that nicotine manipulation. the nci at the time called it progress. along a similar vein, you saw it again today and it was talked about, a 1972 document in which claude teague referred to nicotine as the sine qua non of the cigarette. do you remember that one? dr. cummings told you that means nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco. well, again, on cross, mr. carter had to show you with dr. cummings a reader's digest article from 1950. this was as-995. 1950. 22 years earlier that it was reported to the public that nicotine is an essential ingredient in tobacco. talked about this morning, in 1958, that they identified carcinogens in cigarette smoke. you heard about that from dr. rodgman, the document he 3707 had where he recognized that there were eight polycyclic hydrocarbons in 1958. dr. cummings told you that information was secret from the public. on cross-examination, once again, mr. carter had to show you that those 80 polycyclic hydrocarbons were identified in the same year in reader's digest. and you saw that dr. rodgman did not keep it to himself, but he actually talked about that to the american chemical society. and you can see his report. it was at-956. and in his report, he talked about the presence of benzpyrene and nicotine in cigarette smoke. and he also drew the constituents. do you remember that? now, dr. cummings showed you a lot of memos from a lot of different folks with the tobacco companies, but he did not show you this one, this one from 1968 from the president of reynolds to the head of research and development. and what does it say that dr. cummings did not want you to see? "in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts ultimately to gain their 3708 cooperation in proper research on the subject. "second, if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out." this memo was not prepared to be a trial exhibit. it was a directive to continue the work that was already going on and to increase efforts to develop a safer cigarette. dr. cummings knew about the document, but he did not bring it to you. we did. so why did you have to wait for cross-examination to get the full story on these and other documents, besides the plaintiff did not want to tell you? the answer is simple: to get you mad, to get you to take your eye off the ball. dr. cummings talked to you for three days in the hopes of getting you so mad that you would decide this case on the basis of emotion rather than the facts of john barbose. they started their case with dr. cummings reading tons of documents, and they ended their case with mr. bigger reading more documents and with another attorney asking dr. figlar about the same documents that dr. cummings had already read to you, hoping you would forget what happened in the middle 3709 of the case, hoping you would take your eye off the ball, hoping you would lose your focus. because if you keep your eye on the ball and you focus on the facts of john barbose, mrs. barbose loses in this case. she loses because she cannot meet her burden of proving that he had a primary adenocarcinoma that started in his lung. she loses because mr. barbose was not addicted. he was in control over his smoking choices and he was not significantly impaired or distressed. he was not motivated to even try to quit for decades. and when he was motivated to quit, he was successful for weeks, for months, or for good. and mrs. barbose loses because any addiction mr. barbose may have had was not the legal cause of his death. instead, his decisions and his choice to do what he wanted to do, not what other people wanted him to do, was a legal cause of his actions and their consequences. finally, mrs. barbose loses because she cannot prove a link between anything reynolds and philip morris said, did not say, did, did not do in any smoking decision made by mr. barbose. i showed you this slide in opening. these are the three burdens or hurdles that come into the 3710 first question on your verdict form. and as i said and as mr. bigger agreed, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. that was true then and it is true now. and they have to clear all three of these hurdles. and they are all contained in the first question on the verdict form. if the plaintiff fails to meet any one of these burdens, any one of those hurdles, they lose on that entire question. they have to meet all three in order to get a "yes" to that question. now, throughout my closing and ms. yates' closing, we are going to talk about these three things. and we are going to show you why the answer to each would be no. the first hurdle is whether smoking caused a primary lung cancer in mr. barbose. and i'm not going to say very much about it. as i said in opening, dr. villa told you that you need some imagination to see the features of adenocarcinoma. and he admitted the stains used back in 1996 produced iffy results. that was not my words. that is what dr. villa came and told you. he also told you that there were immunostains available that could have identified the particular cell type and identified where the cancer started. 3711 but those were not done. there is not much more i can say about that. i do not dispute mr. barbose had cancer, but it is hard to go back in time when the evidence does not exist and prove what exactly it was. now, if the plaintiff can clear that first hurdle, the next hurdle is addiction. and this is a big hurdle. and i'm going to spend a lot of time this morning talking about this, because it is a lot of what you heard about in this case. this is the evidence in this case that mr. barbose was not addicted. first, there is no medical record from any doctor who ever treated mr. barbose that diagnosed him with an addiction, a dependence, or a tobacco use disorder. none. the only doctor you heard from in this case who actually saw, met, and treated mr. barbose was dr. stein. he did not even offer an opinion that mr. barbose was addicted. he was treating mr. barbose right at the time that he had stopped smoking in 1996. if he was addicted at that time and suffering from withdrawal symptoms, would dr. stein have remembered it and put it down in his records? he said he would have, but he did not make any record of it, nor did any other 3712 doctor who ever treated mr. barbose. second, mr. barbose was never an out-of-control smoker. mr. bigger put up a slide and said it is not about whether he lost control. you will remember -- and we will talk more about the definitions you saw in this case. dr. drobes talked about addiction being a loss of control. mr. barbose never lost control. his ability to control his smoking when he wanted to was documented. you know he followed no smoking rules. you know he did not avoid going places where he could not smoke. you know he did not smoke in people's houses when they did not want him to smoke. you know it did not interfere with family functions. you know he did not smoke in the car with stacey after she told him she was allergic to cigarette smoking. and the only place in his house that he would smoke was the bathroom. mr. bigger said he would sneak in there and do it. he did not sneak in there. mrs. barbose knew he was in there. she could smell it. and when she asked him about it, he said, it is my house too. that is control. when you are doing what you want to do, you are in control. mr. barbose completely controlled the situations and his smoking behavior when other 3713 people told him to do something different. when they told him how he should behave, what did he do? he shrugged it off, he ignored it, he laughed at the notion that he should stop, and he went right out the door and continued doing what he wanted to do. mr. barbose was not out of control. he was completely in control of what he wanted to do and what he was going to do. i told you during opening statement that you would hear some simple facts about nicotine and nicotine addiction, and you did in this case. you heard that nicotine addiction does not permanently change brain receptors. i think that is clear. i think every addiction witness in this case agreed to that. but you did hear lot about nicotine receptors. you know dr. drobes made a big deal about it, and he showed you images of different receptors they had and he showed you a diagram of the nucleus accumbens. and he did not want to do it, but ultimately he had to admit to me the following about nicotine receptors: everyone has them; they go back to normal after you quit, within two to three months; and the changes in your nicotine receptors are not permanent. but then they tried to get dr. drobes to say 3714 something about smoking has to make a permanent change in your brain, because i put it up in opening. i think they wanted to refute it. so what dr. drobes told you is there is this memory of smoking creates a permanent change in your brain. do you remember his testimony on that? so on cross, i asked him this: "so the memory of a loved one nagging you about stopping smoking can also cause a change in your brain, right? i think all of our experiences can be remembered, and memories are associated with changes in the brain." i asked him, "including memories of those conversations with a loved one, correct?" and he said, "i would not exclude any experience from potentially having an effect on the brain." if there was something that was ingrained in mr. barbose's brain, it was his wife's hounding him about smoking. it is probably ingrained in your brains by this point of this trial. but we know that mrs. barbose complained to him about smoking changed his brain, and we know it did not cause him to change his behavior. you also learned that nicotine addiction 3715 does not do other things. it does not interfere with the smoker's ability to understand the risks of smoking, it does not interfere with their ability to make a choice to quit or a choice to continue smoking, and it does not prevent then from quitting permanently. any smoker can quit. every witness in this case agreed; dr. cummings, dr. drobes, dr. hayes. now, on cross-examination, dr. cummings and dr. drobes admitted that millions of smokers, over 60 million smokers, including millions of addicted smokers, have stopped smoking for good, most of them cold turkey. now, mr. bigger talked to you about populations in his closing argument. and what you were told from the judge is the population of florida is about 19 million people. the whole state of florida has quit smoking three different times. that is how many former smokers there are. and you heard there are more former smokers than current smokers. now, i want to talk for a minute about dr. cummings and dr. drobes. the plaintiff called both of them to tell you mr. barbose was addicted, and both of them had some similarities. they had four similarities. 3716 first, neither one of them currently treats a single patient. and i was not going talk about this, but mr. bigger spent so much time yesterday trying to beat up dr. hayes for, is it 10 to 15? is it 20 to 25? is it five at a time? it is funny, because neither dr. cummings or dr. drobes is treating a single patient right now. and when mr. bigger talked about dr. cummings counseling people, the reason he had to use that term is because dr. cummings is not able to actually treat people. he does not have that type of a background. he cannot write a prescription or anything. now, the other similarities about these two is you have heard they never passed on a case because they did not think the smoker was addicted. you heard they have never testified in a deposition or a trial that the smoker was not addicted. and you heard that both of them were disclosed in this case to say that mr. barbose was addicted before they knew a single fact about mr. barbose. now, mr. bigger said, you know, the evidence was obvious in this case. well, with these experts, they had their opinions before they had any evidence in this case. 3717 and think about that. is it such a slam-dunk certainty that they will give any plaintiff who asks the opinion that they want and need on addiction? is it such a certainty that their opinions can be disclosed before they bother to know a single fact about the smoker? something is not right with that picture. you have an expert on call to give you the opinion you need each time, every time? that is not right. now, contrast that with dr. hayes. she needs to know all the facts. does she go into the record deeply? yes. does it add up for her hours? yes. does she know the facts of the case? you would better believe it. did she get stumped once yesterday on any fact you heard in this trial? not a once. and she tells you that she looks at all the evidence and forms an opinion. and you have heard that her, in other cases, she is looked at it and said, you know what, i've looked at it, and i think that smoker is addicted. and she would say that to a jury or say it in a deposition. the facts of the case matter. they matter to dr. hayes. but they did not matter to these two. they were perfectly comfortable having their opinions disclosed before they knew a single fact about 3718 mr. barbose. now, despite these similarities between dr. cummings and dr. drobes, you will see that they disagreed sometimes pretty significantly. now, you know that the court is not giving you a definition of addiction. you had the jury instructions say there is no definition. well, dr. cummings and dr. drobes, they did not agree on a definition. dr. cummings talked about criteria from the surgeon general's report and something called the heaviness of smoking index, but not dr. drobes. he talked about other definitions he uses. he never mentioned the surgeon general's reports or the heaviness of smoking index. now, mr. bigger did it again in his closings today, and he reminds you, dr. cummings read from the surgeon general's report where it said "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason why people persist in daily cigarette smoking." and he pointed out that he asked dr. hayes that question. and he pointed out that dr. hayes disagreed. well, you know who they did not ask that question of? dr. drobes. you know why? because he would have had the same answer that dr. hayes had. mr. bigger: i'm sorry. objection, your honor. 3719 the court: approach, please. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. bigger: since i'm half asleep over there, i'm not sure. but what i'm hearing mr. -- if what i'm hearing is correct, i'm hearing him say that there is something not in evidence that he is about to tell the jury. mr. geise: no. mr. bigger: you said, what did you not hear dr. drobes say? mr. geise: i did not ask him that question. mr. bigger: well, then no one asked him that question. mr. geise: i'm going to get to it. i'm going to get to the next question i asked him about the prevalence of smoking. mr. bigger: oh, this is cross. mr. geise: yeah. mr. bigger: okay. sorry. the court: overruled. mr. bigger: my apologies. i'm mishearing again. i was paying attention. (end of bench conference.) mr. geise: may i continue, your honor? 3720 the court: you may. mr. geise: thank you. and you know that dr. drobes agrees with dr. hayes. i asked him this. "now, you also know that the dsm-5 that talks about the prevalence of dependence among current daily smokers using the dsm-iv criteria is 50 percent, correct? remember, he came here to talk to you about the dsm-5?" he said, "i'm familiar with that, yes." and i said, "in fact, you agree that there are daily smokers who are not addicted, right?" and he says, "correct." and i'll get to this one in a minute. but he is willing to agree that one hundred percent of people who smoke five cigarettes per day are addicted. so on that point of whether nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason why people persist, the dsm-5 tells you only fifty percent of daily cigarette smokers are addicted. so what does that tell you? for the other fifty percent, nicotine addiction cannot be the fundamental reason why they persist in daily cigarette smoking. if only half are, half are not. now, that is what dr. hayes said. that is why she disagreed. she is relying on dsm-5 just like 3721 dr. drobes. now, that last point up there where dr. drobes says, "you would not say a hundred percent of people who smoked five cigarettes per day are addicted," he said he would not. you know who disagrees with that? dr. cummings. remember, he was asked, "even if someone smokes only one cigarette a day, if they smoke them daily, you believe that smoker is addicted?" "yes, i do. if they do it on a persistent, daily basis over, you know, months, years, decades, absolutely." dr. drobes and dr. cummings disagree. now, dr. drobes and dr. hayes talked to you about dsm-5. dr. cummings did not mention it at all. why? because he is not a psychologist. he does not use it. dr. drobes told you that mental health professionals look at the facts under the dsm criteria and have to apply their own critical judgment based on their experience, their background, and their training. dr. hayes did just that for you. she told you how she formed her opinion that mr. barbose was not addicted. and mr. bigger questioned her for almost two years about websites, about images from google 3722 maps, but he never asked her a single question about the dsm-5 and how she applied it to john barbose. why not? well, his whole cross was to get you to take your eyes off the ball, to focus somewhere else. and as mr. bigger said, he was taking a shot at dr. hayes for her qualifications. well, you know, the court would not allow an expert to give you opinions if they were not qualified to give them to you. dr. hayes told you that mr. barbose was not clinically significantly impaired or distressed. in addition, dr. drobes, when he applied the dsm-5, he did not do it the right way. he did not follow the steps. first of all, you have got to look for the clinically-significant impairment or distress. dr. drobes never mentioned that to you. the second thing you have to look for -- remember in the criteria where it says you have to look for it in the same 12-month period? i asked dr. drobes about it and he said, i did not do it. i did not do it here. so he did not even apply it correctly. he pulled information from the 1950s, oh, that might fit here. in the 1980s, that might fit here. oh, the 1970s, it might here. that is not the way the 3723 dsm-5 works. you heard that from dr. hayes, and nobody challenged the way dr. hayes applied it in this case. choosing to do something you want to do is not a sign of a significant impairment or distress. doing what you want to do is not a disorder. it is a decision. and john barbose had the choice and the control to make a decision or a different decision if he wanted. you heard that quitting takes motivation, determination, and persistence. dr. hayes told you she looks at those factors to determine whether somebody has a clinically significant impairment or distress, and she explained why mr. barbose does not. when he was motivated to succeed, he was a man who came up with a plan to succeed. now, i want to look at his personality a little bit. for a successful business, you know you need to plan the work and work the plan, right? you have got to rent the space, you have got to order the food, you have got to hire the workers, you have got to file the tax returns, you have got to register with the state, you have got to do all those things. you need to have a plan for success. mr. barbose demonstrated the ability to do that when he wanted 3724 to time and time again, at work and even at home. you heard from his brother sam he built a house. think about that. do the plans, buy the supplies, get the contractors, get the equipment, get tools, and build it. does that take dedication, motivation, planning? you bet it does. and he succeeded. if you are a person not capable of making a plan and following it, those projects would be disastrous. but that was not john barbose. he made a plan and he succeeded. and he did that even when others thought the plan might not be a good idea. remember sam told you, i do not know why, but he had a great business going and he decided to close it up and start a new one. i thought he was crazy. sam could not understand why mr. barbose would do that. but the answer is simple. mr. barbose was a person who did what he wanted to do and was not afraid to take risks. did he ever bring that same planning and motivation to a decision to quit smoking? you know the answer to that. now, unmotivation. you remember in opening statement i showed you these two slides. dr. cummings, i said he was going to tell you anyone 3725 can quit if they make up their mind to do it, and i told you he would say the success rate for people who really want to quit and stick to it is 100 percent. it is what dr. cummings tells people in that smart move pamphlet he has that mr. carter showed you. but here, when he was asked about it, dr. cummings told you those quotes were taken out of context. these quotes were taken out of his pamphlet. this is what he tells people. now, it is not the only time dr. cummings disagreed with himself here in court. sometimes he had a hard time telling you the same thing he told some other jury under oath or what he said in his deposition under oath. and mr. carter had to impeach him a number of times with his prior testimony. a couple of examples: mr. carter asked him, "was it fair to say 30 million people have quit between 1964 and 1979?" it is what he said in another trial to another jury, but here he said, no, that is unfair, so we had to show him. mr. carter said, "was it possible for mr. barbose to quit at any point throughout his time?" in his deposition he said yes, but here to you he said no. so mr. carter had to point that 3726 out. mr. carter asked him, "there was no evidence that mr. barbose used a patch after 1994, was there?" in his deposition, dr. cummings said no, but here at trial he said yes, so we had to show that. but there was one thing that really struck me about what dr. cummings told you. when mr. carter was pressing him over and over and over about these different inconsistencies, i think dr. cummings got tired of it after a while, frankly, and he said this: "i always say do not rely on me, do not manufacture evidence." that is what dr. cummings said. and i think that is good advice from dr. cummings. so instead of relying on dr. cummings, let us look at what the people who knew mr. barbose said about his motivation and his attempts to quit. dr. hayes reviewed this for you yesterday. i'm not going to go through her chart. i want to show you what mrs. barbose told you when i asked her, "and you believe that mr. barbose was motivated to quit in that april 1996 time period? "yes. "but you do not believe he was motivated to quit 3727 smoking earlier in the 1990s or 1980s or at any point earlier in time, do you? "well, i know he tried. i do not know how motivated he was about it." and then i asked, "well, you never noticed that he was motivated, correct?" and she agreed. what do we know about mr. barbose's attempts to quit? you heard from his brother sam. he came down here from pennsylvania, and he told the story about his brother would take those loosy cigarettes when he was in high school. did not really remember how much he smoked them. but then he also talked about how he saw john smoke all through the years when he would help him with anything, he would see them. when they were having coffee, he would see him smoking. when he would be at his diner, he would see him at the end of the counter smoking. when they were building the house working side by side, he would see him smoking. sam barbose was not aware of mr. barbose ever making an attempt to quit ever. this was his testimony: "you do not recall your brother, john, ever trying to quit smoking, do you? "no. i do not recall any times that he tried. 3728 "and you do not have any conversation -- you did not have any conversations with him about attempts to quit smoking, correct? "that is correct. "your brother, john, never told you he wanted to quit smoking? "he never told me that." is that evidence of a tortured smoker, of somebody who is out of control, of somebody who is significantly impaired or distressed? no. what was the other evidence about his attempts to quit? dyanna, their oldest daughter, she said there was no attempt to quit before he moved to florida. she said he used mints and gum on one occasion and maybe a patch on another, and those are the only attempts to quit she remembers. and she never recalls him using nicotine gum. the younger daughter, debbie, what did she say? she told you that he did not make any attempts to quit when they lived in pennsylvania, including in the 1970s. you heard that her dad would tell her in the 1970s, do not start smoking, because you will not be able to stop. and she told you that he gave her that advice long before he ever tried to stop himself. 3729 now, dr. drobes told you, oh, i think you can speculate that was an attempt to quit. she told you you cannot speculate on that. she knew the facts. now, after mr. barbose moved to florida, she recalled him on a couple of occasions when he was trying to quit by chewing gum or eating candies or using a toothpick. again, she has no recollection of nicotine gum and no recollection of a nicotine patch. the granddaughter, stacey, you heard from yesterday, she recalled the toothpicks, the candy, the coffee stirrers. only in florida, and she was not sure of whether there was ever a patch or gum. maybe, maybe not. that is the evidence you heard from the other fact witnesses about these attempts to quit. so that leaves us with one other fact witness you heard from, and that was mrs. barbose. i want to walk through what she told you about the attempts to quit. you heard and saw about this first worksheet that she submitted in april of 2009. she verified it. it was under oath. it was under penalty of perjury. and in that worksheet, she said that her husband's only attempts to quit where he tried to 3730 quit for three to six months in 1993 and then he quit for good in april of 1996. that was her sworn testimony as of april of 2009. in her amended worksheet from september of 2009, she verified once again under oath, once again under a penalty of perjury, that her husband's only attempts to quit were three to six months in 1993 and when he quit for good in 1996. same sworn testimony then. but as trial approached, you heard that her lawyers arranged this phone call between mrs. barbose and dr. drobes. and she told him a little bit different than what she said in those worksheets. one of the things she said was that he had tried to quit multiple times a year beginning in 1984. now, remember what dr. cummings said about manufacturing evidence? look at the evidence you have. dr. drobes told you those quit attempts were never mentioned on those worksheets that were submitted under oath under penalty of perjury. and despite recognizing that there was an inconsistency between what she was telling him on the phone and what he knew in the record, he did not bother to ask her -- ask her at all about it. 3731 now, if we ignore those worksheets and set them aside for a minute and look at what mrs. barbose said in court, i think we have about three times that she recalled mr. barbose attempted to and quit smoking, with some clarity. in the late 1980s, she said he quit smoking for one to two weeks. and after he resumed smoking, she did not ask him why he resumed, because as we will talk about, it was kind of a touchy subject. in 1993 and '94, he quit for months. now, when i was asking her questions, she originally said it was just three or four months. and then i showed her the worksheet, she said, okay, it is three to six months. and then i showed her this medical record where dr. -- or mr. barbose told his doctors that he did stop for a period of seven months, and then mrs. barbose said, okay, if that is what he said, it was seven months. now, mrs. barbose believes that on this occasion in 1990- -- that on this occasion in '93, that he may have used the nicotine patch. but she is not sure how long he wore it. and you heard from stacey yesterday, despite being very close with her grandfather, she never recalls him wearing it. and the other fact witnesses could not either. so we 3732 do not know how long he would have wore a patch in that period of time or not. but the more important thing is, after mr. barbose quit successfully, be it for four months, for six months, for seven months, he decided to start smoking again, and mrs. barbose does not know why he did that. no one said he was having cravings or withdrawal symptoms that drove him back to smoking. nobody observed that in him. he was not impaired or distressed or out of control. he was not experiencing cravings. you know that nicotine was long gone out of his system. and you know that the receptors in his brain had returned to normal for a few months. he knew at that time smoking was hard to quit, but he knew he had succeeded in quitting. we will talk about, dr. drobes said at that time period he was not addicted anymore. and yet after all that, after successfully stopping, he chose to start smoking all over again. and then finally you heard about 1996, around the time of his cancer diagnosis, where he quit cold turkey. in almost 40 years of marriage, it is the first time mrs. barbose recalls him ever trying to quit cold turkey and he succeeded. 3733 was it too late at that point? we know the facts of when he died, but he never had a cigarette after that point. now, i want to talk about what you have heard about these withdrawal symptoms or how his personality may have changed on these quit attempts. and you heard that sometimes he would get grouchy or irritable. well, compare that to how he sometimes responded when he was smoking and was told that he should not; when he was told to do something he did not want to do. and let me say up front, there was kind of an accusation this morning that i equated mr. barbose and how he acted as somebody who commits domestic violence. you have heard everything i've said in this case, and you know that is just a cheap shot that i would never have taken and i did not take. i have the utmost respect for mr. barbose. i've treated him with respect, and i think we should respect his decisions, and that is part of what i'm saying today. i have never suggested that this is a man that committed domestic violence. and to suggest that in this case is just over the line. but we do have to look at the facts you heard from the witnesses and what they said and how he 3734 responded. you heard that on occasion he would give mrs. barbose an evil look. he would tell people to mind their own business. he would tell them to leave him alone. and on occasion, he would even say "shut up." now, some people might say that is grouchy or irritable as well. and if it is, so be it, but we know that it has nothing to do with nicotine or the absence of nicotine, it is how he responded. now, a couple things about -- mr. bigger said people did not come in here and try to change their story. well, let us look at some of the inconsistencies you saw. mrs. barbose would say one thing under oath and she said another thing to dr. drobes. i have three examples of that. one, you heard that he came in and said, oh, she told me he was motivated to quit. then i walked through with him what she said in her deposition where -- the part i just showed you -- where he was not motivated to quit until 1996. the other thing is, she told dr. drobes on the phone, yes, i remember him having sleeplessness when he tried to quit. and i had to show dr. drobes in his own notes that he took from the deposition that 3735 she said, no, he did not have sleeplessness. and you know that dr. drobes told you that she said, and he put in his notes from the phone call that, yes, he was anxious when he was trying to quit. so, again, i had to show dr. drobes his notes from her deposition where she said, no, he did not have any anxiety. again, what did dr. cummings say about manufacturing evidence? now, one other point on addiction. the plaintiff had dr. drobes throw out this point about genetic reasons why people smoke and how genetics could play into whether somebody's addicted or not. if so, you know that debbie and dyanna bucked their genes and never smoked. the daughters never smoked. and you know that mr. barbose's father and his brother were not prevented from quitting for any genetic reason, because they both stopped smoking. so there was no genetic reason why mr. barbose had to smoke and no genetic reason that kept him from making a decision to stop. when he wanted to make the decision to quit, he quit successfully. so because mr. barbose never experienced a loss of control over his decisions, he never lost the ability to quit, and he was able to quit when he was 3736 motivated to, he was not addicted. because he was never significantly impaired, he never was significantly distressed, he was not addicted. because the plaintiff did not prove that he was addicted and, in fact, the facts of this case and dsm as applied by dr. hayes shows that he was not addicted, the plaintiff does not clear that second hurdle. so for this additional reason, the answer to the first question on your verdict form has to be no. now, if you think the plaintiff clears that hurdle, the third hurdle is to show that addiction was a legal cause of mr. barbose's death. and this is just that third hurdle pulled out. and mr. bigger put up the instruction. i'm going to show you the same instruction i showed you in opening statement, and you will see it when you look in there. this language appears. but what this legal cause means is they have to prove that directly and in a natural and continuous consequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer and death so that you would say but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such lung cancer and death would not have been suffered. 3737 mr. bigger is right. you read the instruction, it can be a combination. it can work with something else. but even if it is working in combination, it has to be a but-for reason. it has to mean that if you took addiction out of the picture, we would have had a different consequence. now, the evidence here proves that addiction is not a but-for reason for mr. barbose's smoking behaviors. the but-for reason for his smoking behaviors was his choice, his decision to smoke for as long as he wanted to, because that is what he wanted to do, because he enjoyed it, because it helped him deal with stress. and ask yourself this question: if mr. barbose was not addicted, would he have continued to smoke? the answer to this, as we will talk about, is of course he would have. for this reason alone, addiction cannot be a legal cause of his death, because it is not a legal cause of his smoking. if his smoking behavior would be the same whether he was addicted or not, addiction cannot be a substantial cause. now, you heard about mr. barbose's -- when he was in high school and this initial time when he was smoking that his parents did not want him to smoke and he would face punishment if he got caught. so 3738 what he did was he stole the cigarettes when his parents were not minding the store. and his brother really could not tell you how many cigarettes he had in high school; never in the morning before school and only a couple times after school. it was not until mr. barbose had graduated from high school, had a full-time job, and was independent that he became a regular smoker. and he chose to remain a regular smoker for many years. now, plaintiff's counsel can say, oh, we are using this choice word in that. but let us look at what mr. barbose said. let us look at how he responded. how did he respond when people told him, "you should stop; you should quit; you should not smoke; they are coffin nails; they are cancer sticks?" he said, "leave me alone. mind your own business." he would ignore them; he would reject an offer to help; he would laugh; he would give an evil look or he might shut -- tell them to shut up. and then what did he do? he would continue smoking. there is no evidence that but for addiction, he would have given any different response than those. no evidence of that. 3739 so we know what mr. barbose chose to do. what choices did not he make? he did not say help me quit. he did not say it will not happen to me, it is not proven, there is an open debate. and what else did not he do for decades? he did not try to quit. if mr. barbose wanted to quit smoking and just could not do it, do you think he would have asked his loved ones to help him, to support him in that? of course he would have, but we know he did not do that. for decades, he never told his family members that he wanted to quit or was trying to quit. and mrs. barbose told you she does not think anybody could have said anything to mr. barbose that would have mattered. and his daughter dyanna said it best about her father's smoking. "dad just liked to smoke. he smoked whenever he felt like it, all day." he smoked for as long as he did not because he was addicted, but because he wanted to. and when he wanted to quit, either in the late 1980s or 1993 or 1996, he succeeded. dr. drobes admitted when he quit for that seven-month period, he was not addicted. he was 3740 asked, "was mr. barbose addicted to smoking the day before he went back to smoking, having been quit for seven months in '93, '94?" in his deposition, his answer was, "i do not believe he would meet formal criteria for addiction at that time." i pointed out, do you see that? and he agreed. remember, dr. drobes was like, well, i do not know if you are talking about dsm or what you mean by that addiction. and i said, that question did not ask about dsm-5 and that question did not ask about nida. that was his testimony under oath that mr. barbose did not meet the formal criteria for addiction at that time. and he also said this: "now, for that seven-month period, addiction did not cause mr. barbose to smoke, correct?" he said, "if he did not smoke, then nothing caused him to smoke." nothing was causing him to smoke in that time period. when he made the choice to start smoking all over again, addiction was not the cause. it could not have been a but for reason. because we know he was not addicted then. 3741 so if we take addiction out of that equation of the time period and ask yourself if mr. barbose was not addicted, would he smoke? that tells you the answer is yes. i showed you this in opening. these are the four factors of what legal cause requires, and you need to determine that in this case. but you saw what the real reasons were for mr. barbose's smoking. they were his choices: his choice to begin smoking, his choice to continue smoking despite all the health warnings, his choice to control his smoking, to stop smoking, to start smoking again and for all those years to ignore all the warnings. when mr. barbose made the choice to smoke, his choice was a legal cause. as a result, any disease or death brought about by his smoking was not legally caused by addiction. get back to the verdict form. question 1: based on the evidence in this case, you saw where the plaintiff cannot meet all three hurdles. if they can get over the iffy evidence on the smoking history, that is the first hurdle, but they cannot get over the next two. mr. barbose did not 3742 suffer from a loss of control or a significant impairment or distress. he was not addicted. and because addiction was not a but for cause of his smoking and death, they cannot meet that hurdle either. so because the plaintiff failed to clear these hurdles, the answer to question 1 must be no. now, if you answer yes to question 1, you next get to this question. i think that ends the case. we go home, there is no second phase, there is no other questions to answer. the answer is no, we are done. if you answer yes, you will get to the second question that asks: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? now, the medical part is a reason to answer this no that i covered on the first question, but i also want to talk about the testimony you heard about my client's brands of cigarettes. because what the plaintiff has to prove on this question, and they have the burden of proof, they have to prove what mr. barbose smoked and how long he smoked it. and with respect to my client, you did not hear much about it. 3743 to quickly recap the evidence you heard about my client's brands, you heard that he smoked camel unfiltered and lucky strike unfiltered. the first recollection we have is after he was already a regular smoker, mrs. barbose said he went back and forth between the two brands, but she was not sure when he started them and she was not sure how long he smoked either one. his granddaughter stacey recalls him smoking camel, but she recalled the camel pack on one occasion and the occasion she recalls it does not really match up with mrs. barbose's dates. no one else recalls camel at all. not dyanna, not debbie, and not sam, his brother who smoked with him all those years. debbie recalls lucky strike, but she does not know when or for how long. stacey, dyanna and sam never recall him smoking lucky strike. winston, sam said he saw john buy one pack of winston in his entire life, and that was when he was out of his regular brand. sam does not even know if he smoked the whole pack. mrs. barbose thought she recalled her husband smoking winston, but again, she did not know when and 3744 she did not know for how long. same for the daughters. and stacey never mentioned winston yesterday. you heard about kool or salem at some point. nobody ever said it was more than a pack or what it was. and finally, stacey said she recalled doral, but, again, she only recalled a pack. that is it. that is the testimony you heard in this case about mr. barbose smoking products manufactured by my client. they have to prove what he smoked and how long he smoked it. they have to prove it by the greater weight of the evidence. they have to prove that but for smoking my client's products, that he would not have got sick, would not have got cancer. i do not think they did that here. they did not have the evidence. they did not have the proof. now, if the brand history testimony was clear enough, they would have asked dr. villa or dr. stein whether reynolds' smoking was sufficient or philip morris's smoking was sufficient, but they did not ask that question. they played you their testimony today and they just said smoking caused lung cancer. 3745 but for this question on 2, it is cigarettes manufactured by each company. instead, they just asked about smoking. the question called for them to be specific, but they did not meet their burden of proof by proving by the greater weight of the evidence what he smoked, how long he smoked it. so for that reason, the answer on question 2 has to be no and it has to be no for both defendants. now, if you check no there, we are done. there is two chances to stop. if not, we will go to the third question. i'm going to address all of them. if you get to this third question, we have already decided that he died of an adenocarcinoma in his lung that was caused by smoking, that he was addicted and addiction was a legal cause of his death and that both the reynolds cigarettes and then separately the philip morris cigarettes caused it. if you get that far, you will have to allocate responsibility. that is what this question is, the allocation of fault for his death. now, a couple points to keep in mind here. the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. barbose's death. your 3746 instructions tell you that. the defendants cannot be assigned fault for action that were not a legal cause of his death. and these points are important. comparative fault is not some global comparison of conduct. it is not what did john barbose do over the course of his lifetime versus the global conduct of the tobacco industry. it is a comparison of the actions between mr. barbose and r.j. reynolds and philip morris that were the legal cause of his death. it is a very narrow inquiry. now, you may have seen things from the tobacco companies that they said in public or wrote internally that you do not like. but the issue in this case is whether they affected john barbose and caused his death. if you find something reynolds did was wrong and you do not like it, but it is not connected to john barbose, it cannot be considered for part of this analysis. now, one thing to think about when you get to this question, you heard during jury selection, you heard in opening statement, you heard again in closing argument today that they accept responsibility that mr. barbose's actions were a legal cause of his death. they told you that. but the only person you ever heard say that 3747 from the plaintiff's side was mr. bigger. he said it in jury selection, opening, and closing. no witness took the stand to say that mr. barbose was responsible. mrs. barbose did not. the daughters did not. the brother did not. granddaughter did not. keep your eye on the ball. mr. bigger telling you they accept some responsibility is a ball fake. it is a head fake to get you to change your direction. you are told this because they want you to try to split the responsibility. that is why they told you this. but you did not hear a witness say it. now, what do we know mr. barbose said or never said? well, he never said the tobacco companies should be responsible for his smoking decisions. he never said he wanted to sue, not to sam, not to phyllis, not to the daughters. was mr. barbose the type of man who would only take a slight wee bit of responsibility? no. did he take full ownership of his decisions? yes. did he take full responsibility for his decisions? yes, for his businesses, for his employees, for his house. smoking was no different. 3748 when he was diagnosed with cancer, he never placed the blame on anyone else. if mr. barbose had to assign responsibility, would he? nobody made mr. barbose's decisions for him. nobody could decide for him to choose to smoke, and we know from all the testimony that nobody could decide for him to choose not to smoke. those choices were mr. barbose's. he had the control, he had the responsibility. so if you get to this point on the verdict form, based on the fact that they say he is legally responsible and based on knowing his personality, i ask you to give him one hundred percent of the responsibility for his conduct. if you continue past these questions, you will get to the two questions on fraudulent concealment and conspiracy to fraudulently conceal. now, for both of these, there are essentially two parts to the question. first, you have to ask whether the material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking -- were they known, did people know about it, did mr. barbose know about it. and then the second part is this where it says legal cause. it is in both. and that part means did 3749 mr. barbose rely to his detriment, did he reasonably rely to his detriment, on something that reynolds or philip morris said or did not say or did or did not do. so the first part of that is, were the dangers of smoking a secret? the evidence showed you that the public knew about the risks of smoking, and more importantly, mr. barbose did. it was drummed into him over and over. mrs. barbose said she was a recorder. remember this? she said, "i was very bad, yeah. i had a recording going in my mind all the time. when he went outside, i would tell him. "and a recorder means you were saying it over and over and over?" and she said, "over and over." i said, "the kids today would say you put it on repeat, right?" she said, "yes. exactly." i said, "and you would pester him to quit smoking?" she said, "yes, i did." but the music of this recorder started even 3750 before mr. barbose was born. dr. cummings told you this. before reynolds existed, everybody knew -- or it was known that tobacco contained nicotine. knew it could be addictive. knew it could be hard to quit. knew it could be bad for you. and you heard about these slang terms going back to the early 20th century, "coffin nails," "cancer sticks." we talked about mr. barbose knew as a teenager he was not supposed to smoke. you saw florida health notes 1906. they described the cigarette as the worst form of tobacco addiction. you saw the coverage in reader's digest in the 1950s. you saw the coverage in luzerne area papers in the 1950s when the american cancer society was doing that study there. not surprisingly, the public health officials in that time recognized the awareness of the information. you saw this from surgeon general burney in 1957 and dr. heller who was the director of nci in 1957. they recognized that the information was not a secret. 1964, over 50 years ago, the surgeon general had that report linking smoking with lung cancer. it was published. it was front page news 3751 everywhere. in pennsylvania, here in florida, it was on the evening news. you remember, there were only three networks at the time. all three of them covered it. the warning labels, from january 1st, 1966, and every day thereafter that mr. barbose smoked, every pack of cigarettes had a warning label. mr. bigger had a big pack-year sign up there, lots of packs of cigarettes. from 1966 on, every pack that mr. barbose put in his hand, put a warning in his hand about the risks of what he was doing. and they showed you some government reports where they said, oh, people do not know about the warning labels. we do not need a government report for that. we have mrs. barbose's testimony. she told you she remembers reading in the paper or somewhere about the warning label and then talking to mr. barbose about it. so we know he knew about it. you heard that 13 million people quit smoking in the four years after this label went on. 13 million people had that warning in their hands and took matters into their own hands and quit. and mr. barbose could have too. the warnings continued. 1970, 1985. 3752 on top of this, we know the case-specific warnings. we know the recorder was always playing. we know mrs. barbose gave mr. barbose articles about the health risks of smoking. she said she gave him quite a few from different magazines and newspapers. "and the articles talked about the health risks of smoking, right? "some of them, yes. "and you gave those articles to john in an attempt to get him to quit smoking, right? "yes. "and you understood he was not happy that you were giving him those articles to read, right? "no, i do not think he was." these articles were hand selected by mrs. barbose and hand delivered to him. no one was cutting out or giving him tobacco company statements. they were giving him articles about the risks of smoking. did he ever say he did not believe anything she gave him? no. the risks of smoking were not a secret to him. dr. drobes admitted this. "so i'll ask you, do you agree that by the late '70s, mr. barbose understood not only that 3753 cigarettes were harmful, but that they were likely to be harmful to him personally? "well, i think i did agree to that." if mrs. barbose noticed him smoking more on a given night, she would say, you know you are smoking a lot tonight. he would shoot her a look and she knew to be quiet. she told him about this: "one of the things you would tell john was that he was putting another nail in his casket by smoking? "sometimes i would say another nail in your coffin, but that was not too often." i asked, "was it a running refrain that you would communicate? "i would say it now and then, yes. "and that was a nail in his casket, not somebody else's casket?" and she said, "exactly." you heard that he -- she would say, "oh, you are going outside to have a cancer stick." she would tell him he was having a nicotine fit. this one thing, she told him about a nicotine fit. he understood it was a reference -- she understood it was a reference to the addictive nature of nicotine. and she is understood -- she 3754 said, "first, i do not really know if he understood it." and i said, "did you testify that he did? "i would think he did. and what would he do? what did she say at the end? he would go right out the front door and have a cigarette. he had the information and then he walked out and had a cigarette. now, we know -- we talked about this. he told his daughter debbie when she was in high school, "do not start. you will be able" -- "you will not be able to stop." in other words, you might become addicted. he knew it. so if we look at the first prong of these questions, what is the material information about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature? what -- what really does that mean? what is the bottom line, big ticket takeaway on that? cigarettes can cause cancer and kill you. did he have that? i'd say so. "cancer sticks," "coffin nails," "nail in your casket." and cigarettes are addictive and can be hard to quit. did he have that? 3755 nicotine fit, you are addicted. you will start, you will not be able to stop, yes. there is no question that mr. barbose knew the material information. he had the material information. so on this first prong for these two questions, the plaintiff cannot prove that the material information about the health effects of smoking or the addictive nature of smoking were secrets from mr. barbose. they assuredly were not. and this case is only about mr. barbose. and this evidence i've been showing you deals with mr. barbose. so for this reason alone, the concealment claims no. 4 and 5, the answer has to be no. but there is another component to those, that -- that legal cause, that reliance component. and think of this: in this courtroom the plaintiff has to build a bridge. and what they have to do for the second part of these claims is they have to build a bridge between statements, conducts, acts or omissions from the defendants and some action that mr. barbose took. for purposes of the verdict form, it is called legal cause. it is defined in your instructions as 3756 reasonably relied to your detriment. the plaintiff has to prove that reynolds and pm caused mr. barbose, not some other smoker, to take some action to rely on something that was or was not said and get a disease that he otherwise would not have gotten. if they cannot build that bridge, they meet -- fail to meet their burden of proof. the evidence you heard in this case does not let them lay the first span of that bridge. i told you to keep this question in mind. mr. bigger reminded you you should keep this in mind. dr. cummings came in here and he tried to help build this bridge, but he failed. how? let me give you a couple of examples. remember he showed you that clip from the movie of the two lovers sharing a cigarette and he talked about how that -- that motivated so many people to go out and smoke because it made it look so glamourous? that was fiction. the fact in this case, mr. and mrs. barbose never shared a cigarette together. instead of looking into each other's eyes and sharing a cigarette, the only looks they exchanged were he looked at her and went out the door and smoked a 3757 cigarette. dr. cummings showed you lucy and desi. remember this, and the ad, and lucy's like, you want to keep your man happy, buy him cigarettes. that was fiction. the fact is mrs. barbose never bought mr. barbose cigarettes. i asked her, this was clear. "you never bought john cigarettes? "never. "in fact, you refused to?" and she said, "exactly. never." dr. cummings told you, oh, they would buy him cigarettes for christmas. remember the christmas boxes? there is no evidence of that in this case. not at all. but perhaps the biggest reach in trying to build this bridge was the story dr. cummings tried to tell you about there were all these advertisements from unfiltered to filtered to light and mr. barbose fit right in there because he switched and he is like he went from unfiltered to filtered in the '50s and then lights in the '80s. well, that is his fiction again. because it does not 3758 meet the facts in this case. if you believe mrs. barbose's worksheets, mr. barbose smoked unfiltered cigarettes from the '50s into the '80s. so her version of the facts on her worksheets is different than dr. cummings' version of the fiction. her version is he was not moved, he was not impacted by these filter ads in the '50s. he smoked unfiltered for the next 30 years. that is if you believe the worksheets. this split between fact and fiction with dr. cummings on this means one of two things: one, if he is right, it means mrs. barbose is wrong. or it means dr. cummings' story is just that, it is a story. he wanted to come in and tell you a story that he tells all the juries that this is what happened. you go from unfiltered to filtered to lights and it is the ads that cause people to do it, and, boy, his smoking history fits right in there and that is what i saw in this case. but the problem is, he is trying to fit a round peg into a square hole here, because the facts in this case just do not support it. now, dr. cummings admittedly had his opinions 3759 before he has any facts. so he may not have cared about that. but for purposes of this case, you should. one other thing, i believe ms. yates will talk more about lights and filters and compensation and that. but there was never any evidence in this case that mr. barbose smoked a light cigarette made by my client. so to the extent they want to talk about lights and that, i'm not going to address that. dr. cummings did spend a lot of time showing you statements that industry representatives made to the public. you will probably see more when i sit down today. and -- and look, some of those are bad. but dr. figlar, when he was shown them and asked about them, he told you, look, whether those statements were based in science or not, they were clung to for far too long, and he did not agree with them anymore. so in some other smoker's case, they may be relevant, but in mr. barbose's case, they are not. why? because of this: every fact witness we asked if they could identify anything from the companies or the organizations that mr. barbose relied on, every one of them said no. not for the frank 3760 statement, ctr, tirc, ti, any of these press releases or statements by the companies. now, you heard that there are direct evidence and sequential evidence and all this other evidence you can look at. but here's the thing, if you have the facts, you do not need to assume something differently. assumptions are not facts. someone who has the proof does not need to infer something. this is the proof. you heard it not just from all -- let us look specifically at what mrs. barbose said. and i know this is wordy, but this proves why there is no reliance. "your husband never told you he relied on a statement by a tobacco company and decided to begin smoking? "never mentioned anything like that. "never mentioned he heard or read or saw anything from reynolds? "no. "pm? "no. "b&w? "no. "hill & knowlton? 3761 "no. "tirc? "no. "ctr? "no." then this, "he never mentioned he ever saw, heard or read about the frank statement? "no. "he never mentioned seeing any tv statements from the tobacco company executives? "no." there is no evidence of him ever seeing that stuff and relying on it. they cannot build a bridge between the two of them. so for these reasons alone, the answer to questions no. 4 and 5 has to be no. now, i want to talk real quickly about ads. i told you in opening you would see documents or allegations about youth marketing and that and they were going to try to -- try to make the industry look bad. i think ms. yates said they are going to bash us. and they did and they showed you a lot of documents. but, you know, some of the documents showed in 1970s and '80s, that is when mr. barbose is in his 40s or 50s with multiple businesses and 3762 multiple kids. beyond that though, we asked the witnesses who knew mr. barbose if he ever discussed ads with them, and they all said no. so whatever these ads and whoever they are attracting, whatever they are doing, that might be somebody else's case, but there is no evidence in this case that it relates to mr. barbose. mr. cummings -- or dr. cummings told you that. "in your review of the materials, you are unable to identify any print, broadcast or billboard ads that he himself saw? "that is right. "and he never told mrs. barbose that he started smoking because of an ad? "that is true. "and sam and the other witnesses who testified said the same thing? "that is right." no witness who knew mr. barbose testified that he ever smoked a brand of cigarette because of an ad or a slogan. and, finally, your instructions include this one: the manufacture, sale and advertising of cigarettes is a lawful activity. therefore, i 3763 instruct you that a defendant cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes. the plaintiff knew that would be the instruction, and worse yet, knew the testimony about ads not having anything to do with mr. barbose, but they still showed you hours of ads. mr. bigger, in his closing, played a snippet from mrs. barbose's testimony about, oh, what do you think would have happened if your husband knew something that you learned during the trial. and you remember they asked a series of witnesses this, both debbie and dyanna, that if he had seen something that came up in this trial, would it have made a difference. well, you know that debbie and dyanna, in their testimony, they said they would not have engaged in continuing to sell and promote cigarettes if they knew some of this information. a couple comments about their testimony. first, you know, neither one of them ever smoked. they knew growing up that the parents did not want them to smoke. they heard their mother nag their father about quitting smoking all those years. and yet, they both worked in various capacities selling 3764 cigarettes. every cigarette package either one of them ever sold had a warning label. every one. yet they both told you that they had no idea smoking was bad for them until their father got lung cancer. does that make sense? when you look at instruction 19 on believability, ask if that is believable. or ask if that is something that just might be said because i think it helps their side in a lawsuit. because we know that those answers to those hypothetical questions contradict the reality in this case. mr. barbose died in 1996. a death the family associates with cigarette smoking. before he died, did he tell his daughters to stop marketing cigarettes? no. what did dyanna do? she continued doing it into the 2000s. did phyllis tell her not to? no. you heard what mrs. barbose -- i talked to her about their granddaughter who in 1999, a few years after mr. barbose died, she got into the business of selling cigarettes with h.t. hackney. you heard this lawsuit was originally filed in 2007. the granddaughter continued selling cigarettes after the 3765 lawsuit, after the allegations that you are going to have to decide today were put in pleadings for them. she continued to do that. why? mrs. barbose told you. "and after you filed your lawsuit, you did not" -- mr. bigger: your honor, we need to approach for a second. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. bigger: i mean, i'm in disbelief. we stipulated on the record with stacey that no one was going to go into her working history. the evidence did not come out in this trial. mr. geise: i asked mrs. barbose. that is what i asked mrs. barbose. mr. bigger: the granddaughter. mr. geise: i asked mrs. barbose about her interaction with her granddaughter. that is her testimony. and it came in without objection. mr. bigger: okay. the court: i overrule the objection. mr. bigger: i just -- the court: i mean, you are dipping into her 3766 time. is that what you want to do? mr. bigger: they have two hours. they have two hours. the court: total? mr. bigger: yeah. the court: and i do not want to shortchange -- mr. geise: no, i'm just going to save that, yeah. ms. yates: i'll be as quick as i can, your honor. the court: okay. no, that is fine. i just want to make sure. (end of bench conference.) mr. geise: everybody doing okay? i know we are getting close to the lunch time. i'm going to try to finish up and save time for everybody else. you guys have been very patient. so we know what mrs. barbose told us in this testimony. "after you filed your lawsuit, you did not tell your granddaughter to stop working and promoting cigarettes? "no. because it was she had a job. she had a very good job. i do not think cigarette -- cigarettes were the top thing in it. if somebody wants a cigarette, they are going to smoke it no 3767 matter who sells it. if it is in the store, they will buy it, if they are smokers, that is." the point here is cigarettes are a legal product. legal to sell, legal to advertise, legal to -- to make. you heard mr. barbose and his father sold cigarettes. you heard the daughters and granddaughter sold cigarettes or promoted them. and we heard a lot of things early in mr. bigger's opening statement about society. society allows cigarettes to be sold with the knowledge that they are harmful and kill people. and the barbose family believed everyone had the right to smoke if that is the choice they wanted to make. now, when they try to tell you that the additional information would have made a difference, you know that is not the case. the information mr. barbose had from the plaintiff over and over did not make a difference. it did not cause him to even make a quit attempt for decades. this demonstrates that putting the material information about the health risks of smoking into his hands, hand delivered by his wife, did not make a difference to mr. barbose. and she told you, he 3768 never thought he was misled. he never thought information was withheld. he never said if he had more information, he would not have started. he never said if you had given more information, he would have tried more frequently to quit. he never said that he felt reassured. never said he thought smoking was okay. he never said he was confused. and the one thing he did say after his diagnosis is he said, you remember, why did not i listen, why did not i quit? you heard that from a couple different witnesses. the two questions he asked, why did not i listen, why did not i quit, provide the answer to you on this verdict form on these two questions. they tell you that he had the material information, that he did not rely on anything the tobacco companies did or said to make his decision. they tell you he had it and it did not make a difference to him. so keep your eye on the ball. did concealment of information cause his death? no. no. what information could reynolds or philip morris have provided to him that would have been more material, more direct, more persuasive, more from the heart than the information he was 3769 given from his family? none. and this case is only about mr. barbose, not some other smoker. in this case, they had to prove, they had to build, they had to do the bridge. they did not. there is no proof of reliance. now, another thing on these questions, you heard mr. bigger say that -- you know, about them accepting responsibility. and they said mr. barbose is the legal cause of his death. if you check yes to these questions, you basically say no to mr. barbose's responsibility. you wipe it off on those questions before. so if you say yes on this, you eliminate any responsibility for mr. barbose. so because mr. barbose knew the material facts about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature, the answer to these questions must be no. and because there is no reliance or legal cause on anything reynolds or philip morris said or did, the answer has to be no. now, if you find everything that i've said today and throughout this trial unpersuasive and decide to return a verdict for mrs. barbose, you will have to decide the amount of damages. and, you know, i do not think we should get to this point, but 3770 i recognize that it is always a possibility. and it is hard. it is hard because we all feel compassion whenever somebody loses a loved one. it is natural. and we all wish mrs. barbose the best, but compassion and good wishes are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. mr. bigger told you in opening statements he was going to ask for an enormous amount of money, and -- and he did this morning. he asked for, i think, over 9.2 million. but you understand that your verdict cannot be based on sympathy. you knew that in jury selection and said you could set that aside. and i think when you do and you look at the facts in this case and compare it to your own common sense and good judgment, that the evidence does not suggest an award in the millions. it is not a question of whether the defendant is a big company or not. that is not part of the consideration. you just look at the damages and what there was evidence on. so if you get to this point and if you decide to make an award of damages, please do so based on the evidence and your common sense and your good judgment, not sympathy. 3771 finally, if you get all the way to the back, you will have to consider this question of punitive damages. and punitive damages are damages in addition to the damages that you have already fully compensated the plaintiff on. and they are damages that can only be awarded for conduct that is a legal cause of the harms suffered by the plaintiff. they are about more money, basically. and they are designed to punish and deter and punish for conduct that is tantamount to a reckless disregard for human life. now, these damages need to be -- or the entitlement to them need to be proven by a higher level of proof. that is clear and convincing. it has to be more compelling and persuasive. it has to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and at such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction. if you get to this part and decide to go on, we will have another phase with more evidence, more witnesses, but i do not think we should get there. why? well, consider one, what you heard from dr. cummings. reynolds participated with the tobacco working group for ten years. they spent 3772 millions trying to develop cigarettes that are less hazardous and reduce the risk and they addressed suggestions that came from the public health community like filters, like lights, like changing the ph. you also heard from dr. cummings about dr. rodgman. he was a good scientist. his research was excellent. and he disclosed what you saw at the american chemical society, but also to the surgeon general's report. you heard about this larson, haag & silvette book where it was a comprehensive account of all the literature at the time on smoking and health, summarized the articles, including those favorable and unfavorable, and it was relied on and recognized by the surgeon general. you heard that reynolds took out dozens of patents. they are all publicly available patents. you saw in the 1980s how reynolds tried to focus on the cigarette that would heat tobacco instead of burn it. that was the premier that dr. cummings talked about. and no matter what is said in this trial, during the entire time that mr. barbose was alive, the public health community, including dr. cummings, 3773 encouraged companies to make lower tar and nicotine cigarettes. you heard about publications. and dr. cummings can say what he wants about ctr, but he had to admit there were 6,000 peer-reviewed articles. over 600, i think that have been cited or dealt specifically with the issues he was here to talk about. and it had a substantial influence on public health. the grantees were repeatedly cited by the surgeon general report and you heard that ctr research funded 10 nobel laureates. these were not some schmuck scientists. these were pretty good guys. you heard some of the research that they funded. this article from 1963 that was in the american journal of psychiatry, this was exhibit aiw-2649. the tobacco industry research committee and the american cancer society co-supported this research that found in 1963 that nicotine is an active agent and has addictive quality and that heavy smokers are true addicts. this was published. with regard to people trying to quit smoking, you heard about zonnic, what reynolds does now. it is a nicotine replacement therapy that 3774 dr. cummings says is a good idea and he supports. he just wishes it was a little bit cheaper, but he thinks it is a good idea. you go through this. this is not a record of wanton conduct. it is a record of trying to lower risks of what is an inherently risky but lawful product. you have heard there is no safe cigarette. the risks are inherent in the product. and the companies have tried to lower those risks over time. sometimes they have had some success. sometimes they have not. but trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky product is not something that should be punished or deterred. you also heard about these organizations that are out there, the ti, ctr. they do not exist anymore. the documents, you heard they were secret. and you can think of -- in your common sense about other companies and the availability of their documents, but for the tobacco companies, these documents are now publicly available. 18 million documents available. so when you are released from your -- your 3775 service here, you can go home and you can get online and you can search for all the documents you want from dr. teague or dr. rodgman. if the company position on smoking and health and addiction throughout the years angers you, and i can see where it might, dr. figlar told you in that video that reynolds' position changed over 15 years ago when it admitted that cigarette smoking causes cancer and was addictive. in the past, industry representatives would challenge the findings of a new surgeon general's report. not anymore. you saw this link. reynolds has a link on their web page taking people to those reports. rely on them, go to them, look to them. and philip morris does the same thing. looking at all of this, there is no need to punish or deter for changes that took place over a decade ago. so if you get to this point and you have already fully compensated mrs. barbose, the evidence does not justify awarding more money. it is not clear and convincing. the plaintiff has not met that even higher level of proof. so if you get to this question on the verdict form, i suggest you should check no. i'm trying to rush through this so i save 3776 ms. yates some time. she is been kind enough to let me go first throughout this trial and eat up a good chunk of the time. i appreciate that. but i want to -- i want to conclude by saying a few things. in jury selection, each of you committed to holding the plaintiff to her burden of proof. and you committed that if the evidence warranted it, you would have the ability to enter a verdict in favor of our clients. at the end of this trial, the evidence compels a verdict in the defendant's favor on each question. mr. barbose was a responsible man. he was a good man. he was a good man who made his own decisions about what he wanted to do, not what others wanted him to do or told him to do in business, in life, in leisure. and one of those decisions he made was the decision to smoke. mr. barbose never described himself as a victim. do not reward the plaintiff in this case by making him a victim for his choices. now, this is the last chance i get to speak to you-all. as the plaintiff with the burden of proof, mr. bigger actually gets another chance this time. 3777 so i get a bottom of an inning, but he gets another at bat. i do not know what he is going to say after ms. yates sits down. he told you when you go back and deliberate to -- to sit around and to talk. and i agree. and because i will not get another chance to respond to him, i ask you to remember when you sit around and talk how we have responded throughout this trial to give you the other side of the story. and as you deliberate, i ask you to keep the full story in mind, but more importantly, i ask you to keep your eye on the ball and focus on the facts pertaining to john barbose. ladies and gentlemen, it is been a pleasure to present this case to you. you have been attentive. you have been timely. you have taken notes. you have done your service. i hope this is the last time i get to say this to you in open court, but thank you so much for your service. ms. yates: thank you, your honor. your honor? ladies and gentlemen, let me close with where i opened. "why did not i listen? why did not i quit?" those are the words of john barbose, words he said to his wife after he was diagnosed with cancer. those words tell you that mr. barbose had the information he needed, but he chose not to listen. this is what this case is about, mr. barbose and his decisions to start smoking and continue smoking even knowing the risks. your honor, counsel, ladies and gentlemen, mrs. barbose, good afternoon. you have been very patient and very attentive throughout this entire process, and we are almost done. all of the evidence is in, and the case is about to be turned over to you. and you will decide the case based on the evidence that occurred in this courtroom. and i stood before you in opening statement and previewed what i thought the evidence would show. and i told you i thought it would be like two ships passing in the night. now, mr. bigger said somebody had the 6 audacity to say that. well, that was me. i'm standing up. that was me. not somebody. i said the evidence will be like two ships passing in the night. why did i say that? because there was no intersection of the bashed tobacco and the evidence that applies to mr. barbose. relevant evidence does not mean connected to or relied upon. it may come into this courtroom, but it does not mean it is connected or relied upon. i believe that the evidence that came in this courtroom showed that none of those dots connected, nor did the ships intersect. and i think probably the biggest example of that was a statement made by mr. bigger in opening statements. "in this case, you will hear that john barbose was directly told by representatives of philip morris that marlboro lights were safer for him, he believed them, he smoked them." and you might recall, when i heard that in opening statement, i got up here and i said, somebody's going to change their testimony on that stand because there is no evidence based on what we know about this case that you are going to hear that. but you know what? nobody did change their 7 testimony. i was right. nobody said that. no evidence. nobody changed their testimony. you were not presented with a single piece of evidence that any representatives of philip morris ever said to mr. barbose that lights were safer, whether at a trade show or anywhere. that is one huge example of the dots not connecting. no evidence. a statement, a promise made by counsel, and no evidence to back it up. and ask yourselves, why did counsel -- why did mr. bigger say he would prove that? because he needs a connection to philip morris on something they said or did, and we do not have it. it might exist in another case, it does not in this one. let me focus on a second important example of what i think of the two ships passing, the disconnect in the evidence. dr. cummings, an anti-tobacco advocate. just as i predicted, he came in here to try and make you mad. i'm going to spend some time talking about some testimony from dr. cummings and why the facts of a particular case do not matter to him. the facts do not matter, the medicine does not matter. no matter what the evidence is in any 8 particular smoker's case, dr. cummings is going to come in here into any courtroom and bash tobacco and tell his story no matter what. and you know what? tobacco companies are pretty easy targets based on some of those internal documents you saw. i told you there were going to be some bad ones. i told you there were going to be some real doozies, and there were; 50, 60 -- some of them were 90 years ago. and nowhere was the complete disconnect between the story dr. cummings told and the issues in this case. nowhere clearer was the disconnect than his story of lights fraud. an entire story told by dr. cummings based on smokers who, what? compensate when they switch to light cigarettes. but what do we have in this case? we have evidence that pertains to mr. barbose and his smoking. and what did witness after witness say? mr. barbose did not compensate, did not smoke more, did not inhale more deeply when he switched to light cigarettes. the dots do not connect from dr. cummings' ship and the evidence in this case. and i'll come back to the compensation issue in a moment. so as i did in opening, i want you to ask 9 yourselves, as you deliberate and as you go through the evidence in this case, what does the evidence have to do with mr. barbose? and despite mr. bigger making comments about that, i stand by that question. and i ask you again, ask yourselves what the evidence has to do with mr. barbose. and in my closing, i'd like to focus on the same two themes i addressed in opening. number one, there is no evidence that anything philip morris or r.j. reynolds did or said that had any effect on mr. barbose and his decision to start smoking or continue smoking. and the second theme is the choices mr. barbose made. let me begin with number one. and there were three key issues here, i think. number one, the compensation; number two, the wallpaper -- we are going to talk wallpaper -- and number three, reliance. and the reason we have these two ships is, as i've said, the facts do not matter. dr. cummings will give the same presentation whether it is in this courtroom or any other courtroom in florida or wherever he testifies. and why? because he 10 has a significant bias against tobacco companies. he wants to sink tobacco. he wants them out of business, and he wants cigarettes illegal. that is not your decision to make. and this is not an opinion poll on tobacco. why is it important the evidence relates to mr. barbose? because that is how you will decide this case. it is not about hypothetical smokers or smokers in general or an opinion poll. this case is about one smoker and one smoker only, mr. barbose. so let us look to see if the dots connect, if those two ships intersect anywhere other than just the words of counsel. okay? that is not evidence. i want you to look at the evidence. so the clearest example, as i already mentioned, is this issue of compensation. the entire lights fraud story told by dr. cummings is because smokers compensate. but he did admit under cross-examination. "sir, not all smokers compensate?" that is what i said. and second, "and people in the public health community were of the opinion that if you got lower tar and nicotine, it would be better for you so long as you did not compensate, correct?" 11 answer, "that was the assumption, yeah." and remember i had to go back and forth. i had to fight with him a little bit until he finally admitted that smokers who do not change their smoking habits when they go to filters or lights, they get less nicotine and less tar, which is better for them. i had to fight, but i got it from him. what else? well, you know, if we go to the medical and scientific literature, we find dr. cummings' article and -- predictors of smoking cessation in a cohort of adult smokers followed for five years. what does dr. cummings say in that 1997 article? "from a treatment perspective, the findings from this study highlight the importance of helping smokers, especially heavier smokers, overcome their need for nicotine. the means to achieve this therapeutic goal could take many forms including, but not limited to, having smokers switch to cigarettes with less nicotine." but according to dr. cummings, he was bamboozled. he was fooled. but his admission remains the same. if a smoker does not compensate, they are getting less tar and less 12 nicotine. what he wants you to believe is all smokers compensate. not the facts in this case. during his direct examination, dr. cummings did not even discuss this article. i brought it up on cross-examination. has he retracted the article because he was bamboozled? has he said, dear editor, we were duped, we were fooled, we were wrong? has he written a letter? has he withdrawn the article? no. i go to the literature and i find dr. cummings wearing one hat, his hat when you look at this published paper of saying one of the ways is to go to light cigarettes. he wears another hat in this courtroom, his bias hat. so let us look a little more closely about what we heard, the evidence we heard about mr. barbose as it relates to this issue of compensation. and this is not an issue where there was no evidence. there was lots of evidence of compensation. no compensation. he did not change his smoking habits. he did not smoke more cigarettes. he did not inhale more deeply. he did not change the way he smoked, period. and anything beyond those facts would be a guess and will be speculation. actually, it 13 would actually be ignoring the undisputed evidence in this case that mr. barbose did not compensate. let us look at some specific testimony. well, you probably got sick and tired of it, but i got up and i asked those compensation questions of just about every witness. and mrs. barbose said he had a smoking routine, no increase in the number of cigarettes he smoked, and did not change how he inhaled. dyanna; no increase in the number of cigarettes he smoked, did not change how he inhaled. no change whatsoever in the way he smoked. deborah; no increase in the number of cigarettes he smoked, did not change how he inhaled. stacey; no difference in the amount of cigarettes he smoked, no change in the way he smoked. but it did not end with the fact witnesses, because i actually asked dr. drobes, "sir, you do not recall any testimony consistent with an interpretation that mr. barbose compensated his smoking behavior at any point in time, correct? "answer: so should i assume the jury has 14 some familiarity with the term 'compensation'? "question: they do. "answer: okay. yes, i saw no specific descriptions that he changed his smoking behavior in any appreciable way when he might have switched brands. "question: no. you agree there is no testimony mr. barbose smoked more cigarettes or changed his behavior after he switched to light cigarettes, correct? "answer: correct." and mr. bigger said, and i think dr. cummings threw it in there, smokers do not know when they are compensating. they do not know if they are smoking more, they do not know if they are inhaling more deeply. well, the problem in this case is that at one point mr. barbose smoked another full-flavored brand a short period of time, and he realized he was smoking more. what did he do? i'm smoking too much of this, and he got rid of them. so he did know what he was doing when he did it. as mrs. barbose said, he had a routine. that routine did not change when he changed to light cigarettes. that is the opposite of being unaware 15 of compensation. and just briefly, what did dr. cummings cite to you as part of his compensation story? remember that study from 1975? five smokers changed from regular to lights. and i had to tussle with him a little bit, but two smokers did not change, okay? they did not change, they did not get more smoke as they changed to lights. and so they got less smoke, less tar, less nicotine. if mr. barbose had been in that study, based on the evidence we heard in this case, mr. barbose would have been one of those two. all right, maybe three others did change. maybe that is evidence in another case that somebody sat there and inhaled much more deeply or went to two packs a day. not the evidence in this case. so dr. cummings is trying to fit his story, and it does not fit the facts. and he needs it because he needs to try to show that somehow there was some connection, and there is no connection. mr. barbose was not looking for additional information on smoking and health. he rejected the information that was being provided to him. let us think about it this way. if all the information that dr. cummings told you, my 16 goodness, the dangers of filters and lights was plastered on the front page of a newspaper, what would have happened, based on what we know in this case? well, mrs. barbose probably would have clipped it out of the newspaper, put it on mr. barbose's chair, and he would have put it to one side. same way he pushed away the other articles she gave him on the ill health effects of smoking. now, you have seen the verdict form. mr. geise went through it in quite a bit of detail, and the jury instructions were read to you this morning. but i do want to focus on a couple of quick areas. let me ask you the question, it is on the form, "what information was concealed or omitted from mr. barbose such that he would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that information?" the answer is "none." there is no information that would have changed mr. barbose's mind or his actions with regard to his smoking. mr. barbose would not have relied on any additional information about smoking and health that he could possibly have foreseen. and let us not forget, there was always health 17 warnings on the marlboro lights he smoked, including that smoking causes lung cancer. not oh, by the way, if you smoke a light, no, it does not. it was the same warning on the lights as the regular cigarettes. and another thing with lights. they came on the market in 1972. there were no television or radio ads. none. that was gone from 1971. and we never heard anyone say that mr. barbose thought marlboro lights were safe. we did not hear that. so one more point on the jury instructions. they also state, you have seen it, that reliance by john barbose on the conduct of rjr or pm may be inferred from the evidence and testimony. but i want to make something very clear. inferred does not mean guess or speculate. and given everything we know about john barbose from the evidence and testimony in this case, we know that, based on his rejection of the information he was being given, there is no evidence he would have relied on any additional information he was receiving from the tobacco companies. he rejected warnings, he rejected words, he rejected nagging, he rejected articles. 18 so where does the anti-tobacco evidence presented by dr. cummings -- and there was a lot of it -- where else does it not intersect in this case? the wallpaper, the advertising. advertising all over the place. wallpaper; could not escape it. but is there any evidence that cigarette advertising really had an effect on mr. barbose's decision to start smoking or continue smoking? the claim here is that mr. barbose's smoking pattern -- i think mr. bigger said "exactly followed what industry wanted. that is what the promotions were and that is exactly how john barbose responded." it is a few problems there. let us look. as i previewed for you in my opening statement, we do not know why mr. barbose had his first cigarette. we do not know what brand it was, who he had it with, or where he got it from. we do know, early, he smoked this philip morris brand, these loose cigarettes -- loosies -- three for a nickel from his father's store. and his friends would go in, and while his mom and his brother went looking, he would help himself. and the only reason he smoked those loose cigarettes is 19 because his father decided that was the packet, the brand that he was going to cut open and sell individually. there is no wallpaper. there is no connection to any wallpaper for those early cigarettes. what happens next? well, the story changes depending on who you listen to. and as i previewed for you in opening, what the brand history is and how long, it gets different depending on the witness. mr. barbose, there is no doubt, smoked a variety of different brands at different times and in a different order. we are not sure. and i'm here. mr. barbose smoked some philip morris brands. mr. geise is here. we are not running away from that. clearly, our cigarettes were smoked. when, how long, et cetera, that depends on the witness that testified from the stand. but some of them we heard he tried briefly, some became his regular brands. some witnesses disagree. but while all those differences exist, there is one consistency. there is no evidence that advertising played any role in mr. barbose's decision to start or switch or continue on any of 20 these brands. so there may be debate over what, how long, when, but there is nothing that ties it to the wallpaper. let me focus on marlboro and marlboro lights. those are the two philip morris brands. and let me start with marlboro. this is the verified worksheet. remember there was a verified worksheet -- an amended verified worksheet, under oath. this is the brand history, and this is from mrs. barbose. and we have marlboro from the years 1984 to 1993. and while lights -- marlboro lights are not listed in there specifically, mrs. barbose cleared up that she meant that to cover marlboro and marlboro lights during that timeframe. now, sam barbose has a different memory. he remembers seeing one pack of marlboro reds from their -- being purchased by john from their father's store early on, 1957. and he also recalls seeing his brother with a pack -- a pack of marlboro reds, at sam's high school graduation. deborah recalls her father smoking marlboro reds in pennsylvania in the latter years when she got older, but she does not know when he first 21 began smoking marlboro reds. now, dyanna thinks she recalls her father smoking marlboros when she was eight or nine, but she has no memory of them smoking them when she was a teenager. and stacey does not know when her grandfather first started smoking marlboro reds, but she does recall him smoking them after 1980. and, remember, stacey's memory on brands starts in 1986. so that would put it in the same timeframe as mrs. barbose. so even if you take all the differences -- and these are memories. they fade. people can remember different things. nobody came in here and said, aha, the 1970s, that is when he was smoking marlboros -- nobody until dr. cummings. and i sat and i went, did he just say the 1970s? and so i had to impeach dr. cummings and show him his prior testimony. and in his prior testimony, he admitted, well, the totality of the evidence is that he was smoking marlboro reds in the 1980s. the first time he came up was the 1970s was in this courtroom. and despite all the differences, nobody else gave that testimony. so it is confusing. we have the differences. 22 you decide. now, we heard several witnesses testify that there was a switch at some point to marlboro lights. and according to mrs. barbose it is in the same timeframe, but that includes marlboro and marlboro lights. so sometime between 1984 and 1993. sam barbose recalls his brother smoking from a different color marlboro pack after he moved to florida. so that would be after 1984. the earliest deborah recalls mr. barbose smoking marlboro lights was in florida in 1987. she does not remember when he smoked before then. and dyanna remembers her father smoking marlboro lights in pennsylvania, but does not testify as to which year. and then stacey recalls mr. barbose smoking marlboro lights in 1987 or 1988. and on this, dr. cummings actually seems to agree that it seems to be in the 1980s that mr. barbose was smoking marlboro lights. when did marlboro lights first become available? you heard it from dr. cummings, 1972. so we have mr. barbose, at least 12 years -- at least 12 years behind the wallpaper. 23 mr. barbose did not follow the wallpaper. he switched when he wanted to, when he felt like it. and there is no evidence he switched because of anything the tobacco company did or said, neither rjr nor philip morris. nothing. so that is lights. let us look at the timeline that i think mr. bigger said he -- mr. barbose responded to it, responded to the promotions. so just like there was a lag time -- significant lag time for lights, there was a lag time for filters. according to -- sorry -- mrs. barbose, mr. barbose did not smoke filters until approximately 1984, that those first two brands were unfiltered. that is her recollection. well, if mr. barbose did not switch to filtered cigarettes until 1984, you might be asking yourselves, what happened with filtered cigarettes in 1984? how long have they been on the market? filtered cigarettes first became available in the 1950s. so mr. barbose was not following -- well, he was, but decades later. decades. once again, dr. cummings, with his wallpaper story, tried to fit a square peg in a round hole. that is the same wallpaper story 24 dr. cummings -- he said it, that this is what he says. he tells it. and regardless of whether the smoker did not switch to filters or switched to lights and when they first did it, it is all the wallpaper story. and just as there is evidence that millions of americans did not follow the wallpaper, they chose not to smoke, there is no evidence mr. barbose, as a smoker, followed the wallpaper. the evidence is to the contrary. he did not. one other fact on the cigarette types that mr. barbose smoked. plaintiff claims he went from unfiltered to filtered to lights. and that is where the plaintiffs's timeline or story stopped. why? well, because if you go back and look at that chart, 1993 to 1996, mr. barbose went back to smoking a regular full-flavored brand. that is a glitch in their story. so, where does that leave us? well, it leaves us that the time lag for filters, the time lag for lights, and then the switch back to a full-flavored brand does not match the wallpaper. and although the evidence is somewhat conflicting on mr. barbose's quit attempts, we do know that around 1993 or 1994, he quit for about three to 25 six or seven months. so if mr. barbose is following the wallpaper or moving to a healthier cigarette, there is no fit. after he quit for three to seven months, he went back to smoking a regular, full-flavored brand. but what we do know is, before he was diagnosed, whether it be one week, three weeks, four weeks, a few weeks, mr. barbose quit cold turkey. the wallpaper dots do not connect. let me quickly move to the third issue. mr. geise covered quite a bit of this. he showed you a chart of the testimony. and not a single witness said that john barbose relied on any statement by any tobacco company or organization to start or to continue smoking. no advertising reliance, nothing. nobody testified that he thought it was okay to smoke cigarettes. nobody testified that he said cigarettes were safe and that he did not understand the warnings. no evidence. so on the issues of anything philip morris or r.j. reynolds did, no compensation; no evidence. no following the wallpaper; no evidence. no reliance; no evidence. now, let us put that into perspective a little 26 bit by looking at it in the context of the instructions that the court read to you and that you will see. and plaintiffs have to prove to you that mr. barbose relied to his detriment. in other words, but for some disclosure of information, mr. barbose would not have developed cancer. that just is not the case. it may fit the facts of another case where dr. cummings testifies, but not this one. and to answer that question with the evidence, let us quickly look at what we know. we know mr. barbose never expressed any desire to quit or made any attempt to quit until the mid to late 1980s after he moved to florida, despite all the public information about the health risks of smoking, all the warnings he received about the health risks of smoking, all the years mrs. barbose talked to him about quitting, all the articles of smoking and health she tried to show him, and the millions of people quitting in this country starting in 1964 with the release of the surgeon general report. mr. barbose chose to continue smoking. and he smoked light cigarettes even though the pack of cigarettes had the same surgeon 27 general's warning as the full-flavored pack's warning. you have seen them all. you have seen 1966, 1970, 1985. and if he is only smoking in the 1980s, he is getting a warning, whether lights or regular, smoking causes lung cancer. plaintiff presented no evidence that mr. barbose would have quit smoking had he not switched to a filtered cigarette. plaintiff presented no evidence that mr. barbose would have quit smoking had he not switched to light cigarettes. mr. barbose chose to continue smoking. and no additional information would have changed that, because we know, unfortunately, mr. barbose chose not to listen. we know he was stubborn on his smoking. he did not go to doctors. he did not want to hear them nag him. mrs. barbose did not know he had that prescription. no smoking. she found it in the drawer after he passed away. the clipping of the newspaper articles, the fingernail one, no reliance, no connection, and certainly no reliance to his detriment. let me change subjects briefly and talk about the medical side of this case. and plaintiffs 28 have the burden of proof, as mr. geise says, to prove that mr. barbose's cancer was caused by his smoking. and something interesting happened in this courtroom. plaintiff's medical expert, dr. villa, he was honest. he said, pathologists, well, we can differ. we can disagree. and we can specifically disagree in this case on whether mr. barbose had an adenocarcinoma. we are not sure. and we talked about some features. you remember the one i could not pronounce, the -- i want to say amici or something, and he -- acini or something cini. he corrected me. and the mucin stain, he said they are questionable, they are iffy; right? and he said we are not sure. well, why is that important? well, because dr. cummings, not a medical doctor, came into this courtroom and said, adenocarcinoma is the filter cancer. and once again, he is trying to connect those dots to philip morris and rjr, but he does not care what the evidence is in a particular case. he is going to sit in that witness chair and tell you his story. that is what is coming out. and another thing on the medical side, 29 dr. cummings said, you know, the additions of these filters made it easier to draw the smoke deeper into the lungs where you see it more in the peripheral part of the lung where you see most of the adenocarcinomas these day. if mr. barbose had an adenocarcinoma, where was that big tumor? smack dab in the center in the bronchus; right? dr. stein showed you a video, right in the central part. i think dr. villa was up at the screen and he was showing. and it was right in the center. it was not peripheral. it does not matter to dr. cummings. he is just going to come in here and say what he has to say. no connection to the facts. so while we are on the medical, let us briefly talk about some of the admissions dr. villa. and we have been, i think, accused of challenging the plaintiffs on the medicine. all we are saying is meet your burden of proof. you have to prove this. so i asked dr. villa certain questions. let us quickly take a look. no treating doctor identified in the medical records what caused mr. barbose's cancer. that is a fact. the lung is 30 the most common site of metastatic disease. that is a fact. two cancer nodules in the lungs raises suspicions for metastases from elsewhere. dr. villa said it. and this was not a small cell lung cancer, and that is the one that has the highest correlation with smoking. and dr. villa also testified, you know, we do not have an autopsy in this case, and that is important for determining definitely the primary site of the cancer. and dr. villa testified he thinks it should be a requirement of an autopsy for bringing a medical/legal case. now, mr. bigger may try and interpret those words, "medical/legal," but he was not asked what he meant by that. there is no evidence what dr. villa would have said if he was asked, well, what do you mean by a medical/legal case? we are here, it is legal, we are talking about medical issues. he was not asked to explain that. one other issue. before i shift my focus to my second thing of mr. barbose and the choices he made, i'd like to make a final comment on dr. cummings' version of the lights and the filter issues. dr. cummings had a gotcha moment here. we 31 made the holes in the filters invisible. we are hiding them from the smokers. you know what he would have said if we would made them visible? well, we put them there so that smokers would know they could go find them and cover them so they could get more tar and nicotine so they could compensate. so we are criticized for people having to not see them. we would have definitely been criticized if you had been able to see them, because then we are giving you a tool to hide them; right, to block them. you all know dr. cummings' agenda by now. it is to sink tobacco. it is to make cigarettes illegal. and he is going to bash tobacco no matter what the facts are. second thing, choices mr. barbose made. why did not i listen? why did not i quit? and what he meant by that, according to mrs. barbose, is why did not he listen to her for all those years? she begged him, she nagged him. and others told him to quit. the friend elise, the employee marge, why did not i listen? he had the information. he chose not to listen. he was stubborn about his smoking. he did not want 32 to go to doctors. he knew that cigarette smoking had health risks, but according to mrs. barbose, he thought this was going to happen to someone else. he did not think it would happen to him, despite all his awareness. i'm not criticizing mr. barbose. he made those choices. by all accounts, he was a loving, intelligent, capable man, but he was fully entitled to make those decisions about his smoking. he chose to continue to smoke after his father quit for health reasons. he chose to quit after the warning labels were put on the first packets of cigarettes in 1966. i can go on through the decades. i can go all the way up to april 1996 before he was diagnosed. he finally quit. and with those choices come responsibility, responsibility for the risks associated with them. and after he was diagnosed, mr. barbose never said, bring a lawsuit against tobacco, i was misled by tobacco. he never said he was confused. what he did say was, why did not i listen? why did not i quit? and when it comes to discussing the choices of mr. barbose, some of the most important 33 testimony came from dr. villa. we know that there was no quit attempts by mr. barbose until after he moved to florida, mid to late 1980s. we never heard any specifics until the mid to late 1980s. and we know a little bit about that with the gum, maybe toothpicks, candy, maybe one to two weeks. and then we know a little bit more about a quit attempt in the early '90s, three to six months, seven months, 1993 to 1994. you have heard all that. and he managed to quit for those months. and nobody gave us a reason why he started smoking again. nicotine was long gone from his system. if he had been addicted, it was not because of an addiction that he picked up. he chose to pick it up again. so let us put the importance of quitting in perspective. what did dr. villa say about quitting? well, if a person stopped smoking, their risk of developing lung cancer declines over time. a smoker's risk of developing lung cancer begins to decrease five years after the smoker quits. if a smoker quits for 15 years, a smoker's risk of lung cancer is cut in half. by the time a smoker has reached 25 to 30 years of cessation, their risk of 34 developing smoking-related cancer has decreased close to that of a non-smoker. so let us look at that in terms of what we know about mr. barbose, again, from dr. villa. if mr. barbose had quit around mid 1960s, his risk would have approached that of a never smoker. if mr. barbose had quit around 1979 or 1980, his increased risk of lung cancer would have been reduced by half. even if mr. barbose had quit into the early to mid 1980s, his risk would have still been reduced. and if we tie those facts to the timeframes of what is going on, we have the surgeon general report in 1964, we have his father quitting, we have the labels going on every pack, 1966, '70, '85. and, you know, mr. bigger actually showed you some wallpaper. it looks like marlboro wallpaper. now, that is the number of packs of cigarettes at one pack a day, 365, right? that is what he said. you want to know something? every pack of cigarettes after 1966 -- well, even before -- had 20 cigarettes in it. so every time mr. barbose opened one of these packs of cigarettes to get out one of those 20 cigarettes, that was 7,300 times a 35 year mr. barbose had the warnings and chose to go right past them, chose to ignore them. i'm not going to go back through the various quit attempts, mr. geise covered that. and i want to quickly just finish up with a couple of points about the jury instructions. and mr. geise covered a lot of ground about addiction. i'm not going to repeat that, but i do want to focus on a couple of issues. dr. drobes acknowledged the dsm-5 is the only tool he used for his work in this case that was developed for diagnostic purposes. and even though that dsm-5 requires that 12-month period, did not matter to dr. drobes. ignored it. and then we had a difference that mr. geise highlighted about, you know, dr. cummings thinks a smoker's addicted if they have got one cigarette a day. dr. drobes is slightly different. and so they are not on the same page. and speaking of addiction, we have yet another example where dr. cummings seems to pick and choose which facts he wants to rely on. do you remember the criteria that dr. cummings uses to determine addiction as being time to first cigarette in the morning? it is kind 36 of one of the things he looks at. and when dr. cummings looked at his notes to determine the time to first cigarette, he did not include a note from ms. barbose. and i had to point that out to him in cross-examination. so ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, why would not dr. cummings include the testimony on the first cigarette from the lady who woke up with him in the same bed every morning for all those years? he selectively chose other witnesses who did not even live with him. why? because he is going to pick and choose and try to make it fit, but it does not fit. the dots do not connect. mr. bigger asked you for over $9 million. i agree with mr. geise that i do not think you should get there. but if you did, you were asked to award $9.256 million. and i do not pretend that i'm standing here and asking you to do something easy, because i'm asking you to award no money to a nice lady, a nice lady who tried to get her husband to quit. but being nice and feeling sympathy is not enough in a court of law, and plaintiff has to prove by a preponderance of the evidence the claims that have 37 been made. and i do not think they met that burden. but i want to put something in perspective. if you have a family that makes about $50,000 a year, 9.256 million would take 185 years to get to that total. if you get to damages, use your common sense. apportionment of fault. mr. geise covered this. but if you get to the intentional torts and you had to assign percentages, all gone if you get to the intentional tort. so those numbers are wiped out. and recall that mr. bigger has stood here and said that mr. barbose accepts some responsibility. you will wipe that out if you find intentional tort. finally, mr. geise talked about the entitlement to punitive damages. that is a different standard. you have the instruction. it is clear and convincing evidence. and the evidence you are to consider in making that decision is not the amount of the number. that is -- we will come back and there will be a second phase of witnesses and arguments and testimony. that is what you do next if you find 38 that. but when you look at the instructions, clear and convincing evidence is defined. and it is a much higher burden of proof than greater weight or preponderance of the evidence. you will see the evidence is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion. and let me tell you one more thing. if we get there, punitive damages are warranted based only on conduct that relates specifically to mr. barbose. this case is about john barbose, not all smokers, and not the general public. john barbose always had the information available to him and, unfortunately, he chose to ignore it. mr. barbose always had the ability to quit smoking when he was motivated to do it. we saw that through the evidence. he simply did not quit until it was too late. you have heard no evidence during this trial that anything the defendants did or did not do, said or did not say, caused mr. barbose to begin smoking or to continue smoking. john barbose made his own lifestyle choices. no one else made them for him. he was bright, ambitious. he was an entrepreneur. he was strong-willed. 39 given the evidence that you have heard, ladies and gentlemen, plaintiff has simply not met their burden to prove to you their case and certainly not that punitive damages are warranted. to conclude, this is the last time you will hear from me. plaintiff goes last because they have the burden of proof. if the evidence is even or in our favor, they did not meet their burden. and while i do not know exactly what mr. bigger will say, he may make some shots about things i say, ships passing in the night, what does this evidence have to do with mr. barbose -- i stand by those questions. i anticipate he will try to make you angry again, try to show you by going after tobacco again, but i want you to ask yourselves the following as he speaks, because he will have no response to the following evidence. the evidence shows that mr. barbose did not compensate when he switched to light cigarettes. second, mr. barbose started smoking light cigarettes in the mid to late 1980s after the move to florida. the wallpaper, the advertising for lights began in 1972. there is no following. third, he will have no response to 40 mr. barbose's own words. "why did not i listen? why did not i quit?" there will be no response, because there is nothing that has contradicted or questioned this evidence. i ask you again, i stand by this question, what does the evidence have to do with mr. barbose? and finally, i want you to ask yourselves -- mr. bigger gets the last word, but what would mr. geise and ms. yates say in response? because you know by now we would have something to say in response. ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your patience, thank you for your attention throughout this important process. our system would not work without jurors like you. thank you.