6 mr. walker: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i want to start where mr. clark did, and just echo what he said, thanking you all for your service in this case. he was really right when he said that everybody here, the staff, the lawyers for both sides, really all of our clients really and truly appreciate the sacrifice that you have all made to be here. you have been very conscientious. we all kind of watched to see when you are taking notes and, you know, who is really listening and paying attention, and you really all have been. and we just really all appreciate that and i need that to be the first thing that i say to you on behalf of everyone here, on behalf of my client, we really, really appreciate your service. um, as to the other folks who spoke that i brought some remarks along with me that i want to discuss with you, but before i say anything else, i want to talk to you about something because i was sitting there listening to mr. berg and mr. clark and it occurred to me that there is something that we have all seen throughout all of the evidence. it maybe has not really been yet and maybe it is time to say this. the fact is, the reality is that when it comes to cigarette smoking, there are people who enjoy smoking cigarettes. there are people who want to smoke cigarettes, even though they know that smoking cigarettes is a dangerous activity. that is true today in 2014, that there are millions of people who know the risks and who nevertheless like to smoke and want to smoke. and the evidence showed you in this case that that was true in the 1950s, in the 1960s, in the 1970s and throughout mr. ramsay's lifetime. the fact of the matter is, you do not have to be addicted to want to smoke cigarettes. you do not have to be fooled, you do not have to be ignorant of the risk, you do not have to be any of those things because there are people in this world now and then who like smoking cigarettes and are comfortable with the risks that you take when you smoke cigarettes. just like there are people who know the risks of riding a motorcycle, and who are comfortable of taking those risks because they like riding motorcycles. there are people who are comfortable with the risk of not eating right who know those risks, but take them because they like to eat a certain way. the evidence is going to be in this case that when it came to smoking, mr. ramsay was one of millions of americans who, frankly, enjoyed smoking. it relaxed him. it helped him deal with the stress of his work. and he knew the risks and did not smoke because of any of the things that have been asserted in this case. now, um, one of the things i need to address up front, too, is the fact that there was a suggestion that the defendants, that we did not call any witnesses. that all you heard from us was a short clip of mrs. ramsay that we played during our case, and that is not quite right. and the reason i say that is not quite right is because the reason we did not need to call witnesses in our case is because they called our witnesses for us. they spent hours and hours and hours with witnesses that they were paying by the hour to come here and talk to you about -- about a number of different subjects. and we, just like we said we might do in jury selection, we got in a lot of the facts and the evidence that were relevant to our point of view in this case through their witnesses. and i want to give you some examples. yeah, i could have called a witness who would come here and tell you that mr. ramsay knew the risks of cigarette smoking the entire time that he smoked, but i did not need to do that because mrs. bishop took the stand and told you that under oath. she told you that mr. ramsay knew the risks of cigarette smoking the entire time that he smoked. you heard evidence that the warning labels were on the packages for almost the entire time that he smoked, and that mrs. ramsay, their son and their daughter were constantly warning mr. ramsay about the health risks of cigarette smoking. there was a suggestion about how mr. ramsay started smoking when there were no warning labels. yeah, that is true, but the warning labels were never the only source of information about the health risks of cigarette smoking. you heard evidence in this case about all the other ways that smokers and nonsmokers and everyone else in america learned about the health risks of cigarette smoking. and i want to show you a slide with just one example of that. remember you heard this in the case. this was the surgeon general in 1957. that is right around the time that mrs. bishop meets mr. ramsay. and dr. -- and surgeon general burney was saying in 1957 that the position of the surgeon general is that he had informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv. and we showed you the press and the tv. could i have called in another witness to repeat what mrs. bishop said to repeat all this evidence? sure. we could have been here another two or three days listening to that. but i did not need to because we got that in through their witnesses. i could have called a witness here to tell you that mr. ramsay had the ability to quit smoking. we could have -- we could have put on hours of testimony about that. but i did not need to do that because mrs. bishop told you that mr. ramsay did quit smoking in the late 1980s and the early 1990s. the fact that mr. bishop [sic] quit in the late 1980s and 1990s the very first time he made an asserted effort to quit tells you that he could have accomplished the same thing earlier in his smoking career had he been interested in doing that. mr. clark said that we did not call a witness to address all the design features, and he -- he -- he went up to the witness stand, talking about dr. villa. well, this is what -- mr. clark came up here (indicating), and he said -- remember he said -- dr. villa stood up here and he talked to you about lung cancer and all of these different things. he did all of those things, that is true. then when mr. clark sat down, mr. -- dr. villa sat down and he started answering questions of mr. isasi. and do you know what he said when he was answering those questions? he said that each and every one of those design features that you spent all day hearing about from dr. henningfield did not make a pill of difference to mr. ramsay. whether mr. ramsay was smoking filtered cigarettes or unfiltered cigarettes, cigarettes with overwrap, cigarettes without overwrap, any of those design features on that chart did not mean anything to dr. villa about the cause of mr. ramsay's cancer. i could have called a witness here to tell you that the only thing that mattered to mr. ramsay is when he decided to quit smoking. did not need to do that because dr. villa, right from this witness stand where i was sitting, told you that had mr. ramsay quit smoking in 1964, when the united states surgeon general's report came out, he would have eliminated 97 to 98 percent of his risk of getting lung cancer from smoking. dr. villa told you that if mr. ramsay had quit smoking even in 1974 after the collapsed lung, if he had stayed quit and not gone back to smoking cigarettes, he would have eliminated over half of his risk of getting lung cancer. that means that the choices that mattered to mr. ramsay were the ones that mr. ramsay made, and he, more likely than not, would not have gotten cancer and died from cigarette smoking had he made a different choice in 1964; and 1966, when the labels went on; in 1970, when the labels changed; or in 1974, when he was off cigarettes for three and a half weeks. i did not need to call a witness to tell you those things because in this case the facts are our witnesses. the facts do not need $925 an hour to tell you what the truth is about this case. i do not have to pay $5,600 a day to point out to you the facts that prove our point in this case. the facts are our witnesses and those are the ones i'll be talking about today that establish that there should be a defense verdict. but before i leave this question about the witnesses, i just told you that the facts are unbiased, they are impartial, they are not paid. what about the plaintiffs' witnesses? they told you in opening statement they were going to bring world-renowned experts. and i said what you are really going to see are some of the most biased experts you have ever seen. because unlike the process of selecting jurors, where we want people who are impartial, who are unbiased, who can be objective, that is not always how expert witnesses are selected. can i have the next slide, please? take a look at three of the witnesses that the plaintiffs brought you today, that they talked about being world renowned. there is dr. cummings on the left. he is the guy that is been paid a million dollars testifying in almost 80 cases like this. and he is the guy who told you from the witness stand that he is been described as a mercenary, a soldier for hire in these cases. dr. hurt on the right. the one with the grin there. he is the one that is been paid $5,600 a day. he is the guy who says not all smokers are addicted, but yeah, every time i testify, i always say they are addicted. that is what $5,600 a day buys you. dr. henningfield in the middle. he is the one that said he is on a crusade. he is been on a crusade against the tobacco companies. and he is the one who is been paid $925 an hour for his testimony. if you do the math, that comes out to about $15 a minute. there are people in this world who would love to have a job that pays $15 an hour. every minute that he was up there not giving a clean answer to mr. isasi to a "yes" or "no" question, he was getting paid $15 per minute. and remember -- if you remember dr. hurt and dr. cummings, the ones on the outside. those are the ones that all attended the same conference, where they get together with plaintiffs' lawyers and they try to figure out how to get a just verdict. a verdict with a big number. and those are the ones that receive this trial in a box. if you wondered why you are being shown ads and clips and things that maybe did not really seem that relevant to mr. ramsay, you were going to see them anyway. remember dr. cummings? dr. cummings in the evidence that mr. ramsay, the business executive at texaco was watching the beverly hillbillies and the flintstones. oh, yeah. yeah, yeah. i'm -- i'm going to put myself out there on a limb like that. dr. cummings, dr. henningfield, dr. hurt are going to show the same presentation to every jury in this engle class of smokers. maybe in some other cases some of that evidence will apply. the evidence is going to be in this case it did not apply to mr. ramsay. and the last thing i want to say about this is remember dr. hurt? dr. hurt's the one who gave such a hard time to mr. fiorta over there when he was trying to ask him the questions, and the funny thing is right at the beginning of that presentation mr. fiorta said, dr. hurt, i've got this powerpoint where you were given advice about how you are supposed to act in court. and your powerpoint says whatever you do, do not give anything up. avoid "yes" or "no" answers. get in your messages as much as you can. and doggone it, that is what he did. he avoided giving anything up. he avoided any kind of a "yes" or "no" answer. he was going to say what he wanted to say, whether it was responsive to the question or not. you saw the same thing from dr. cummings. getting a "yes" or "no" answer from dr. cummings was like pulling teeth. and you are going to be allowed to consider -- can i have the next slide? one of the instructions that you are going to get is going to tell you all of the different ways you can consider the credibility, the believability of these witnesses. you can consider the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness. any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case. that would include things like being paid a million bucks or 900 bucks an hour. the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness. and the bottom line with these paid experts is that you can accept the opinion of those experts, you can reject it, or you can give it the weight that you think it deserves. and i'm going to talk to you about the reasons why you should not give much weight to the testimony of their paid experts. i want to show you one of the things that can happen when there is a major credibility issue. i asked all of you in jury selection and in openings, i said, i do not have the burden of proof; i'm always going to go second. that means i've got to sit over there and wait while i'm hearing all of this testimony going on and i'm thinking, what about this? what about that? you did not show this other part. and i asked each and every one of you if you can wait until it was my turn to stand up and ask questions so you could get the rest of the story. and you all said you could do that. and i could tell that you were actually doing that. and i want to show you just a couple of examples why that is so important, especially when you have paid witnesses like this. this is just one example. on the right you see this teague document from 1972. and they wanted to show you a passage that said nicotine is a sine qua non of tobacco products. like that was this huge secret that the tobacco companies had buried in a vault somewhere. only on cross-examination were we able to come back and say, no, in reader's digest in 1950 when it was the most popular magazine in america, that same concept was being published 22 years earlier. nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco. it is what makes tobacco tobacco, and not just another weed. let us look at one more. here's another example. on the right is the reynolds document from 1959 that they said, my god, the tobacco companies know something no one else does. they know that there are eight polycyclic hydrocarbons isolated from smoke. that is the document from dr. rodgman who was actually publishing on ways to know what was in cigarette smoke. we had to come back on cross-examination and say, wait a minute. november 1959? that is the same month, the same information was being printed publicly in the most popular magazine in america. they have identified eight carcinogenic polycyclics in tobacco smoke and are on the trail of others. that is why it is always been important in this case to wait and withhold judgment to see both sides of the story. now, we are closer to the end of this case than we have ever been. and i see some smiles maybe because of that. i know you are all heartbroken about that. it is okay. but the reason we are close to the end is because soon you are going to have a chance to fill out this verdict form (indicating). the verdict form that you get will look a lot like this, but it will not have this blue highlighting. the blue highlighting is every place on this verdict form where there is a reference to robert ramsay. and i did that to show you what i told you at the beginning of this case. this case is not about every smoker in the world. they must have said about 20 times 20 million smokers were affected by smoking. it is not about 20 million smokers; it is about one smoker, robert ramsay, and whether or not their allegations mattered to him. every question on the front page, second page, throughout, you will see when you get it, it is all about one smoker and one smoker only, robert ramsay. what i'm going to try to do, then, is i have my copy, but i have some that i put on the powerpoint. i'm going to try to take you through the verdict form and suggest to you what we think you saw in the evidence. you will make your own decision, but i think you are going to see that the right result in this case is -- is a defense verdict. but, um, when we get to those questions, think about these things because i -- i'm not going to keep saying this. but i will -- i will say this because i said it in opening. what did we learn about mr. ramsay? we learned that mr. ramsay was a willing smoker who smoked because he liked what smoking did for him. it relaxed him. it helped him cope with the stress of his job. the evidence was mr. ramsay smoked and continued smoking because he was not interested in quitting. the first time he really was interested in cutting down on his smoking, he cut down to what dr. hurt told you was a nonaddictive level of smoking in the late 1980s. the first time he was really interested in quitting smoking altogether for his own reasons, not because mrs. bishop wanted him to, for his own reasons, mr. ramsay stopped smoking. that is a fact. the evidence that nicotine did not control mr. ramsay, and we are going to talk more about that, because there is evidence in this case about what mr. ramsay did when he did not even have any nicotine in his system. that is going to tell us everything we need to know about whether nicotine turned mr. ramsay into a robot. and we are going to talk about the evidence that mr. ramsay was not misled. so let us pull up the very first question from the verdict form. was robert ramsay addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer? couple of different issues bundled up in that. you can think about that in at least three parts. one part would be, is the nicotine in cigarettes addictive at all? and you actually heard a lot of evidence about that. can i have the next slide? that the plaintiffs put on evidence through dr. hurt, dr. henningfield and a bunch of documents trying to show you that the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. but you know what? i told you that in jury selection. i told you in opening statements that i was not going to come here and tell you that the nicotine in cigarettes is not addictive. no dispute about that. some people who smoke cigarettes get addicted, and some people who are addicted to cigarette smoking have a hard time quitting. that is not the issue on the verdict form. the issue on the verdict form is about mr. ramsay. and it is been known for hundreds of years, by the way, that the nicotine in cigarettes and tobacco is addictive. that is never been a secret. and dr. cummings told you that reynolds and philip morris never -- that reynolds and philip morris did not deny that nicotine was addictive in the 1950s, in the 1960s or in the 1970s. all those decades when we will see that mr. ramsay was not really trying to quit, the companies were not denying that the nicotine in cigarettes was addictive. um, so then the question becomes, well, was mr. ramsay addicted? was he addicted? they claim that he was, and most of their evidence about whether mr. ramsay was addicted came from one person, that same dr. hurt that i was talking about. the guy who was paid all that money, who says, not all smokers are addicted. but every time i, dr. hurt, testify, they are addicted. then we said, well, okay. how do you come up with that? how is it that you can tell this jury that mr. ramsay was addicted? he says, well, i've got this heaviness of smoking index. when we start to talk to him about it, you find out it is a rigged test. can i have the next slide? look at this test. think about this for one second. you are asked two questions. and no matter how you answer the questions, if you look down at the scoring, the answer is always dependent. no matter whether you smoke, whether you do not smoke, how many cigarettes a day you smoke, when you have your first cigarette. you could take somebody who is never smoked their whole life, administer this test to them, and the answer is going to be this person is addicted. they just have a low level of addiction. to use this test is to decide in advance that the person is going to be addicted. and the interesting thing is, dr. hurt does not use this test in his regular work. in his regular work he uses a completely different test called the fagerstrom test that has more variables and is scored differently. where does he use this heaviness of smoking index that is rigged to always come out an addicted result? in court. talking to juries like you. the minute dr. hurt chose to use this test is the minute he was not giving you an unbiased, impartial opinion about whether mr. ramsay was addicted. there is no possible way to answer this test to have an answer that is not addicted. so you will have to decide for yourself whether that is good enough. the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. we do not. that is what they brought you, a rigged test and a highly paid witness to deliver it. but the really important question is not the two that i've been talking about. the really important question is the verdict form question. was addiction a legal cause of mr. ramsay's lung cancer? and i want to just look with you at the instruction that you are going to get about what legal cause means. this is basically the same instruction that -- that plaintiffs' counsel showed you, except they did not highlight the words that i'm showing you now. "an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of disease or medical condition if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition so that it can reasonably be said that but for" -- that is the key language -- "but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine such disease or medical condition would not have been suffered." a lot of words in there. you will have time to look over those as much as you want in the jury room. the bottom line is, this is the test. if you look at somebody who smokes, you ask yourselves, if we take away this alleged addiction, would the person still smoke? if you take away the nicotine, is the person still going to smoke? and what does the evidence show about that generally? let us take a look at the next one. the question, again, is going to be, did addiction lead continuously and substantially to lung cancer? let us go to the next slide, please. what was the evidence, not just about whether people can be addicted or whether or not nicotine is addictive; this is about what does addiction actually do? does it actually turn people into robots? does it change people's behavior? this is what the evidence was. "nicotine does not prevent smokers from choosing to try to quit." again, this is their expert. "many smokers who say they want to quit, do not try. addicted smokers can quit and even heavily addicted smokers can quit." let us look at one of the charts that was shown to you by plaintiffs' witnesses. maybe you can remember this one. on the left you see there is a percentage for daily smokers, and then to the right of that you can see that there are many smokers who do not even say that they want to quit. next to that, you can see that even among people who say they want to quit, some do not actually try to quit smoking. can i have the next one, please? this was the pamphlet that dr. cummings put together that we also discussed with one of the other experts. this is their -- these are their witnesses talking: "do you want to stop smoking? are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? if you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking." this is their experts telling you that all smokers, even ones who meet criteria for addiction, can quit smoking. and the evidence was also that there can be different degrees of addiction. you can be heavily addicted and it might be harder for you to quit, or you can be not as heavily addicted and you can be successful quitting easier than some other people can be. quitting smoking is a very individual thing. and that is why we have to look at what the evidence was for mr. ramsay. but we are doing that knowing that in america, there are 60 million americans who have quit smoking. there are more people who are former smokers than current smokers. the question becomes: was mr. ramsay so addicted that he could not stop smoking, or did he smoke as a matter of personal choice? and i want to take the first half of that first. was mr. ramsay so addicted that he could not stop smoking? well, we know the answer to that is no. because mr. ramsay did quit smoking. when they showed you this chart, they were trying to say that only 3 percent of smokers who attempt to quit at a given time are successful in the long term. that may be so. but if that is true, mr. ramsay is part of that 3 percent. because he did quit smoking the minute he made an asserted effort to do so. it is true before that he experimented with quitting while he went on vacation. mrs. bishop said once or twice a year they would go on a vacation. mr. ramsay would say, i'm on vacation, i'm taking a vacation from smoking too. and then a couple of days later he would give up on that. she would buy him cigarettes and he would be back to smoking again. that was not a concerted, committed effort to quit. mr. clark, i think it was, said something about chronic relapsing. it is not chronic anything if you only do it once a year. if you are only trying to quit once or twice a year when you go on vacation, you are not somebody who is constantly doing everything you can to try to quit smoking and failing. that is not what it is. at some point he tried nicotine gum. sure. but what did he really use the nicotine gum for? while he was smoking the gum, did he ever put down his cigarettes? the testimony was he did not. while he was on the gum, did he use the gum to reduce his cigarette smoking? he did not do that either. it was only in the late 1980s when mr. ramsay made an asserted effort, that was the words mrs. bishop used, an asserted effort to quit and he succeeded. now, the second half of the question was, did he smoke because he made a personal choice to do so? well, how can we figure that out? how do we know? the plaintiffs are saying, well, he smoked because of nicotine. he smoked because he was a young person when he started. he smoked because he did not know the risks. how do we know whether those things are true? for the same reason that mr. berg talked to you about. there is a very important piece of evidence in this case that you have all heard about. and that is this episode that he had in the mid-1970s where he had this collapsed lung. and i just want to show you this (indicating). during jury selection i asked almost each and every one of you whether you had a moment in your life where you were presented with the option to smoke or not to smoke, and we talked a little bit about how you viewed that situation and what you did about it. i'm showing you, and i'll tell you this: i believe this is lake eola. turns out i'm not from orlando. so this is a neat lake that i saw around here, and when i would try to go jogging before it got really cold, i would go through this area. and one day when i was -- when i was doing that i thought, you know, if i keep running straight down this path, i'm going to end up in this lake. so it turns out that you got to go left or you have got to go right. and that is a lot like what happened to mr. ramsay in 1974. he is on a business trip. you all know the story by now. his lung collapsed. he is freaking out. his colleague takes him to the hospital. it turns out he is unconscious for like ten days. ten days he is out, knocked out to the world. what is happening during those ten days? within ten hours the nicotine that was in his system from whenever his last cigarette was went out of his blood stream. i did not have to call a witness to say that; dr. hurt admitted that. that is just his blood stream. within a couple of days, the nicotine is out of his body entirely. there is no nicotine in his system at all. he is still unconscious. the witness has told you that the peak withdrawal symptoms when withdrawal is at its worst is within a few days after you stop smoking. day 1, day 2, day 3 can be very hard. it was not hard for mr. ramsay because he is unconscious. he is in a hospital. he cannot smoke. he is safe. so he basically slept through the peak withdrawal symptoms that might make some smokers, if they are addicted, want to start smoking again. that was not his experience. then dr. hurt said that withdrawal symptoms, not just the peak, but any withdrawal symptoms, they end within 14 to 21 days. what happens in that 14 to 21 days? well, by day 10 mr. ramsay's discharged. he is very scared because he is aware of the risk that his cigarette smoking may have somehow contributed to his lung issue. he is worried about it. ms. bishop is worried about it. they are all worried about it. so he does not smoke the first day he is back from the hospital or the second day or the rest of that week. he goes all the way into the second week without smoking. by this time he is 24 or 25 days out from his last cigarette. the withdrawal symptoms that dr. hurt set in after 14 days or 21 days are over. he is weeks away from having nicotine in his system. he is weeks away from peak withdrawal symptoms. he is several days away from any withdrawal symptoms at all. and when we ask -- i asked mrs. bishop, how is he acting? did you see any difference to his personality? she did not report any withdrawal symptoms. she did not say he was climbing the walls or irritable or anxious. so he goes to see the doctor. what else is going on at this point in his life? the warning labels have been on the packages for almost ten years. he is got the information from mrs. bishop for almost ten years, perhaps more, that smoking is bad for him. people are saying things to him like you have got to stop smoking. it is killing you. he is saying to other people, i know. he is telling his own children, who are born by this time, you should not smoke because it is bad for you. this is all before he makes this decision. no nicotine, no withdrawal, he knows the risk. he is telling other people about the risks. and he is 34 years old. you heard a lot of evidence about teenage brains and allegations about marketing to young people. he is not a young person. he does not have a teenage brain at age -- i'm sorry, 34. he is a grown man. he is been in the air force. he is got a wife and a family and a job and a rising, promising career. so what does he do with knowledge of the risks, no nicotine in his system, no withdrawal and an -- a personalized concern about what smoking might be doing to himself? he goes back to smoking. now, there was a lot of argument here about character, and i do not want there to be any suggestion that i or ms. gallagher or anyone else is criticizing mr. ramsay. we are not. we have not sued anybody. there are lots of people who make the choice to smoke, who have no nicotine in their system, who are not addicted, have no withdrawal and who are old enough to make that decision, as mr. ramsay was when he did this. so the question that you should be asking yourself is: what would mr. ramsay have done if it was not the nicotine, if it was not the withdrawal, if it was not a teenage brain, if it was not ignorance of the risk? he made the same type of adult informed decision that millions of people did then and do now. and he chose, instead of going the route of being a nonsmoker, to going back to being a smoker. now, mr. berg said to you that while he had stopped smoking, he went back to smoking because he could not stop. mrs. bishop tried to tell you the same thing in answer to one of your question. why did he go back to smoking after three and a half weeks of not smoking? and the answer was something like, well, he could not stop. but he had already stopped. whether mr. ramsay wanted to or not, this was not about motivation. he was off cigarettes because of what happened to his collapsed lung. what is important is that he went back to smoking and why he went back to smoking. and it is not for any of the reasons that they have been talking to you about in this trial. the fact of the matter is mr. ramsay made a personal choice to be a smoker, and there is no reason that he ever would have made any other choice until in the late 1980s he decided to quit. now, mr. clark then talked to you about what mr. ramsay did in the late '80s to try to quit. and he was right about that part of it. mr. ramsay made a plan. he made an asserted effort. he stopped smoking around mrs. bishop. he stopped smoking in the house. he stopped smoking in his office. he stopped smoking on the floor and in the building. all of those things. then mr. clark said, well, why did not mr. ramsay do that earlier? and he said, who knows? that was mr. clark's answer to that question, who knows. who knows why he did not try earlier? well, you know. because you saw the evidence of it. i want to show you some of it. can i have that slide, please? the reason he did not try those things earlier is because he was not really interested in quitting. remember mike criscitiello? he was his coworker who had been through the process of quitting smoking. and he said to mr. ramsay, if i can quit, you can quit. mr. ramsay did not say back to him, oh, i do not believe that. there is a controversy. the tobacco companies are telling me to doubt all of this. he just stared at him. when his daughter, jennifer hardman, said to him smoking is not good for you, he did not say back to her, i do not believe that. the tobacco companies are telling me it is safe. he said, i know. when mrs. bishop was telling him smoking is killing you, i wish you would stop smoking, he just puffed away. he was not interested in quitting smoking. can i have the next one? that is what he was saying. what was he doing? did he really try to quit? mr. criscitiello, once again, he knew what it took to quit smoking because he did it. and mr. fiorta asked him, well, you saw him, what was he doing? was he really interested in quitting? and he told you no. he really probably was not serious about really wanting to quit smoking. his daughter admitted he could have tried earlier and more often. and even mrs. bishop, who is asking you for money in this case, said he could have made additional efforts or attempts to quit. he was not at a point in his life before 1988 where he was ready and committed to quitting. and then in 1988, think about this. what really changed? the argument was made that if only he had known something else in 1974. if only the doctor had said to him, you know, your collapsed lung was because of the smoking. you need to quit. in 1988 he did not have new information. he did not read some study that led -- that suddenly made him think it is true. i've been saying it is true all these years, but now i believe it is true. that is not what happened. what happened in 1988, if you remember, mr. ramsay had a grandchild. and he wanted to be there for his grandchild's graduation from college, and now he had a motivation that he did not have before. mr. berg tried to tell you that this fork in the road that mr. ramsay had in 1974 was because he did not know the risks. that is not it. he did know the risks. what he did not have was the motivation to remain a nonsmoker, even though he knew that information. so then the question becomes from the verdict form, if you take away nicotine addiction, would he still have gotten sick? well, what do we know? we know what the effect of mr. ramsay's personal choice was. it is what dr. villa told you about that i just went up there and sat down in his seat. if he had -- if mr. ramsay had made a different choice in 1974, more likely than not, he would not have gotten lung cancer. that was not a choice that reynolds or philip morris or any tobacco company could make for mr. ramsay. as dr. hurt said -- and we will see the slide -- only the smoker can decide when to quit smoking. all right. let us go back to the verdict form. no, no. back one. back. the answer to question no. 1 should be no. the answer should be no. because their allegation that addiction is a substantial and continuous reason why mr. ramsay smoked enough to get lung cancer just does not hold up. take away the nicotine, take away the addiction, take away all of that, mr. ramsay still is choosing to smoke. now, you will see on the verdict form that if you answer no to question no. 1, your work is actually done. you do not have to go through the rest of the verdict form. and that is why both of us have spent so much time on this first question, and i think why both of us have spent so much time on the decision that adult mr. ramsay made in 1974. but it is my job to talk to you about the rest of the verdict form, and you heard a lot of evidence about the other issues too. so i want to talk to you about some of the other questions now. can i have the next question? was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of robert ramsay's lung cancer and death? now, this is an interesting question because in this case you heard about some of the brands and you have to answer this question for each company. so you heard in this case about some of the brands that were made by reynolds, like winston and vantage. and some of the brands that were made by philip morris. you heard some evidence that he smoked those brands. but you also heard that those were not the only brands that mr. ramsay smoked. and the evidence was far from clear about what the other brands were, how much he smoked, and for how long he smoked them. you might remember when mrs. bishop was on the stand, she told you, well, i was never really a smoker so i cannot really tell you exactly what brands he was smoking. i cannot really tell you exactly how much he was smoking. when i first met him, he only smoked on weekends. i really do not know how much he smoked. and then even after we were married, he always bought his own cigarettes. i do not really know how much he smoked. plaintiffs have given you some medical records that say in total, he smoked this amount or that amount, but you have no evidence about how much of reynolds smoking he did and when. and the same for philip morris. even when one of you asked mrs. bishop the question about what brands she bought him, like when he was on vacation and he quit for -- or he sort of stopped for a couple of days and she would buy him cigarettes, and one of you asked her, well, what about these cigarettes that you bought then? what did you buy? she said, well, maybe vantage, maybe merit. and i stood up and i said, now, are you really sure those are the ones that you bought? and she said, i'm not sure. i'm really just guessing. there is really no hardcore evidence about how much he was smoking of these brands. if we look at her interrogatory responses, the questions she answered before trial where she swore under oath that her answers were true, and it was all over the map. it was like 20 different brands. and for vantage and merit it just said like various times. merit, various times. the evidence in this case just is not clear about how much of reynolds' brands or philip morris' brands he smoked. and when dr. villa took the stand, he was never even asked. nobody asked dr. villa. it is their burden of proof. they did not ask dr. villa, if you take away the r.j. reynolds smoking, would mr. ramsay have gotten ill? you never heard the answer to that question. you never heard the same question for philip morris. what he said was, the total amount of smoking all brands for all times, according to dr. villa, caused the lung cancer. that does not allow you to answer this question on the verdict form. so we would ask if you even reach this question, that you find that the plaintiff has not met her burden of proof and that no be checked for both defendants. okay. let us go to the next questions. and i'm going to take a few of these at the same time because there is some similar issues on these. again, you can see that mr. ramsay is in every question, and what is being asked here is "please state whether mr. ramsay reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement by r.j. reynolds that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death." there are a couple of things i think you can focus on that will make your job on this question a lot easier. there are two parts in each question. reasonably relied to his detriment in a statement by r.j. reynolds or a statement by philip morris. in fact, can we have the next? you will see that questions 5 and 6 on the verdict form are very similar, the same requirements. reasonably relied to his detriment and a statement made in furtherance of reynolds or philip morris u.s.a.'s agreement. what does all of that boil down to? two questions. for every statement that they are saying that we should be held liable for, you should be asking yourselves two questions. who said it? who made the statement? and did mr. ramsay rely on that statement? and i want to start with the first question of who said it, because you saw many, many statements in this trial made by all sorts of different people. you saw statements by newscasters. you saw statements made by government officials like the surgeon general. you saw statements about smoking made by public -- people in the public health community like cuyler hammond at the american cancer society and others. you saw some statements made by tobacco company employees. and we are going to talk about those. and you saw some statements that were made on behalf of groups representing the tobacco companies. so these questions that say statement by reynolds, statement by pm, they are going to require you to think about whatever their allegations of fraud are, who said it? who actually said it? and i want to give you an example of why that is important. mr. clark said during his closing, he said a couple of times rjr and pm put out there that the filters were safer. he said we were out in the public saying that filters were safer. that is -- that is an example of where it is going to be really important for you to look at whether or not we actually said that. it seems simple. um, first off, it is possible because they have this argument that mr. ramsay thought that low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes were safer. maybe he did think that. maybe he did. but the question that you have to answer for yourselves is did he think that because of something that we said? because of something that he heard that was in furtherance of a conspiracy or that we said. and you are going to see that is just not the case. i want to show you some examples of what they put in evidence. we are into their fraud case now. remember mr. clark said we put out there that filters were safer. let us look at what they actually put in. can i have the next one? these are some of the ads, and i went through each and every one of these ads with dr. cummings, i think. and he agreed with me that there is not a single one of these ads that says anything about filters or low-tar cigarettes being safer. you will not find safe. you will not find safer. you will not find less hazardous. you will not find less harmful. you will not find any of that. and even after dr. cummings got off the stand, plaintiffs came back and they put in a few more stacks of ads. there is a big stack of ads in there that they put in there. look through as many of them as you want. you will not find safe, safer, less harmful, or anything like that in there. mr. clark argued that we put out there that the -- that filtered and low-tar cigarettes were safer. that is a great argument. except for the fact that it does not square with the facts. it does not square with the evidence. then they showed you some commercials. actually, let me see the next dem first, please. these were the vantage and merit ads. i went through all six of these. nothing in there about safe or safer. it is all about flavor and taste. then they show a commercial for vantage. do we have that? listen for it and see if you hear anything about safe or safer. (on video.) * * * * (music.) male speaker: until now, many smokers have found that high-flavor cigarettes have been high-tar cigarettes. until now, as cigarette tar went down, cigarette taste went down. until now, the flavor stopped here. but now there is vantage. the full flavor breakthrough cigarette with the incredible new filter that does not cop-out on flavor. vantage, it is on the way and it is worth waiting for. (video concluded.) * * * * mr. walker: now, looking at who said it, the companies are saying flavor, taste. if you want flavor, if you want taste, here's our brands. they are low-tar, low-nicotine brands with flavor. here they are. there were people out there saying that low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes were safer. it just was not us. the public health community, people that dr. cummings and all of the witnesses said, no, they are not in any conspiracy with the tobacco companies. cuyler hammond at the american cancer society, they were not part of any conspiracy with reynolds or philip morris. they did not work for philip morris or reynolds. let us look at what they were telling the public about filters and low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes. can i have the next dem? this is the american cancer society. not reynolds, not philip morris, not any alleged coconspirator. if you do smoke cigarettes, you should know the relative amounts of nicotine and tar in your cigarettes as determined by the federal trade commission. the less tar and nicotine you inhale, the better. was the message out there? yes. were we the ones putting it out there like mr. clark said we were? absolutely not. can i have the next one, please? this is the u.s. department of health, education, and welfare, a pamphlet: "how to take some of the danger out of smoking." "choose a cigarette with less tar and nicotine. the difference between brands can be more than two to one." if mr. ramsay thought that low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes were safer, what is more likely? that he got that from our ads talking about taste and flavor or that he got it from pamphlets and other information from the public health community like this that expressly said, "choose a cigarette with less tar and less nicotine." and then there were the public service announcements that mrs. bishop said she knows were being run. she saw some of them. can we have that? just one example. (on video.) male speaker: we have a little wisdom for smokers. starting at the bitter end. the first puffs are not enough, but those last are the deadliest of all. (inaudible) you smoke are the tars and nicotine and the (inaudible). a big rotten accumulation, and you can actually end up (inaudible). the more tar and nicotine you start off with, the more you end up with. and you can buy yourself 118 different packs of trouble. up to 31 milligrams of tar; up to 2.2 milligrams of nicotine. there is no such thing as a harmless cigarette. but the low-tar/nicotine cigarette can save you a little. and if you are still smoking, that is better than nothing. we have got a tar/nicotine (inaudible). it is free (inaudible) right now." (video concluded.) * * * * mr. walker: that is the united states public health service. it is not a commercial for vantage or a commercial for merit or anything at all put out by a tobacco company. it is easy to attack cigarette companies. it is easy to do that. but they should not be attacked for statements they did not make. the next question, then, is once you have gotten past who actually made the statements, then you have got to think about -- can i have the next dem? -- whether mr. ramsay relied, and there are a couple of things i want to go over with you on this. first of all, when you start to think about whether mr. ramsay relied, consider the testimony that you heard from mrs. bishop and others that mr. ramsay never talked about ads, advertisements. we heard today, and we heard while she was on the witness stand, they talked about everything, but they did not talk about ads. no one heard mr. -- mrs. bishop and no one else ever heard mr. ramsay say that a tobacco company said that smoking vantage would help him quit. but mrs. bishop did say that she heard public service announcements like the one we just saw from health, education, and welfare talking about low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes. she did say that she heard public service announcements from the american cancer society talking about low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes. the bottom line is this. a couple of things: company statements, they showed you a lot of company statements; advertisements; and then they made these arguments about youth market. let us start with company statements. first of all, dr. cummings admitted that there was no statement in the 1950s, 1960s, or 1970s that nicotine was not addictive. there is no evidence in this case that mr. ramsay saw, believed, or relied on any industry statements. you have heard and you will continue to hear about this wallpaper effect -- wallpaper, it is all over the place. but remember when i asked mrs. bishop when she was on the stand, "you are about the same age as mr. ramsay. you grew up in the same community. did you ever hear any of this stuff about the frank statement or the tobacco industry research committee or all these ads? "no. no, i did not." mr. ramsay never mentioned any tobacco company organizations, and mrs. bishop had never even heard of them. now, the statements that they showed you from tobacco company employees, they were all to the effect that it was not proven that smoking causes disease. they talked about those. they showed you statements about how, you know, the companies, they say, were trying to create doubt. it was not proven. there is a controversy. there is an open debate. but mr. ramsay never said those things to anyone. mr. ramsay -- if mr. ramsay was relying on statements from the companies that the risks were not proven, why is he telling people, "i know the risks"? if he relied on statements about it not being injurious to health, why is he telling his daughter and his son that they should not smoke? it is a great argument; it just does not make any sense for the facts of this case. the evidence was to the contrary. the evidence was not that mr. ramsay doubted the risk or thought that there was some controversy about it. it was the exact opposite. can we have the next -- or -- oh, i see. go back. you had it. the evidence was that mr. ramsay did know. he was warned by his family. he saw it on the news. he watched walter cronkite. he read the paper in the morning, in the evening, and on the weekends. we showed you what was in the periodicals that he looked at. this was all the way back in 1957 talking about higher death rates for cigarette smokers. the next one, please. this is the same quote we looked at earlier from public health officials. mr. ramsay knew. the next one. this is another one from the national cancer institute. newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public. next one, please. we talked about all the magazine coverage of it. next one. and the surgeon general's report and so on and so on. and we know that from 1966 forward, there was a warning or a caution label about the health risks of cigarette smoking on every single package of cigarettes that mr. ramsay smoked. no one ever heard mr. ramsay repeat any of the things that they say the companies were saying on television or anyplace else. then something interesting happened -- and i hope you all caught this. this was on dr. cummings's cross-examination, and we went back and forth on a great number of things. but i asked dr. cummings if he had seen the polling data where americans were actually asked whether they were even listening to the tobacco companies at all. and this is what you learned when we saw that. can i have the next one? that is not it. okay -- no. there we go. this is one of the examples of the roper polls that we saw, where americans were asked, like in 1968, "who are the most reliable sources of information on smoking and health?" this is a place where, if the tobacco companies were duping the american public, if everybody was listening and relying on things that tobacco companies were saying on tv like this bill dwyer he talked about, you should see a high percentage of people listing the tobacco companies as a reliable source of information. instead, only 5 percent listed the tobacco companies as a reliable source. can i have the next slide? sixty percent thought that the public health community, the warnings that we showed you, where dr. hammond said people should be warned and they are being warned about the cigarettes risk, dr. graham's coverage of the mouse-painting studies that he did, people were listening to that information about the health risks of cigarette smoking. can i have the next one? but these are all the statements that plaintiffs showed you in their case. anne browder, mr. bowling, mr. cullman, mr. heimann, mr. corrigan, they showed you all these statements by company employees in videos, and they wanted you to think that these people were somehow pulling the wool over the eyes of the american people. this survey from 1968 and all the surveys we talked about during the case that came after it show that is just not true. the american public did not think that these tobacco company employees and representatives were reliable. people were not relying on what they said, and neither was mr. ramsay. in fact -- can we have the next one, please? this is how bad it was as of 1962. this is, like, 50 years ago or more. this is a "reader's digest" article where the person who wrote the article is saying, "tobacco industry spokesman issued the standard rejoinder that the evidence was merely old data without new research findings, but the statements sounded weaker and more pathetic than ever." what did they show you? they showed you an internal document where somebody at the tobacco institute was patting themselves on the back about how they had this great idea that was brilliantly conceived. this is great. you have got the hard data in these surveys that shows that people just were not listening to the tobacco companies, and there is no reason to believe that mr. ramsay was any different. he did not rely. then they talk about advertising. well, we have already seen -- can i have the next dem? we already saw what the theme was in the advertising. the ads were about flavor and taste and draw, how it feels when you are smoking the cigarettes, and some of the -- some of the ads actually acknowledge the reports about the health risks of cigarette smoking. it was the public health community that was talking about how you should quit. if you do not quit, you should lower your tar. it still is not safe because all cigarettes including low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes can cause lung cancer. plaintiff says that you should infer, that you should infer that mr. ramsay relied on things like the beverly hillbillies, the flintstones, lord knows what else. but infer that based upon what? maybe there is some other case. maybe one of those other 80 cases where dr. cummings testified, maybe there is some other plaintiff in this engle class you keep hearing about relied on that stuff, just not mr. ramsay. there is no evidence of that in this case. and the last thing i want to just mention, there have been some allegations about youth marketing. this idea, in fact, i think mr. clark started off with it. very serious allegations that the companies were out trying to hook children. and they put in -- they had a list of a bunch of documents that supposedly show you that. if you were to actually look at those documents, you are going to find that the very first document they listed was from about 15 years before mr. ramsay was born. sometime back in the -- maybe calvin coolidge was president, sometime in the '30s or '20s. maybe it was in the '20s. nothing to do with mr. ramsay. then they have got a bunch of documents like from the '50s where surveys are just being conducted to find out who is smoking. "are you smoking? are you not smoking?" then they have got a bunch of documents from the '70s and the '80s -- mr. ramsay, like, in his 30s and in his 40s, a grown adult -- that are proposing new marketing plans for the future. you will see it in the title. new -- proposal for new brands, proposal for new marketing. and even those documents, those were some of the documents we had to come back and say, "wait. you are -- you cut out the part of it that says what reynolds' policy actually was." can i have the next one? this is what got cut out in their documents. 1973. this one, we -- we made them show it to you even while their witness was on the stand. "we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start." 1975. "these terms do not accurately describe what we are talking about." this is the one that was introduced to suggest that somehow young adult smoker means something other than young adult smoker. this document shows that even before they were putting adult in the paper, what they meant was adults. young adult smoker. in 1975 -- this was another document they showed you. and -- and it talks about the target market. remember dr. cummings said, "oh, you are targeting people under 18." i said, "well, dr. cummings, wait a minute. it says right here 'primary target 18 to 34.'" and then the last one. this was the one i told you about in openings. and even though i told you in openings they were going to show you this document and not show you this part, they still show you the document without showing you this part. you saw this document today without this part. and what was being missing -- what was missing? rjr's consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free informed adult choice which the company does not seek to influence. this report is intended to provide additional learning on younger adult smokers age 18 to 24. what does all of that have to do with ramsay? nothing. it has absolutely nothing to do with him. none of those documents relates to mr. ramsay at all. and the answer to the questions on the verdict form -- do we have that? for all of the reasons that i just went over with you: -- who said it, did mr. ramsay rely, does it have anything to do with mr. ramsay -- for all of those reasons the answers to questions 3, 4, 5, and 6 should be no. can i have the next one? all right. the answer to these should be no as well. now, the next question on the verdict form. "state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of robert ramsay's death that you charge to" -- and there are places where you can put a percentage for each of those. the important part is, if you notice in the question like all the other questions, there is another reference to robert ramsay. the only percentages that you can put down here are things that were a legal cause of injury to robert ramsay. if there is some choice, some decision, some conduct that you hear about -- and i'm sure after i sit down and they have another chance, they will take another run at it -- you have got to ask yourselves whether it has something to do with robert ramsay. would it have mattered to him? what are the choices that actually could have made a difference to mr. ramsay? the choice to quit, the choice of when to quit, the choice of how to quit, and the choice of how hard to try to quit. and we already know -- can i have the next one? -- that the plaintiffs have admitted in this case that the acts or omissions of robert ramsay were a partial legal cause. well, which acts or omissions? relating to the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit. what did you hear about the frequency of his efforts to quit? once or twice a year, on vacation. what did you hear about the duration of his efforts to quit? a couple of days. until the end, when he made the effort to quit -- and you have dr. villa's testimony that if he had stopped in the '60 or '70s, he would not have gotten ill. the fact of the matter is the choices that could actually have mattered to mr. ramsay and his health could only have been made by mr. ramsay. mr. ramsay is one hundred percent responsible for each of the choices that we just went through. in fact, even if we look at what their paid experts said about this -- look what dr. hurt said in his pamphlet. "only you can decide when to quit smoking." if that is true, how can reynolds be 40 percent responsible for a decision that only mr. ramsay could have made? what did dr. cummings say? he did not admit it to me at first. i had to go dig out of his testimony from all those boxes we had back there. the smoker bears responsibility for making the decision to try to quit. how can reynolds or philip morris be forty percent, thirty percent, twenty percent, even 1 percent responsible for a decision that only mr. ramsay could have made? and, remember, mrs. bishop agreed with me that mr. ramsay was not the type of person to blame other people for his decisions and neither should you. i'm not criticizing mr. ramsay. he was entitled to make those choices, but we should not be held responsible for them. the evidence was, mr. ramsay was very capable of making those decisions as well. i'm not going to go through all of it. you all know by now about his career, how he applied himself at all different levels of education and in his work. but you do know by now that he was the type of man that if he had made that choice that dr. hurt was talking about, that dr. cummings was talking about, that mrs. bishop wanted him to make in 1974, he would have accomplished in 1974 the very same thing that he accomplished in 1988. what are the things that did not matter to mr. ramsay? we have talked about some of them already, the designs. dr. villa told you. mr. isasi went through that long list of designs. dr. villa said, "does not matter to me." doctors do not ask patients, "well, which cigarette product are you smoking? does your cigarette product have vent holes? does it have overwrap? does not matter. none of that matters. i'm sure it was very interesting, engaging testimony. does it matter for this verdict form? not a bit. dr. hurt was asked, "well, are any brands more addictive than other brands?" he said, "no, they are all addictive." those same design features, everything you heard about ph manipulation, all that does not make any cigarette any more or less addictive than the other. that is why the warning labels that go on all of these cigarettes, regardless of how they are designed, all say the same thing. "cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. quitting now reduces your risks." okay. can we go back to the dem? so this is why we think the evidence supports zero percent for reynolds, zero percent for philip morris, one hundred percent for mr. ramsay. it is not a criticism of mr. ramsay; it is a recognition into when we make choices, we bear responsibility for the choices that we make. now -- can we take that down? the next question on the verdict form -- i guess the next few questions relate to damages. and you all know this about me because i've been saying it since jury selection. we do not believe this is a case where damages should be awarded. we just do not. i was upfront with you all -- with all of you about that from the very beginning. quite frankly, you should not even get to the question about damages because of the no answers that come before that. but i will say this: that figure that mr. berg threw out, $5 million, $5 million to the wife of a man who made adult, informed, knowing choices to smoke. where does that number come from? it is just pulled out of thin air, just $5 million sounded like a round number and that is -- that was the number you got. there is no basis for that. and no damages should be awarded in this case. there is one last question on the verdict form that it is my job to talk to you about, and that is this question about punitive damages. and i guess what i want to do first is just talk to you a little bit about punitive damages generally. what are punitive damages? first of all, punitive damages can only be awarded for conduct that caused mr. ramsay's illness and death. if that conduct that injured mr. ramsay also injured somebody else, you can take that into consideration under the judge's instructions. but you can only punish for conduct that actually harmed mr. ramsay. so, for example, dr. cummings, remember, showed you a document from claude teague. this is young claude teague, 20 years old, second job. in 1953 he writes a memo that says something about changing the color of the filters. then when i asked dr. cummings, i said, "hey, did anybody ever use that? did that idea about changing the colors of the filters ever get put into a product?" "no. no, it did not." that is an example of something that we cannot be punished for because it could not ever have hurt mr. ramsay. it was never even used in the cigarettes. punitive damages can only be awarded to mrs. bishop, and they are in addition to, that means on top of, damages that fully compensate mrs. bishop. punitive damages are simply more money. and -- can i have the next slide? the standard for awarding punitive damages is much higher. you have already heard the judge mention in his instructions about the greater weight of the evidence, what are -- what is going on with the -- whether the scale is being tipped. clear and convincing evidence is actually the highest standard that exists in civil law. it requires evidence that is more than the greater weight of the evidence. evidence that is more compelling, more persuasive, and evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces in you folks a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue. and you are just not going to see that, because what is really being asked here is, what are we being punished for that hurt mr. ramsay? we should not be punished, for example, for making filtered cigarettes. the evidence in this case was that the public health community, people like dr. -- i think it was dr. wynder or dr. graham recommended that the companies make filtered cigarettes. we should not be punished for responding to something the health community suggested that we do. we should not be punished for making low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes the public health community also asked for that. for years and years and years, decades, the public health community genuinely thought people who were not part of anybody's conspiracy believed that lower-tar and lower-nicotine cigarettes would be safer for smokers. and we met that recommendation by selling those cigarettes. we should not be punished for that. there is a suggestion that we should be punished for nicotine manipulation; ph levels and all that. but then, when dr. henningfield was here, he admitted, again, we did not need to call a witness for this, dr. henningfield admitted that back in those days, people thought you could make a safer cigarette by changing the nicotine yield of cigarettes. and he has his own product that he admits manipulates nicotine levels. it is not reprehensible conduct, it is not punishable conduct to have an opinion that other people had in the 1950s. you were shown the frank statement, and mr. clark told you that the sentence that said there are many possible causes of lung cancer? he said that that was not true. well, dr. cummings said that was true at that time. mr. clark said that the sentence that said there was no agreement among authorities regarding the cause of lung cancer? he said that that was a lie. except that their witness, the million-dollar man, dr. cummings, he said that was true at the time that we made it. and we did not just leave it at what dr. cummings said. we actually showed you some of the statements that people in the public health community were making in like 1953, 1954, 1955. the statement of cuyler hammond at the american cancer society, the statement of dr. kuper [phonetic] at the national cancer institute, these were people who were not selling cigarettes. they did not -- they were not out to try to persuade or defraud anybody. these were people who looked at the same publically-available materials that young dr. teague did in the library and came to a different conclusion. the reality is, in the 1950s, '53, '54, '55, when the frank statement came out, there were lots of well-meaning people who -- scientists, who had not made up their minds based on the science that, um -- that the link had been established. and in spite of that, the public was still being warned. while the scientists were trying to figure out whether the evidence was enough for them, the public was being warned. reynolds and philip morris should not be punished for funding research. remember -- do we have that -- can we have the next slide? this is some of the research that was funded with money from reynolds and philip morris. we should not be punished for that. can i have the next one? we should not be punished for funding research by nobel prize-winning researchers. we should not be punished for putting out the green monster. remember that green book? you saw it a couple of times, and i put it down on the table. it made kind of a thud. that was the one with 6,000 articles made available to the public about the health risks of cigarette smoking and anything related to cigarette smoking. we showed you the article by knapp, k-n-a-p-p, in 1963 that the companies funded that concluded with tobacco-funded research that nicotine was addictive. we talked to you about the research that dr. rodgman at reynolds did, where he was coming up and inventing new ways to really figure out what was in cigarette smoke. this was at a time in the '50s and '60s where people did not know. reynolds developed that technology, published on it and told everybody about it. we should not be punished for recommending -- this is really, really important. we should not -- do we have a slide on this -- for recommending against the adoption of the ftc machine method. you have heard a lot of accusations that made it sound like testing low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes on a machine like that was our idea; that the companies came up with that. but we showed you in 1966 when the federal trade commission was considering doing this, the companies said, do not do this. the machine method will not reflect what smokers actually get. the thing they are telling you that we were fraudulent about, we told the ftc in 1966 when this was being adopted that that could happen. and the ftc made the decision to adopt that -- that method against our recommendations. the companies should not be punished for trying to make cigarettes safer. there were a lot of accusations made about the character of the companies. the fact of the matter is these companies were made up of people who were well meaning just like a lot of other well-meaning people. i want to show you just one example that was in evidence. look at this letter from galloway to sinkus [phonetic]. this is the president of r.j. reynolds in 1968 to the top research scientist at the company. "areas of special interest: in cooperating with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper research of the subject." remember when -- keep that up for one second. remember when, i do not know if it was mr. berg or mr. clark said there is no document that shows that the company cared about their consumers? there is no document that suggests that reynolds cares about smokers? look at this. "if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. "please prepare a plan to carry it out." this document was not written with the idea that this was going to end up in somebody's newspaper. this is the same kind of secret, internal document that they have been talking about all this time. and this came right before the ten years long effort by scientists from reynolds and scientists from philip morris working with the government to try to come up with a safer cigarette. you heard an allegation that the filtered products that we made, that the public health community asked for, mr. clark or mr. berg said that was a gimmick, that was a gimmick. well, what did dr. henningfield say? the nine -- the nine -- that $925 an hour? this is what he said. do we have that? dr. henningfield, at $15 a minute, said, "if you go back before that to the days when cigarettes were nonfiltered, i think it is likely that for an individual a filter would be better than nonfilter. that is my own opinion." that is dr. henningfield whose evidence tells you filters were not a gimmick. can i have the next slide, please? go back. just one second. . . all right. here's something you should really, really think about, about vantage cigarettes. this is really interesting and i think really important. the evidence in this case was that the public health community asked the companies to develop cigarettes that would deliver lower tar. at reynolds, when we were -- when they were working on the vantage cigarettes, they developed a new filter that scientists inside of reynolds, in internal secret documents, said to each other that they believed was a better filter than was available on the market. can i have the next slide, please? actually, let us take a look at this. again, remember, the accusation: there is no secret, internal document that says the companies cared about smokers. this was the vantage technology document that you saw and that was shown to dr. henningfield, their design expert. what -- you see it? here's what it says: "the vantage cigarette introduced in april 1970 almost met the original objective of the coanda filter. that is, it provided a novel filter with substantially better filtration than the standard winston filter without unacceptable pressure drop increase." okay. "a presentation to management was held in the research department on november 18th, 1968. there it was reported that the multijet filter showed 60 percent tar removal from cigarette smoke as compared to forty percent tar removal by the winston filter at the same pressure drop of two inches." what does all that mean? this was a better filter that was going to be used in the vantage cigarettes, and this is what the scientists at reynolds genuinely thought. this document was just as secret as all the other documents they were talking about. these two paragraphs are talking about the performance of the filter on the machine. but look at what else is in this document? "a second presentation to management was held at research on june 18, 1969. "there, it was reported that the laboratory multijet filter did, indeed, reduce the amount of smoke retained by a smoker." not just on some machine; retained by a smoker. and dr. henningfield said after he saw this document, he said, well, yeah, i mean, i -- i know that there is vantage smoking in this case, but i did not spend time looking at the design of vantage cigarettes. but now that i've seen this, yeah, this may have been a product that actually reduced tar yields to a smoker. this is not fraud, folks. this is a company doing what it is supposed to be doing. this technology was incorporated in the vantage cigarette, it was put on the market and it was marketed to people not as a safe or safer cigarette, but simply as a low-tar, low-nicotine cigarette that nevertheless was able to have good flavor. so think about this: we are being asked to be punished for this. imagine what would happen if we had done the opposite. if this were a case where they came to you and said, the companies came up with this fabulous technology that is actually better filtration and actually reduces the amount of smoke that goes to the smoker; and instead of incorporating it into the cigarettes, let us say we buried it. we buried the technology, we did not incorporate it into a cigarette product, we did not tell anybody about it, we did not give any smoker the option to smoke it. would they be patting us on the back for that, or would they be saying you really should be punished for that? you had this technology, you did not put it out there, you did not market it? that is punishable conduct. it is not what happened here. this was genuinely believed to be an improvement. it was incorporated into our products, put on the market, not marketed with anything false, just reported with -- the tar and nicotine numbers the ftc required us to report, and billed as a flavored cigarette. but it was on the market. that is simply not punishable conduct. and then, later, in the 1980s and 1990s, you heard that reynolds spent millions and millions of dollars developing this product called premier. and what happened? dr. henningfield agreed this premier product actually reduced cancer risks. what was the response to that? can i have the next one? the office of smoking and health -- this is a government office -- said that, "preliminary research conducted by the developers showed that there were fewer carcinogens in premier. nevertheless, if you look at the middle ones, the panel was concerned about the ramifications of a cigarette that is actually safer than current cigarettes." and then at the bottom, "research should continue, but there is no need to wait for results to initiate a war against new tobacco products." what am i really talking about here? you are being asked to punish us for doing what we should be doing: trying to put a safer product on the markets with vantage, with premier. that is not punishable conduct. now, can we take that down? there is one last thing on this topic that i think is really important for you to understand that you heard in the evidence. what is the context for all these allegations about the ftc machine, the numbers that were being reported in the ads? what was the regulatory environment that reynolds and philip morris were operating in? this is what you heard because mr. clark or mr. berg said, we sat right back and let it happen. all this tar and nicotine numbers were deceptive and we sat right back and let it happen. what is the real story? the real story is, the companies told the ftc you should not adopt this machine method because it is going to mislead consumers. you should not do it. the ftc made the decision to do it anyway. outside of our control. the federal trade commission required us to report those numbers in the magazine ads. the -- this idea that the companies were putting deceptive numbers in their advertising is not true. the federal trade commission required the companies to do that. then, remember when lorillard came along? you saw this letter. lorillard happened to be the first one to do it, they come along and they say, we have got these machine numbers, but we think that our product might actually be delivering higher tar yields than what the machine yields. we would like to print that. the ftc said no. you cannot put higher numbers on there than what the machine comes up with. that is not a decision that any of these companies made; that was an ftc decision. and then, as we already saw, the federal trade commission and the public health service was encouraging smokers to switch to these types of products; even telling them, we will give you a list of the products you can buy if you just send us in the mail [sic]. now, i'm not trying to attack the federal trade commission. i'm really not. all i'm suggesting is that we are not responsible for those decisions that the ftc made. you should not punish us for putting numbers in our ads that the ftc required us to publish. so for all of those reasons, we ask that you check "no" to these questions about punitive damages, and that you check "no" to the other questions in this case that we identify. at the end of the day, this case is not about sympathy, just like i told you at the beginning. it is not about sympathy. you heard a very -- you heard some very compelling testimony that might have made -- would make anyone, really, feel sympathy towards the loss of a human life. but that is not enough in a court of law to award money damages. there has to be evidence, and they do not have the evidence to support that here. this is not a case about whether cigarettes should be legal. it is not a case about whether they should be banned. and it is not a case about other smokers who may have -- maybe other smokers did not know this, maybe other smokers did not have this fork-in-the-road opportunity where they were kind of forced to be off cigarettes and had to decide whether to go back to it. but in this case, the evidence is at the end of the day right where it was at the beginning of the day. mr. ramsay was a willing smoker who knew the risks and liked what smoking did for him. he was not interested in quitting until he did, and nicotine did not control him. and he most certainly was not misled by anything that the tobacco companies or anyone in the conspiracy with them, said. we are going to be asking you, i'm asking you now, to come back with a defense verdict in this case. i've tried as best i know how to summarize the evidence that you have heard, and after i sit down, it will be ms. gallagher's turn to address you. i know she is -- she is had to be quiet all this time so i know she is eager to talk to you. and when she finishes, one of the plaintiff's lawyers will have another turn. and they actually get the last word because it is their burden of proof. so there just will not be a time for you to wait for me to come back and answer those because i will not be able to do that. what i will ask you to do, though, is to just think about what our responses would be to what you hear in rebuttal. you know what our points are, you know what the evidence has been. um, and, um, i guess the last thing i need to do then is to just thank you once again. you have all been patient. you have all -- you know, we have gone on and on, i go on and on and on, and we start getting, i -- you know, i understand. we have a lot to say, there is a lot to cover and i appreciate your patience with us. you know, mr. berg referenced the equal justice under the law there (indicating), and that has to apply even to tobacco companies as well. equal justice under the law means, at least in this case, that if the evidence and the law as you get it from the judge does not support a verdict in favor of mrs. bishop, you should come back with a defense verdict. you were all chosen because you could do that if the evidence and the law requires it. we are in your hands. i'm not asking you for anything more than you follow the law, listen to your common sense, apply the evidence, and, yes, come back with a verdict in favor of the defense. thank you very much. ms. gallagher: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. from the floor: good afternoon. ms. gallagher: three facts. three facts are all you need to decide this case. three facts. and they come from the plaintiff's witnesses. they do not come from documents. they do not come from arguments. they are just three facts. three facts that everybody agrees to. and those facts are from 1974. and by that date you know what i'm going to talk about. fact no. 1: mr. ramsay quit smoking for 24 days. mrs. bishop tells you that. fact 2: when mr. ramsay started smoking again, after he quit for 24 days, there was no nicotine in his system. he was nicotine-free. dr. hurt told you that. fact no. 3: if mr. ramsay had chosen to remain as a nonsmoker, if he had decided not to start smoking again, he likely would not have developed lung cancer. no lung cancer. dr. villa told you that and we would not be here. so the very first question you are going to be asked to decide is, was robert l. ramsay addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer? a legal cause. you have the definition. that means it was a substantial cause. a but-for cause. and so what that means is but for his addiction, could mr. ramsay have quit smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer? and these three facts explain why the question -- the answer to question no. 1 is "no." you know that in 1974, when mr. ramsay had this pneumothorax, this collapsed lung, he ended up in the hospital for ten days and he was basically unconscious for those ten days. he could not smoke. but then he got out of the hospital and for the next two weeks, he made the decision every day to be a nonsmoker. he did not smoke. fact no. 1: he quit for 24 days. and you know that all the nicotine was out of his system. dr. hurt explained that. he said within three days, nicotine is completely gone from a person's body. mr. ramsay did not pick up cigarettes again for 24 days. the nicotine had been out of his system for weeks at that point. and he did not start smoking again because of withdrawal symptoms, and, again, you know that from dr. hurt. because dr. hurt told you that within 14 to 21 days, all the withdrawal symptoms are gone. not only did you not hear any evidence of any withdrawal symptoms during this period, dr. hurt told you that by the time he picked up those cigarettes again on day 24, those withdrawal symptoms were gone. and dr. villa explained to you -- he came in and told you, when you quit smoking, your risk of getting a smoking-related disease decreases. it goes down. and remember he told you, you get a substantially -- that was his word -- a substantial benefit if you quit after five years. and then he went further and he put numbers on it. and mr. walker told you about those numbers: 1964, 97 to 98 percent. decreased risk. but what he also told you was that back at this time, if mr. ramsay had made a decision to stay as a nonsmoker, it is more likely than not that he would not have developed lung cancer and we would not be here. those three facts, ladies and gentlemen, they answered that very first question for you. just those three facts. and when you answer that first question "no," your work is done. your job is done. you put your pen down, and you go home. now, i told you i would be brief during the course of this trial. i did not know how brief. i do not think there is ever been a trial where i did not ask a single question, and i'm going to do so again here today. mr. walker did an excellent job summarizing the evidence, and i agree with what he said and i'm not going to go back through it. but i am going to give you, for lack of a better word, kind of a reader's digest on questions 3 through 6. those are the questions that basically asked, was mr. ramsay defrauded? was he somehow fooled into thinking that cigarettes were not addictive? was he somehow fooled into thinking that cigarettes were not dangerous? was there something that the tobacco companies said or did not say that fooled him? and the answer to that is no, to all of those questions. for all of the reasons mr. walker explained. and for reasons that came directly from mrs. bishop. because mrs. bishop was asked by her own attorney, mr. berg, after she -- he asked her questions and then mr. walker asked her questions, mr. berg came back and said, you are not saying that mr. ramsay knew that nicotine was an addictive drug in the 1970s, are you? and she said, yeah. i think he did know that. when she was directly asked by mr. walker, so it is fair to say that your husband knew about the health risks of smoking back from the time you got married? back to 1961? and what was her answer? yeah, i suppose he did. now, the plaintiffs have come in here and tried to make a big deal about filters and about low tar and say that somehow mr. ramsay was fooled by that. well, all you need to do is look at what mr. ramsay said and how he acted. when he told his children, do not smoke cigarettes, he did not say, do not smoke cigarettes unless you smoke filtered cigarettes or unless you smoke low-tar cigarettes. he told them, do not smoke cigarettes. when his wife would get on him, his friends, his kids and say, you need to quit smoking, it is bad for you, it is killing you. he did not say, oh, it is okay; i'm smoking a low-tar cigarette. it is okay, i'm smoking a filtered cigarette. what he said was. . . every time that mr. ramsay picked up a package of cigarettes, it had a warning on the side. and he saw the exact same warning for every type of cigarette he picked up, whether it was filtered, unfiltered, low-tar, or full-flavored. if mr. ramsay heard anything that the tobacco companies were saying -- and there is no evidence that he did -- he obviously did not believe any of it. and one thing to remember is all of those questions, 3 through 6, also have legal cause. that same thing in there, the legal cause that you have to consider for this. and that brings you back to the three facts you need to answer, the three facts you need for -- to answer these questions, comes back to dr. villa. if he had quit smoking and remained a nonsmoker in 1974, then we would not be here. now, i told you at the beginning of this case that this was a case about mr. ramsay and the decisions he made. and it still is. this is a case about mr. ramsay who quit for 24 days. mr. ramsay who when he picked up cigarettes again, knowing full well the risks associated with smoking, had no nicotine in his system at all. mr. ramsay, who made the decision not to remain a nonsmoker and if he had, we would not be here today. those were his decisions. and those were his decisions to make. and as mr. walker said, we are not criticizing him for making those decisions. but when you make decisions, you accept the responsibility for those decisions. and now mrs. bishop is asking you to award her money for his decisions. do not do it. the evidence in this case simply does not support it. and that is why, ladies and gentlemen, you should return a verdict for the defendants in this case. let me conclude by echoing what everybody has told you, and we are all very sincere in this, thank you for your time, thank you for your attention, and thank you for your jury service. we appreciate it and our clients appreciate it. thank you. the court: thank you.