mr. reilly: thanks. it is still before noon, so good morning, everybody. (response was heard.) mr. reilly: mr. freidin began his closing argument with a thank you and just as i said in my opening statement, i want to express my thanks on behalf of hassia, myself, philip morris and everybody for your service here as jurors. without you guys our civil justice system would not work. and it requires that you guys pay very close attention to the evidence, the witnesses, as it comes in and you have done a great job, no question about it. now, judge blake has given you the instructions. he is going to give you a few more in just a minute, when i'm done and when rebuttal is over. and then you will have an opportunity to take the instructions, follow the law, take the facts as you learned them in this room, and then take our verdict form and answer the questions and resolve this civil dispute, right. so, again, thanks for your service. now, you can see how many boards i have. you know that i've used these in my opening statement. and when i gave you my opening statement i said i was confident that what i was telling you in my opening statement was what the evidence was actually going to be. confident enough that i said, you know what, i'm going to use these same boards in my closing argument. and i am. there are many of the same boards i used in my opening statement right here. but, of course, as you can see from the size of this, i've supplemented that with a bunch of additional boards, right, because during the course of the trial there was evidence that came in that was important enough for me to actually extract it and put on it a board and show it to you in this case. because that is really what this case is all about, the facts that came out during the course of this trial. now, where did the evidence come from in this case? well, we had a total of eight witnesses. some of them were live, like dr. proctor. some of them were on videotape, like their dr. jack henningfield. dr. abel was live. electo reyes was read to you. luisa gonzalez was read to you. eduardo de la vega was read to you. these two were very short. electo reyes, you remember, was the best friend of mr. blasco as he was growing up. gave us a tremendous amount of detailed information about his youth, right. mrs. blasco of course came live and she provided a lot of the evidence that i'm going to be showing you here in a little bit, a lot of the information about mr. blasco and his feelings about smoking, his decisions about smoking. you can call it his choice if you want to. and of course while mr. freidin said choice has nothing to do with class membership, it frankly does. it is all about the choices that we make in our lives, how we live our lives, and that is what this is about. and then dr. ira dosovitz, you saw him just yesterday, he was the only medical doctor to come here and talk to you about addiction. and i'll talk more about all these folks and the information they provided as we go through this closing argument. now, what did i tell you this case was about. that is devon moss' job. in my opening statement i said, i promised you that the judge was going to give you pages of instructions. and he has. and you will actually get a copy of all those pages of instructions. and i said they are going to be filled with legal terms. and they are, tons of them. and i said you are going to get a multi-page verdict form as well, and you will. and it has lots of legal terms in it too. but i said i truly believe that you can condense all that down into just two words. what this case is about, what does it distill down to? and that is control and responsibility. who was in control of mr. blasco's life, his lifestyle choices, and of course in particular his decision about whether he would begin to smoke, continue to smoke, become a regular smoker, and decide whether he wanted to enjoy smoking for decades and then whether he truly wanted to quit smoking? and if he did, what level of motivation did he exercise, and can you tell from what he did and what he said and what he said to his wife whether he wanted to quit smoking or whether he wanted to continue to enjoy the pleasure he derived from smoking and whether or not mrs. blasco is the one that truly wanted him to quit smoking? and you will see that from the quotes that i'm going to show you here in just a little bit. and by the way, this case, well, you heard an awful lot about the american public and things going on in america and statements made to americans. you know, this case is only about one smoker, is not it? you all knew that when this case started. we told you that in opening statement. this is not a class action. this case is about the decisions made by one smoker, and that is mr. blasco, that is mr. blasco. and where did mr. blasco grow up? where was he born? where was he raised? where did he live? we will cover all that as we go through this closing argument. who was in control of mr. blasco's decisions about how he lived his life? and then when you understood that, then you could determine who had responsibility for the decisions that were made by mr. blasco, and did philip morris really and truly in this case and this case only have a significant role in the decisions that mr. blasco made? and that is what this case is really all about. now, i said that you will not see these terms on the instructions or the verdict forms -- verdict form, and you will not, but that is what this case turned out to really be all about. i also told you in my opening statement that i said that there were things that philip morris, and, frankly, other cigarette companies did that i described as wrongheaded in my opening statement. i said, you know what, they clung too long to the position that smoking did not cause lung cancer, had not been proven to cause lung cancer. and i said they should not have disagreed with the surgeon general in 1988 that smoking could not be addictive. i said that right up front. i said it right up front. but i said, you know what, if that is all they had to prove in this case then you guys did not need to share -- we are in our third week now. you guys did not need to share three weeks with us. you could have all gone home. but you could not because they had to prove much more than that in this case. because that is the law of the case. you are going to see a term called "legal cause." you are going to see a term called "reliance." but you are going to see a term called "legal cause." incredibly important terms in this case, in these instructions, on this verdict form. and i warned you that legal cause is a concept that law students spend three years in law school trying to learn. it is difficult. there is a lot of legal terms in defining it. and we expect you guys to come from your nonlegal jobs and join us and learn it and apply it. it is asking you a lot. but you cannot overlook it. you will see it at least five times on the verdict form. you will see instructions on it five times, or thereabouts, in the instructions. it is the most essential element of this whole case in terms of your responsibility as jurors. so now, i showed you this little diagram in my opening statement. i have it again here in my closing argument to help you understand what the obligation of legal cause is. in order for the plaintiff and her lawyers in this case to establish that philip morris is the legal cause of mr. blasco's lung cancer and death, they have to prove that there was a direct connection between philip morris, something it said or something it did, and mr. blasco. what does that mean, direct connection? it means he has to have seen it or heard it. it has to have touched him. it has to be connected to him, not the american public, not internal memos to some other people in a company. it has to apply to him. and there is no getting around it. but it has to be more than he just saw it or heard it. it has to have had a substantial impact -- i'll show you this language in each one of these instructions -- a substantial impact on the decisions of mr. blasco. how substantial? so substantial that without whatever it is that they are complaining about that mr. blasco, what, would not have begun smoking, would not have continued to smoke, would not have become regular smoker, would have avoided all of that and at some point would have quit smoking if he became a smoker and would have quit in time to avoid getting his lung cancer altogether. that is what legal cause requires. reliance is the same concept. he has to have heard it. he has to have seen it. he has to have relied on it. where was mr. blasco? we will go through that. only then can whatever it is they are complaining about be a legal cause of mr. blasco's lung cancer and death. and that is an obligation they have in this case. and there is no getting around it. you virtually did not hear anything about that in either mr. freidin or mr. alvarez's closing argument, did you? there was virtually no emphasis on what i'm talking to you about. but i'll show it to you in each and every question. i put this board up in my opening statement and i said, when we go through this evidence, i suggested to you that you have these thoughts in mind, just kind of be thinking about this as we go through it because it is so important in determining that issue of legal cause. did mr. blasco keep well-informed about current events? was he an intelligent and capable guy? was there evidence that mr. blasco was influenced in direct and substantial way by philip morris? when he finally gets to the united states in 1972, and ladies and gentlemen, there is a big difference between being in puerto rico and being in the continental united states, and i'll explain that to you more in a little bit. was mr. blasco waiting to hear something from philip morris about the health risks of smoking? those are things that i suggested to you that you should be listening for, listening for. because this case involves somebody who was not born here, was not raised here, did not live here, did not live in the continental united states until 1972 when he was 41 or '2 years old, a grown middle-aged man, a grown middle-aged man who had made decisions about smoking for how many years? 30 years? 30 years before he ever gets here and before he -- obviously there is an issue about when he began to smoke cigarettes manufactured by philip morris. was it 1972? was it 1983 or '4 or '5? we will go over that. but at a minimum he had been smoking for over 30 years and he was a middle-aged man who had made decisions about whether he was going to begin smoking, continue to smoke, become a regular smoker, continue to smoke for decades enjoying the pleasure that he derived from smoking, and there is not going to be any question that he derived pleasure from smoking when i get through reviewing the evidence in this case. we now have the verdict form. so what i'd like to do is just walk through the questions that you are being asked to answer and just see what the evidence was and then suggest to you what i think the answers, based on the evidence, prove to be. now, briefly let me talk about the burden of proof. because the burden of proof rests on the shoulders of the plaintiff to prove virtually all the issues in this case. mr. freidin said, well, the burden of proof is only to tip the scales a little bit. what it really is is when we present to you a mountain of evidence, their mountain has to be higher. that is their burden of proof. their mountain has to be higher. so when i go through this evidence, their mountain has to be higher than what i'm showing you. what is the first question? "was mr. blasco addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" well, who came and testified about that? who came and testified about mr. blasco? yes, you spent the day yesterday with dr. ira dosovitz, and obviously dr. ira dosovitz is an expert in the field of addiction, addiction medicine, addiction psychiatry, there is no question about it. they criticized him because of a sickness and a death in his family that he let his certification lapse for a short period of time in the middle of his career. but did george washington medical school think that he was somehow unqualified because he delayed recertifying himself because of a death in the family? obviously not. that is ridiculous. and dr. dosovitz explained to you how people who are truly experts in this field go about making a determination of whether someone is truly addicted. this is a court of law. this is not the street. this is not the boulevard, this is a court of law, and in this court of law we bring experts to you to assist you in making serious determinations. and whether or not mr. blasco was addicted is a serious determination to be made by you in this case. now, yes, dr. dosovitz walked you through the criteria that psychiatrists, psychologists, he described a world full of physicians use this tool along with their clinical judgment. he is told you that he is cared for 3,000 people who wanted to deal with smoking. and we went through the diagnostic and statistical manual criteria. he walked you through the whole thing and how he analyzed it. now, let me ask you this. who did the plaintiff and her lawyers, this team of lawyers, who did they bring to address this issue for you? did they bring you anybody who read all the depositions like dr. dosovitz did? did they bring you somebody who had looked at the medical records, the medical records that we have in this case? no. did they bring you anybody that knew anything about mr. blasco? because this case is not about the american public. this case is not about smokers in general. this case is only about one smoker and one smoker only, is not it? and that is mr. blasco. so who on behalf of the plaintiffs analyzed this situation for you? if it was so easy to determine whether or not mr. blasco was addicted or not, then, my goodness, it must have been a snap to go find somebody to come in here and talk about it. but that was not done. you have to ask yourselves i think, my goodness, if it is so easy to do then why was not that done? why is the only evidence they presented somebody on a videotape taken years ago who was not even a medical doctor? why was that done? a matter of strategy? perhaps so, perhaps so. but does that raise a question in your mind as to what is going on? who has the burden of proof on this issue? not hassia and me. yet we brought you somebody to address this very issue. we brought you a highly qualified person who does what? who makes these determinations every day, makes these determinations every day. based on all the evidence that dr. dosovitz had, he addressed this issue and his conclusion was that although, yes, mr. blasco had withdrawal on those occasions when he quit smoking and yes, he had tolerance -- he said, you know what, this fellow does not meet the diagnostic criteria and from my clinical point of view i do not think that he was addicted, i do not think he qualified as addicted. if all you had to do -- they have taken the cigarettes away, but if all you had to do was figure out how many cigarettes were smoked, you do not need this book, right. you do not need this book. but why does the american psychiatric association bother to print it if that is all you need to do. it is because that is not all you need to do, not all you need to do. so i would suggest that, frankly, in this particular case the uncontroverted evidence, because they brought nobody to address it, mr. blasco in particular, is that the answer was no, he was not addicted. if that is what you conclude -- and all these answers have to be unanimous. they all have to be unanimous. you cannot go on until you answer this question. because the next sentence says, it directs you to whether you go on or you do not go on, and if you answer it no then you do not go on and your work is over. if you answer this question yes, and everybody would have to agree that the answer was yes, then you go on to the next question, and that is, "was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of mr. blasco's lung cancer and death?" well, did you hear anything in their closing argument about that, legal cause? here's the instruction. i mean, look at all this verbiage. "an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of the disease if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially," that is the minimum, it either has to do it by itself or it has to contribute substantially to producing the disease. how substantial does it have to be? it has to be so substantial that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine he would not have gotten sick with lung cancer and died. ladies and gentlemen, you cannot skip over it. that is their burden in this case. now, who did they bring to address this question? nobody. dr. henningfield did not even address this question. they brought nobody. and you cannot skip over it. every instruction, everything i'm showing you you will have in the jury room, every one. so in order to know the answer to this question you have got to ask yourself, so was addiction why mr. blasco developed his lung cancer and died? is that why he kept smoking? or did he keep smoking because he enjoyed smoking? did he keep smoking because that was a lifestyle choice that he made for himself? now, let us look at the evidence that was presented in this case. every time i quote somebody, that is who is saying it, and this is exactly where the court reporter created in the trial transcript what was said so there is no question about what i'm putting up. this is mrs. blasco. i asked, "in fact, when you met him, you could not stand the smell of the smoke of his cigarettes. "no. "and, in fact, you told him that. you told him you did not want him smoking around you because" -- this is 1953, right? -- "because you did not like the smell of his cigarettes? "yes. but he told me that i had met him that way, smoking." this is 1953. he is been smoking for a decade. "right. so he intended to keep on smoking because that is the way he was when you met him. "yes. "and mr. blasco enjoyed smoking when you met him, did not he? "yes." this is mrs. blasco. why is he smoking? there is the answer right there, because he enjoyed smoking and he intended to keep on doing it. and this is going to go right on through, i'm going to move pretty quickly because i only have a limited am of time and an awful lot of boards because there was an awful lot of testimony on this. remember she got married and she found out he was smoking in bed. "now, you said to mr. alvarez that he would smoke two or three cigarettes before he would get out of bed in the morning." you know he said it takes 10 to 15 minutes to smoke a cigarette so he would apparently stay in bed for 30, 45 minutes getting out of bed. that is the testimony. "yes. "so he liked to stay in bed for a while in the morning, did not he? "yes. "all right. this was his style. "yes." this is mr. blasco's style. "and then you said he would smoke some cigarettes before he went to bed at night. "yes. "he liked to get in bed and spend some time in bed before he went to sleep? "yes. "that is just the way he liked to live his life? "yes. "right. and did not you tell me, hey, i do not like the smell of the smoke in the car and i wish you would not do it? "yes, i would tell him, but he continued smoking." i'll get the system down yet. probably not. still mrs. blasco. there is so much mrs. blasco testimony here. "did you say to your husband, look, i do not want you smoking american cigarettes in cuba now because you could be put in jail?" do you remember that? "yes, but he continued to buy them. "did he give you any explanation as to why he was willing to risk going to jail just to buy american cigarettes? "because he liked them." because he liked them. "mr. blasco never had any desire to quit smoking in the '50s or the '60s while you were dating him or married to him in cuba, did he? "never." this is mrs. blasco's testimony. "never." if he started smoking in 1953 -- i'm sorry, 1943 and he continued to smoke in cuba until 1967, what is that? 24 years? maybe that is not good math, but pretty close. "did mr. blasco tell you that he enjoyed smoking his winstons in puerto rico? "yes." yes. was there any evidence -- i heard mr. alvarez say, oh, why does he switch to winstons in puerto rico? we have no idea. nobody came here and told you why he switched to winstons in puerto rico. it was a mystery, was not it? i mean, he switches from chesterfield that he was willing to go to prison to smoke and then all of a sudden he gets in puerto rico and he switches to winstons. and there was no explanation. it was a mystery. but now mr. alvarez has an answer for that. more testimony. "did mr. blasco ever try to quit smoking while you were in puerto rico was the question. "no." "well, he told you many, many times when you would talk to him that he did not want to stop smoking either, did not he? "yes. "and, in fact, he would tell you that he did not want you to talk to him anymore about quitting smoking, did not he? "yes." that is in the '80s. i mean, i've walked you straight on through. we have been in cuba. we have been in puerto rico. now we are in the united states. she is saying he tried to quit. "well, he told you many, many times when you would talk to him that he did not want to stop smoking either, did not he? "yes. "and, in fact, he would tell you that he did not want you to talk to him anymore about quitting smoking, did not he? "yes." these are decisions that we make. this is how we live our lives. "the times that he would hand you the cigarettes and tell you to take them was in connection with you telling him you wanted him to quit smoking, was not it? "yes. "and the times that he would stop smoking for two or three days were in connection with you telling him you wanted him to stop smoking, were not they? "yes... "and mr. blasco continued to tell you that he enjoyed smoking. "yes." whose idea was it to quit? you know the answer to that. look at these pictures. and i said, so there is you are husband he is enjoying smoking and drinking beer at a festival, right? "yes. "something he enjoyed doing. "yes. "but there he is having beers and smoking cigarettes. "yes, we were on vacation." that is what he enjoyed doing, is not it? i need this again because the next board there is more. "looks like he is having a cup of coffee and there is his package of -- those are marlboros, are not they? "yes. "and he enjoyed having coffee and cigarettes, did not he? "yes. "if we went all the way back to cuba, he enjoyed from the time you got married to him and were spending mornings with him, he enjoyed having a cigarette with his coffee in the morning, did not he? "yes. "he liked to have his cigarette after dinner, did not he? "yes. "he liked to have a cigarette after breakfast in the morning, did not he? "yes." ladies and gentlemen, these are the choices that you get to make. these are the choices, whether it is cigarettes, alcohol, these are substances that have danger, there is no question they can be addicting, they can cause you to get sickness and die. but we have made the decision as a society that these are legal products and you get to use them if you choose to. nobody puts a gun to your head and says you have got to smoke this or you have got to drink this. whether it is beers, alcohol, or cigarettes, these are choices that we make. "now, when you said to your husband in the '80s you wanted him to quit smoking, did you ever suggest to him that he go to a stop-smoking clinic? "no." you know why not, because she said he did not want to go, would not go. remember they lived across the street from a physician, dr. gala. "did you ever say to your husband, why do not you walk across the street and ask dr. gala to help you quit smoking? "no. "when dr. gala was at your house" -- remember, dr. gala would come over. dr. gala was a cardiologist and family practice physician. dr. gala has children who grew up with their children. dr. gala would be in their house. and i said, "when dr. gala was at your house, did you ever say, dr. gala, my husband is having difficulty quitting smoking, can you help him? "no. "is the reason why you never did that because you knew your husband would not go to dr. gala? "no. "why did not you suggest that to your husband? "because i never thought of it." "and did you say to him," talking to her husband, "i want you to quit smoking while you are receiving treatment?" remember, there was a question, why did he continue to smoke after he was diagnosed? why did he do that? did he do that because he was addicted? and you heard dr. dosovitz explaining that. "and did you say to him, i want you to quit smoking while you are receiving treatment? "yes. "and did he tell you, i do not want to stop smoking, i want to smoke now?" and the answer is "yes." you know what, we get to make that decision. "and after he knew that he was not going to get cured, did he tell you he absolutely wanted to keep smoking because that is what gave him pleasure in life?" that is what gave him pleasure in life. "yes, and what he had left, he could no longer walk, because that way he would die to his pleasure, smoking. "because that is what had given him pleasure in life, right? "yes." right up to the end. i walked you from cuba to the end of his life. and here was mrs. gonzalez. this is the most important thing mrs. gonzalez had to say. this was the friend of the family. and she was there when mr. blasco quit smoking on occasions. and this is the question that she was asked and this testimony was read to you. you can have it read back if you want. "when elba was deposed and she was asked about when she and others would encourage mr. blasco to stop smoking, she responded that he would not pay attention to anybody about cigarettes, he would continue smoking. is that your recollection as well?" she said, "i know we encouraged him, then he ended up smoking within a few days, so obviously he blew us off." he blew us off. now, this is a friend of the family. she has no stake in this case. and that was a friend of the family speaking about her experience watching mr. blasco return to smoking. could mr. blasco have quit smoking if he had wanted to? here's what the american cancer society has to say, smart move. this is their brochure on what it takes to takes to quit smoking, three things. do you want to stop smoking? well, the first question, ask yourself right now after all this testimony, did mr. blasco want to stop smoking? you know the answer to that as you sit here right now. was he willing to make changes to his daily routine? obviously not. are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? clearly he was not. so now back to the question. you know the requirement of their burden of making addiction a legal cause of why mr. blasco got his lung cancer and died. what is the answer? you know why he kept on smoking. why did he keep on smoking? because he enjoyed smoking and did not want to quit. so what is the answer to this question? the answer to this question is no. and if you agree with that then you proceed no further, sign this verdict form and your work is done. your work is done. now, that is what the evidence shows. you guys have to come to a conclusion. if you disagree with that then you have to go on, you have to go on and answer the rest of the questions. the next question, i have i think four questions here. "was smoking philip morris' cigarettes a legal cause of mr. blasco's lung cancer and death? again, you see this requirement of legal cause. for the philip morris cigarettes to be a legal cause of mr. blasco's lung cancer and death those philip morris cigarettes have to have been a substantial reason, they have to have either produced or been a substantial cause to why mr. blasco got his lung cancer. how substantial? that if he had not smoked philip morris manufactured cigarettes he would not have gotten his lung cancer. when did mr. blasco begin smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes? you know, there is a great debate about that. mrs. blasco said -- you remember her deposition, it was sometime after he came to the united states. was it before or after her daughter got married in 1984? and she said, you know what, now i know for sure that it was in 1972. it was shortly after we came to the united states. and i said, why? and she said, because i've seen this picture, i've seen this picture and i know that those were marlboros in that picture. and so i asked her -- remember we did this, and i said, where are the marlboros in this picture that convinced you that your husband was smoking in the early '70s in the united states? and i said, is it this white pack here? is it this? and she said, no, no. and she had me point -- remember we had it way out, she had me point, remember we had it way out and it turned out to be his shirt pocket. it turned out to be his shirt pocket. so when did mr. blasco begin to smoke cigarettes? that is the only reason why she now knew it was in the early '70s. when did he start smoking? why is this important? it is important because of a couple of questions that hassia asked dr. abel, their expert. the question was, when did the cancer start in his body? and mr. alvarez said, well, he knows when it was. it could not have been 10 or 20 years ago. but that is not what their expert said. here's what their expert said. dr. abel's testimony was, "based on the records we have, you cannot tell when the lung cancer originated in mr. blasco's body, right? i'm talking about originated at the cellular level." that is how cancer starts. "there is no way to tell when it originated. "no way i can tell. no way you can tell. "exactly. no way anybody can tell that, right? "right." so then the next question was -- because you all have heard about people who quit smoking and a decade later, two decades later they still get lung cancer, do not they, because it is called a latent disease? and so hassia asked that very question of dr. abel. she said, "so let me ask the question again, doctor. have you had, in your practice have you had patients who quit smoking for 20 years and still developed lung cancer? "i'm not sure if 20 years, certainly 10 years. but, you know, we examine the data, you get off the elevator ride and you keep your risk. so i'm sure they are out there." 20 years. i'm sure they are out there that have developed cancer -- and i've seen them for 10 years. so if mr. blasco did not begin smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes until 1972 and he is diagnosed in 1991, we have got people 20 years, that is 1971, when he is still living in puerto rico and he has not smoked a marlboro yet. if it is 10 years and he did not begin smoking marlboros until the mid '80s... who is got the burden of proof on this? hassia did not need to prove that. who has the burden of proof on this issue? not philip morris. and that is their expert who said that. so what is the answer to this question -- remember, it is a balance. who brought bigger evidence? did they overcome that mountain from their own expert? i did not even -- hassia and i did not even bring a doctor because we knew he would say that. so what is the answer to this question? the answer to this question is no, they did not satisfy their legal cause requirement because their own expert said, i do not know when the cancer started and i know that there are people who have cancer in their bodies for 10 or 20 years after they have quit smoking. that is a fact. next two questions. these questions are about -- you still have to go on and answer questions regardless of how you answer that one. that is what the evidence shows in response to that question. questions 4 and 5, in order to answer these questions about reasonably relying, see that word "rely," to his detriment, that means he has to make a decision to his detriment on a statement by philip morris that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects so that the reliance was a legal cause of his death. the same thing applies here for some act in furtherance of the agreement they are talking about, they still have to show that mr. blasco reasonably relied on something that was said. this is where we are talking about legal cause, reasonable reliance, is it something that mr. blasco heard or saw, did it touch him? but it has to do more than touch him. it has to be something that substantially influenced him. how substantially? so substantially that mr. blasco would not have done what he did, he would not have begun smoking, he would not have continued to smoke, he would have quit smoking and quit smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer. did they show you that? they do not even mention, they do not even mention a cigarette company in the united states in mr. blasco's life until sometime in the mid to late '80s when he is been smoking for what, 40 something years. 40 something years. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, mischaracterized the requirement by law. the court: jury will listen to the evidence and the instructions and apply the law accordingly. mr. reilly: well, i'm just reading it right to you, so there you have it. here's the requirement of the reliance being a legal cause. now, in order to answer these two questions you really have to know how mr. blasco lived his life, right? you need to know, well, is there some connection between philip morris -- for the conspiracy question -- philip morris or some other u.s. cigarette manufacturer? was he really being influenced in some material way? did he reasonably rely on something that was said? well, you have got to walk through mr. blasco's life. and that is what i'm going to do right now. that is what i'm going to do right now. mr. blasco was born in 1931 in cuba. he was not born here in the united states. and there is not even an allegation of conspiracy until 1953. 1953. there is no claim that mr. blasco was caused to begin smoking cigarettes by philip morris, no claim. none. in the 1940s what is being told to the cuban population about american cigarettes? you cannot even find an ad. there is not even an ad in this case from the 1940s regarding a cigarette company in the united states. they had less than 1 percent of the market, 1 percent of the market. i'll show you that their own expert dr. proctor agreed with that. here's dr. proctor. "and from the cuban manufacturing standpoint cuban cigarette manufacturing standpoint, as of 1945 american cigarettes comprised less than 1 percent of the total cuban market, right? "it was very tiny, yeah." very tiny, yeah. so when they talk about the atmosphere that was created by cigarette companies, who was creating an atmosphere about smoking in cuba? who has 99 plus percent of the market in cuba? cuban cigarette companies. you heard mrs. blasco talk about all the brands of cigarettes in cuba that were for sale, cuban cigarettes. and how proud -- you know this is the number one industry in cuba. yeah, we put in evidence, bohemia magazines. can you find ads for american products in la bohemia? you bet. look at those magazines, you can find ads for tires, for cars, find ads for american cigarettes, because, guess what? there are not ads for cigarettes. yeah, i think they found 20 ads or 30 ads after combing everywhere for a decade. a decade. i gave you the whole magazines. they are filled with cuban cigarette ads. why? because they have 97 percent of the market. makes sense, right? we will talk more about that in just a minute. bottom line, when does mr. blasco begin smoking? he begins smoking in the early '40s. how do we know? because we know from electo reyes. what is being said to him by his buddies when he begins smoking? is he being encouraged to smoke? "once eddie was smoking and you would see him after school" -- i'm sorry. i've got this one out of order. what were his friends telling him? "okay. now you were talking about all of eddie's friends, including you, told eddie to stop smoking. "yes, they did. "prior to him moving to havana was the question. did anybody else tell eddie to stop smoking? "all his friends told him to quit doing it, to leave it alone because it is sick." was there any evidence in this case that mr. blasco heard or saw any statement by any cigarette company from the united states in the '40s? none, not one word in this case. remember, reasonably rely, legal cause. these are requirements. that is why you did not hear about this during plaintiff's closing argument. because these are burdens that they have that you cannot overlook because you have to follow the court's instructions. does he spend some time in the united states? yeah. yeah, here's his report card. when does he go there? he enters on september 6th, 1948 from the ministere de educacion instituto de segunda ensenanza. he does not do well in school and guess what? withdrew december 17, 1948. he is there for three and a half months. was he a regular smoker before he went to military school? sure. this is electo reyes testimony. "once eddie was smoking and you would see him after school for about an hour and a half, how many cigarettes would you see eddie smoke at that time? "two or three cigarettes". so here he is before he even goes to havana he is smoking two or three cigarettes in an hour and a half after school. all right. that is the '40s. let us go to the '50s. you know, that the blascos meet each other in 1953. you know that at that point he is already smoking, he is already a regular smoker. he is smoking chesterfields. not made by philip morris, right? made by liggett. and you saw liggett's lawyer here at the beginning of this trial when you were being selected. they are not here anymore. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. reilly: at that point in time mrs. blasco asks him to -- tell him to quit -- asks him to quit. and what is he say? you already saw the testimony. no. you met me i was a smoker, you got me as a smoker. we talked about advertising for american cigarettes in cuba. here's what electo reyes had to say about advertising for american cigarettes. "did you recall seeing any print advertisements for american cigarette brands in cuba before the revolution? "no. "do you recall seeing any television advertisements for american brands in cuba before the revolution? "no. "do you remember hearing any radio advertisements for american brands in cuba before the revolution? "no. "after the revolution do you recall seeing any ads, any print ads for cigarettes, for american cigarettes in cuba? "oh, no, even less then." did mrs. blasco say something different? "and, in fact, rarely were there any ads in cuban magazines or newspapers for american cigarettes, were there? "yes, there were. "yes, i understand. but rarely, right? "yes." rarely. rarely. is this some major influence? well, you would think that if you advertised heavily in cuba you might get more than 2.75 of the market, but that is all they ever had. now, mr. alvarez spent a great deal of time, ninety percent of his presentation in his closing a argument was spent talking about things that were said in the united states by american cigarette manufacturers. frank statement, company statements, speeches, articles. was there any evidence that any of that ever appeared in cuba? none. he gets to get back up. he is got 12 minutes after i sit down. he is got 12 minutes to come up here and say, well, here are the articles that reflected american cigarette companies' positions on whether smoking had been proven to cause lung cancer in cuba, in puerto rico in the '60s or early -- '50s, '60s, early '70s. there are none. there are none. and, in fact, you may or may not remember this, but several of the videos that mr. alvarez showed you, remember the two guys from philip morris and then the last guy, the guy that was giving a deposition? remember these instructions that were given to you by judge blake just before both those videos were shown. regarding the philip morris one, it says, "ladies and gentlemen, you are about to see a portion of a recorded interview given by two philip morris executives in 1976. this recording was never broadcast in florida or anywhere else where mr. blasco could have seen it. there is no allegation mr. blasco ever saw this recording or that mr. blasco ever relied on it when making decisions whether to smoke or refrain from smoking." this is their burden, ladies and gentlemen -- gentleman. how about the fellow giving his deposition? "all right, ladies and gentlemen, you are about to see a recorded deposition given by a former executive from a tobacco company called the american tobacco company. this deposition was used in a court case in 1987 that was never broadcast. there is no allegation that mr. blasco ever saw this recording or that he relied on it when making decisions whether to smoke or refrain from smoking." in the '50s was a tobacco company talking about the health risks of smoking to cubans? sure. their dr. proctor with a document mrs. blasco's lawyers gave him had this perfectos habana cigars ad from the gente magazine in 1958 in which perfectos said "there is no doubt that cuban cigarettes are to be considered the purest and healthiest in the world and are also lower in cost than," et cetera, et cetera. ..."cleaning and purifying process." and that american cigarettes cause chronic bronchitis and reproductive organ problems for women. yeah, there was -- and you have an instruction from judge blake that says this did not involve cuban cigarette companies this conspiracy that they are talking about. so that is what cigarette company -- that is the only evidence in this case as to what a cigarette company was telling cuban smokers in cuba in the '50s, that is it. we put in evidence articles from selecciones telling consumers and mr. blasco, because he read selecciones, mrs. blasco said so, and la bohemia and diaro de la marina. articles in which there was a discussion of the health effects of cigarette smoking. the science begins in 1950, grows in '53, grows some more, you saw the life magazine, grows some more where the cuban people being informed of these advances in science connecting smoking with lung cancer. yeah, you are going to see not only the articles, but the translations. i know that some of you i'm sure speak and read spanish, for those that do not there will be translations on these exhibits. is there any statement of denial in those records from people from the united states? no. none. remember the obligation, reasonable reliance it is got to touch him, it is got to touch mr. blasco, he is got to see it, he is got to hear it, he is got to believe it, he is got to rely on it and it has to affect his decision whether he is going to smoke, continue smoking or not. 1959, they marry. when they get married mr. blasco is smoking in bed. you saw the references to when he smokes in bed, when he is getting up in the morning, when he is going to bed at night. mrs. blasco asks him do not do it. he says, you know what, i'm going to keep doing it. how about risks of cigarettes? that gente article announced that cuban cigarettes were safe, right? but dr. proctor knew that was not right. their expert said -- he agreed with "the surgeon general has addressed whether dark tobacco," which cuban cigarettes are made of, "is more dangerous and more addicting than american brands, has not it? "that is right. that is been one conclusion, yes. "well, that is the surgeon general's conclusion, is not it? "yes, that is right." cuban cigarettes with dark tobacco are more addicting and more dangerous than american brands. that is more dangerous and more addicting. here are some of the articles that we have put in evidence for you. "cancer of the lung." united states congress, information in the united states congress regarding the dangers of cigarettes. you will see it. and is mr. blasco somebody who reads la bohemia? yes. is he somebody who reads selecciones? yes. is he somebody who reads diaro de la marina? yes. is he intelligent? yes. does he keep abreast of current developments? yes. is there any reason to believe that mr. blasco does not have this knowledge? no. is there ever a moment -- well, 1960s, mr. blasco, the revolution is successful. now mr. blasco is buying chesterfields on the black market, still not manufactured by philip morris. cuban tobacco industry is nationalized. you cannot even buy american cigarettes in cuba anymore unless you buy them from on the black market from the mafia, as mr. reyes said. but if -- matter of fact, here's the article in one of the bohemia magazines that you have. this is the april 10th, 1960, you have it. there is this little picture, you can see it. i forget what page it is on. but it says there is not one american cigarette left in the entire country. "capital fight has broken the local habit of blowing 'yankee smoke.'" there is a huge nationalism of the sugar and tobacco industry in cuba. so they are very opposed to smoking american cigarettes, yet we are told that mr. blasco continued to do it because he enjoyed it. okay. he enjoys them regardless of whether or not they are going to be very expensive. after the revolution it was illegal to buy american cigarettes in cuba. this is from electo reyes. "i think. i seem to remember, i have a vague idea that nothing in america was allowed into the country. "where would you have to buy american cigarettes after the revolution? "to the guantanamo, the naval base in guantanamo. and if they caught you they would put you in jail. so if you wanted to buy american cigarettes, you had to buy them from the gray market in cuba. you would have to go to the mafia." you know that he leaves and goes to -- the family leaves -- oh, by the way, in 1966 if he is smoking chesterfields, then every package, and if they came from the united states every package has got to have this "caution: cigarette smoking maybe hazardous to your health" on it. so if he is smoking two packs a day, 40 cigarettes a day or two and a half or three, whatever the number is, how many times a day does he take a cigarette out of the pack? how many times a day does he have the opportunity to look at that language from his chesterfield pack of cigarettes? now, you can choose to ignore it, but it is there. and whether you believe it or not you at least are given the opportunity to be aware of the health risks, to be aware. then you make your decision. 1967 they arrive in puerto rico. they move to caguas. he switches to winstons. we have no idea why. all we know is he switches to winstons and he smokes winstons from there on out until 1972 when he comes to the united states. but now we have that very personal and very powerful experience that he has when electo reyes has the throat nodules. you remember? he was smoking cigars and so he -- the doctors tell him, hey, those maybe cancerous. so he announces to all of his buddies including mr. blasco, do not smoke, quit smoking. i may have cancer of the throat. this is what he said. "since ms. blasco listed you as a witness, everything you know concerning eddie, his life -- "blasco and i were buddies from time to time when we were in cuba. we were 11 or 12 years old and i would insist, because he is been smoking from the time he was 12 or 13 years old, i would tell him not to smoke, but he never paid any attention to what i told him. i smoked cigars, but one day i developed some nodules here in my throat. yes, unfortunately, and the doctors told me, thank heavens, that those were benign. "however, the doctors set an example for me. he told me that, you know, when you take a piece of meat and put it on broil that it is going to burn up very quickly. if i put it on bake it will eventually burn, but it will take longer. and i gave that example to eddie. "so i have not smoked now for i do not know how many years, but eddie did not pay any attention to me." was mrs. blasco telling mr. blasco when he lived in puerto rico that she wanted him to quit smoking? "were you ever present when elba told eduardo to stop smoking? "once or twice. "and that was in miami? "in puerto rico, the one or two times that i saw them." all right. let us go to the '70s. now there is a warning on every pack. in fact, if you look at instruction 20, you receive on instruction 20 -- do we have that on the screen? we have it on a board. one more board. you thought i was one short. instruction 20, the warning labels placed on cigarette advertisements and packs by philip morris and other tobacco companies complied with federal law. after july 1, 1969 philip morris had no obligation to place any additional warnings on their cigarette advertisements or packages. that is this warning, ladies and gentlemen. "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." dangerous to your health. does that cause mr. blasco to stop smoking or even consider stop smoking? you already saw the testimony from his wife, he had no interest in quitting smoking in the '50s, '60s, '70s, until sometime in the middle or late '80s. and that was because she wanted him to quit. before they ever moved to the united states there is no more cigarette advertising on television. remember i asked dr. proctor, by the time they moved to the united states the surgeon general's report was out eight years earlier, smoking is on the decline, per capita level of smoking in the united states has already declined. and there have been tens of millions of people who have already quit smoking in the united states. mrs. blasco continues to talk to him about his smoking. he has no interest in quitting smoking. there are public service announcements running on television in the '60s and '70s. michael, do we have public service announcements? i think is the talman. i'm just going to play one from the '60s/'70s time frame, but they ran all the time. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: this is the house we live in. this is billy. he is pretty handy to have around. steve, home from college. barby looking after her brother timmy. debbie, who will soon graduate from high school. susan, our youngest. and my wife peggy, who looks after all of us. and that is me, bill talman with a friend of mine you might recognize. you know, i did not really mind losing those courtroom battles, but i'm in a battle right now i do not want to lose at all. because if i lose it means losing my wife and those kids you just met. i've got lung cancer, so take some advice about smoking and losing from someone who is been doing both for years. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you do smoke, quit. do not be a loser. (video clip concluded.) the clerk: counsel, you have 25 more minutes. mr. reilly: thank you. let me hurry on through. let us go to the '80s. do people know that smoking causes lung cancer? this is san diego tribune, january 17th, 1981. here's dr. david burns. he is the author of so many -- he is a significant public health figure, he is the author of so many surgeon general's reports. he says, "it is not that smokers do not know the risks. in fact, 95 percent of them are thoroughly aware of the health dangers and 90 percent of them realize that their health could be affected, according to dr. david burns." somehow they are shoe-horning mr. blasco into the 5 percent that are not thoroughly aware and the ten percent that realize it and believe it. is there some reason to believe that mr. blasco somehow is such an oddball? more public service announcements. i will not play more of them for you. but mrs. soto moves down. and mrs. soto is now joining the chorus of telling mr. blasco to quit smoking. does he ever say to mrs. soto or to mrs. blasco's brother reynaldo reyes [sic] that cigarette companies have convinced him to continue to smoke? no, he never said that. and mrs. blasco acknowledged that her husband never said that in front of those people. warnings change in 1985, now the warning says explicitly "smoking causes lung cancer." did mr. blasco control his smoking? does he know that smoking comes with a health risk? sure. that is why when his granddaughter christina comes and lives with the family, or stays with the family three months he is not smoking in the house. not smoking in the house. unfortunately, he is diagnosed with lung cancer in 1991 and unfortunately dies in 1992. i will not spend the time to go again in detail through the reasonable reliance requirements but you know that they have got to prove that he relied on some statement, he has to reasonably rely, he has to hear it, he has to see it, he has to rely on it and then you have to find that it is a legal cause so that it can reasonably be said that but for that statement he would have, what? now that we are in the mid to late '80s, what? that he would have quit smoking and avoided getting his lung cancer? there is no evidence of that, ladies and gentlemen. same for reasonably relying on some statement in connection with the agreement, the conspiracy that they talk about. same requirements, reasonable reliance so that but for the reasonable reliance he would not have gotten his lung cancer. was there any evidence of that in this case? no. the whole time that mrs. blasco is asking her husband to quit smoking he is saying, i do not want to quit, i enjoy smoking, i'm not interested in quitting. advertising. mr. alvarez talked about advertising. i asked mrs. blasco, "but your husband never told you that he began smoking because of advertising of any kind, did he. "no. matter of fact, mr. blasco never told you that advertising for cigarettes affected him in any way, did he? "no." how about, was there any evidence in this case that mr. blasco was deceived in any way? "during the time that you were dating your husband" -- i did this in segments. "during the time that you were dating your husband i guess until december of 1959, did you ever have a conversation with him about -- that he was taking a health risk by smoking?" "no." she never even talks to him about it. i broke it down into this next segment. "in between the date of your marriage and january of 1960, you did not talk to him about quitting smoking. "no. "and other than the fact that he said to you that he liked them, that he enjoyed them, he never gave you another reason why he chose chesterfields as his brand in cuba? "no." talking about changing to marlboros. mr. alvarez said it was due to ads. i asked mrs. blasco directly, "now, your husband never told you why he changed from winstons to marlboros whenever that happened, right? "no, never." where is the evidence that mr. alvarez is relying on? certainly not in this case. "when you were living in puerto rico, did you ever talk about the health risks of smoking with your husband? "no. "while you were living in puerto rico, did your husband ever report to you that he had read or seen anything anywhere about the health risks of smoking? "no, because i never saw it." how about the '70s in the united states? "did you talk to your husband about smoking at all in the '70s here in the united states? "no. "now, sometime after you got here in the united states you began telling your husband that you thought he ought to quit smoking, right? "yes, after the '80s." after the '80s. "and did not you and nora soto talk about the fact that your husband should stop smoking for his health? "yes. "and did not you do that in front of your husband? "yes. "but he never said to nora soto that he was going to continue smoking because somebody from a cigarette company told him that it was safe to smoke, did he? "i do not know if he told her. "while you were sitting there, he never said that to mrs. soto, did he? "no." so let us go back to these questions. if you get this far on this verdict form, have they really shown you a bigger mountain of evidence than i just did? that mr. blasco truly reasonably relied on something that philip morris or some other cigarette company, in this case philip morris said about the health risks of smoking such that he made a decision, to what? certainly not begin smoking or become a regular smoker, because that happened decades ago, right? so the only question here could be, did mr. blasco actually decide, reasonably rely on something that philip morris said to decide to continue to smoke in the '80s when he had already been smoking for 40 plus years? and you saw over and over and over again mrs. blasco saying, every time i talked to my husband he said he did not want to stop, he enjoyed smoking. that is their burden of proof in this case. have they really proved that to your satisfaction, each and every one of you, really and truly? hey, look, there is no doubt that everybody in this room feels sympathy for somebody who has lost a loved one. that is the most natural thing on the planet. but you receive an instruction from judge blake, it is contained in instruction 30, and this is what it says, "in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion, or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received and the law on which i have instructed you." so that is what your job -- and i know it can be hard because, you know, our heartstrings are plucked. we are human beings. we can feel sadness for another human being. we can feel sympathy. but your job as jurors are hard sometimes and you have to set aside feelings of sympathy and just go on the evidence that was presented in the course of this trial and the law as judge blake gave it to you in the instructions and these questions on the verdict form. so what are the answers to questions 4 and 5? they are clearly no. the man is in cuba. the man is in puerto rico. there is no evidence of any involvement, no touching, no hearing, no seeing. the most you have in this case is a very vague statement by mrs. blasco sometime in the mid to late '80s where he said something to her about some cigarette company executive said something that he heard. but i asked her in detail, who was it? what was it? do you know anything? no, nothing. nothing. and nobody else heard him ever say that. so now what is the mountain of evidence that they have brought that is bigger than what i just gave you? let me go on to this -- so what are the answers to these questions? these questions are so much easier. these answers are no, on this fact. you can be critical. you can be doggone critical of philip morris, other cigarette manufacturers for clinging too long to whether or not smoking caused lung cancer or not or not agreeing with the surgeon general in 1988, sure you can. but that does not get a verdict in this case. and you see why. this is the judge's rules. you see this as the law of florida. now, if you get this far you have to assign responsibility. and mr. alvarez said put 85 percent of the responsibility for mr. blasco's decisions on philip morris. he does not even smoke cigarettes -- the decisions he makes in smoking are to begin smoking, to continue smoking, to become a regular smoker, to smoke for decades. he cannot possibly have even touched a philip morris manufactured cigarette until when? at the earliest 1972. but if you do not believe that there is a marlboro pack of cigarettes in that photograph it is probably the mid '80s, right? he is in the last, what, five, six, seven years of his smoking career probably when he starts smoking marlboros. every day when mr. blasco wakes up and he looks in the mirror, according to mr. alvarez, he is in a little tiny piece of the mirror and philip morris is completely occupies the mirror practically. is that the way we live our lives? is that who makes our decisions every morning when we decide how we are going to live our lives when we wake up and wash our faces, take a shower, look in the mirror? you do not leave your common sense at that door. we do not let sympathy take away your common sense. you cannot do that. i know it would be easy, but that is why we are in a court of law. i leave this to your sound discretion. you know what, is there really anybody else in the mirror, really? when we wake up in the morning and we look in the mirror and we say, this is how i'm going to live my -- whether it is we are going to drink cocktails, we are going to smoke cigarettes, we are going to gamble, who else is in the mirror really when we decide how we are going to live our lives? i leave that to your sound discretion. mr. alvarez asked you for 12 million dollars in damages. you know what, i do not think you get anywhere near this in the verdict form, but if you do, i leave that to your sound discretion too. in light of all the evidence in this case, i do not think you get anywhere near any of these questions. but if you do, use your sound judgment. that is all i ask. all right. ladies and gentlemen, i'm done. and i greatly appreciate -- you all have been incredibly attentive during any closing argument. i greatly appreciate it. on behalf of hassia and myself i thank you very much. i sit down now, and i do not know whether it is going to be mr. alvarez or mr. freidin or who else, but they get another 12 minutes. why do they get that 12 minutes? because they have the burden of proof. they have the obligation to persuade you that what i just went through is wrong. so i do not know what they are going to get up and say. maybe they will throw up some more old documents from philip morris or some other cigarette company from the '50s or the '60s, but ask yourself, the touch, where is the touch to mr. blasco? you know what you have to do in terms of -- you have to be persuaded in terms of legal cause and reasonable reliance. you know what the obligation is. thank you very much.