mr. freidin: good morning. (response was heard.) mr. freidin: i think the first thing to say is thank you. we are aware of what you have done and how much you have been here and how much attention you have paid. and certainly on behalf of mrs. blasco she wants to thank you and all the lawyers on both sides. thank you. jury service is a very special thing. when we go to vote, that is very special, but as we know, we can often be one of thousands, if not millions. but today, of course, you are the law on what is pretty much sort of historic in a very significant case. i think you all are aware of that. so your position as a juror -- mr. reilly: i object, your honor, reference to historic. the court: overruled. mr. freidin: your position as a juror, as a citizen is an honor as well as a responsibility, but i feel honored to be able to speak to you about this for a few minutes. i'm going to talk about the first part of the case, which is the class membership. mr. alvarez will then speak about the rest of the case. class membership is the area in which the question is whether or not, essentially, mrs. blasco, or through her husband, would be entitled to even come here and bring a case and bring up all these issues. we try this together, but basically it is really nothing more than this, a key to the courthouse. class membership is nothing more than a key to open the door and say, now can i come in and hear my case? the reason why there are requirements for class membership, quite simple. in order to bring a case against philip morris, you have to demonstrate that you satisfy certain criteria. but basically what you would think of as not a class action or class membership would be somebody who smoked a handful of cigarettes a year or hardly ever smoked. that would be somebody who really does not fit the category of a cigarette smoker that should be in the class, not someone who is smoking two to three or three packs a day. and the second part of it is that if somebody has a disease that you would be sort of sorting that out and say, well, this is not even something that you get from smoking; not something that we have in this case either. so basically class membership is just the idea, can they come in and make their case to you? can mrs. blasco make her case to you about what happened -- which mr. alvarez is going to talk about at length, about what was done, what was not done, all those things? and it is not about certain other things. it is not about who is at fault, class membership. it is not about what choices were made. perfect. those issues will be discussed when mr. alvarez gets up and when mr. reilly speaks, but for the first three questions that you are going to have, or three of the first four questions, which are class membership questions, and they are labelled as such on the verdict form, those issues do not concern class membership. once you have class membership you get to those issues. but when you are answering the three questions on class membership, they have nothing to do with it. when you decide things -- i'm going to kind of do some of this on there. the judge discussed burden of proof with you. earlier on, i cannot remember exactly when it was he used the expression, we have to tip the scales when we have a burden of proof. burden of proof on the plaintiff, that is us, is to take the scales of justice and tip them. another way of putting it, as he has told you, is by the greater weight of the evidence. but that is really, if the scales are loaded and they just tip, which one has the greater weight. it does not have to be ninety percent or 95 percent or beyond a reasonable doubt, which is a criminal case, just needs to be 51 percent, just tip the scales. that is what greater weight of the evidence is. and you will see that the burden of proof will switch back to mr. reilly on the issue of comparative negligence, that is his affirmative defense. so he will have the burden of proof on that. but in terms of class membership and in terms of our case, burden of proof is simply tipping the scales, 51 percent. i want you to know that -- let me show the two questions that we are going to start with. number 4. of course i've taken the liberty of checking "yes" there. this is your decision, but it if the answers are no then the case is over. there is no key. you are saying that the key does not open the lock. mrs. blasco cannot come into the case. and there is a third question, which we will get to. in order to determine was he a member of the class, was he addicted to cigarettes, which i'm going to talk about in a few minutes, and was the addiction a legal cause. now, it is important to note that a legal cause, i say a legal cause because it is not the legal cause, it is not the only legal cause, it is a legal cause. and the judge instructed you and said, there can be other causes, it does not have to be the only cause. a legal cause is a very important point. the instruction, which is number 3, robert, please. you do not have to prove -- we do not have to prove that mr. blasco was a member of the class -- in order to prove he was a member of the class we do not have to prove that he was addicted to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris. he could have been addicted to any of the cigarettes created by american manufacturers, any of them at any time. remember, it is just to take the key and open the lock, that is all it is, to get into the courthouse. and for this purpose we do not have to prove that his addiction and death were caused by smoking philip morris cigarettes or any other particular brand. any american cigarettes in part of this group of cigarette companies would suffice. so we heard he smoked other cigarettes and so on. for the purposes of the class action, no need to prove which brand caused addiction or death, which is the bottom thing on the red. now, let us talk about whether he was addicted. and i want to talk common sense first before i put anything on the board. we already heard from dr. dosovitz. i'm not going to say that is the best source of information for you, but i'm going to say dr. dosovitz conceded, so if he conceded it you know you can bank on it, that mr. blasco was at the top end of the scale of smoking, smoking three packs a day. three packs a day. he never heard of anyone smoking four packs a day. so let us just say, without having heard anything, using your common sense, whether someone is addicted if they smoke two packs or three -- he said two packs is a heavy smoker -- three packs a day of cigarettes every day after the first initial few years of working your way up or working his way up to smoking, which takes a few years when they are teenagers. he started as a kid and every day -- he smoked in bed. we can put that up, number 5, please. we compiled a list of some of the evidence in this case. and ask yourself, just using the test of common sense, is this an addicted smoker? he smoked regularly for 40 plus years. truthfully i think it is closer to 50 because he started when he was an early teen and he smoked from like 1943 or '4 till 1992, close to 50 years, two or three packs a day. i mean, his wife said many, many times it was three packs. it does not matter. i just want to show you what three packs of cigarettes, 60 cigarettes looks like. and realize that is a lot of smoking in one day. and that is today, and then that is tomorrow, and that is the next day. until you get to the point where, as we showed, he smokes hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of thousands of cigarettes. so going along on this, smoking in the bed, dr. henningfield said, and he was quoting the fda, food and drug administration, he was quoting the surgeon general, he was quoting the national institute of drug addiction, he was quoting almost every organization. the only person he was not quoting, who disagrees with him and who disagrees with all those organizations, is dr. dosovitz. dr. henningfield, who has written 400 papers, who consulted with the surgeon general, who consulted with the fda, who consulted with the dsm, who consulted with almost every major organization dealing with tobacco addiction, said the two most important things are how much people smoke and when did they first smoke it. video tech: you want that slide? mr. freidin: no, i'll stay with this one. we will come back to that. we know that he smoked in bed and we know that there was at least one episode where there was a fire. is this common sense that somebody is addicted? he smoked at home. he smoked several cigarettes before he left for work. he smoked during his meals. he smoked at work. he smoked in his car. he smoked the last thing at bed just before going to bed. the cigarettes in the ashtray were on his nightstand. he hid backup packs in his car so he would not run out. he smoked one after the other like a chimney using sometimes the stub of one to light, another. common sense would say i do not need to hear anything about that. that is an addicted smoker. he is at the upper levels of what dr. dosovitz has seen. he risked going to jail in cuba by smoking the american cigarettes. after he was diagnosed with lung cancer -- now, this is something dr. dosovitz made a big deal out of, but let us think it through. he said, well, he knew he was dying. well, he did not know he was dying when he was first diagnosed with lung cancer. he only knew that or we may think he knew it, and, in fact, we do not know what he knew, but we know that when he first was diagnosed he did not have metastases and he did not believe he was going to die. but during his radiation therapy, he would finish the radiation therapy, you heard this testimony, and then he would smoke. he was being burned by radiation then he would smoke. is this common sense addiction? if this is not addiction, what is? asked dr. dosovitz, is four packs addiction? he said, i cannot tell. i have to do three sessions at $375 a piece, maybe five sessions, then i'll first tell you if you are addicted. there is no definition of addiction except common sense really. there are some criteria that people use. the fagerstrom is world-recognized, according to dr. henningfield, who himself is world-recognized. and under the fagerstrom we know what he scored. by dr. dosovitz's scoring he was 8, highly addicted. but he scores 10 if you follow the testimony of mrs. blasco. in addition to that, he was smoking just before he passed away. now, you say, okay, he did not want to give it up. everybody said he was addicted. and the testimony was that he tried to quit many, many times. let us look at evidence of quit attempts, number 6. this is the evidence. i'm just talking about evidence, the law and common sense. that is all i want to talk about. i do not want to be argumentative. i want to talk facts. that is all i'm going to talk about. anxiety. when he stopped smoking for a day or two, he would get anxious, he would get restless, he could not sit still. he is bouncing off the walls literally. he is depressed. he has trouble sleeping. his appetite is lost. he is pacing. he is irritable. he is frustrated and angry. he is usually a very calm man. and what happens? he starts arguing with his wife. he gets angry. he has difficulty concentrating. he gave himself gum. she gave him gum. he sucked on candy. he had these cigarettes, these phoney cigarettes or candy cigarettes to suck on, fake cigarettes. they threw away the cigarettes. and of course dr. dosovitz would say, well, he did not throw them away, that is all the difference in the world. threw away his personal ashtray. there was only one ashtray. he threw it away. and his wife said he quit or tried to quit many, many times, many, many, many, many, many times. she must have said that 50 times, many, many times. she could not count how many times. well, is this consistent or inconsistent with the scientific evidence? i think i must have asked dr. dosovitz about that several times, which is, what do the statistics show about people quitting? dr. dosovitz even admitted it is a very small percentage that successfully quit, under 5 percent, in any given year. eighty percent of people, and this is from the dsm, eighty percent of people who are regular smokers want to quit, about half of those, about forty percent of them, try to quit, and about 5 percent succeed for a year. so it is not -- it is pretty much common sense that he tried and he tried and he tried. he did not have treatment with dr. dosovitz, whose statistics are staggering, staggering statistics, that he is -- he is got better statistics than anybody who has ever dealt with this, the surgeon general, the fda. they would be interested in those statistics, i'm sure, but the statistics that the public agencies have put together are that a very tiny percentage of people get through it. now, they will try it five times, ten times, and ultimately about half the people quit, ultimately. but that is 30 years later, 20 years later, 40 years later. and that is how those numbers wind up being 30 or 40 or 50 million people quit. although, it is not quite fair to say that the hundred-cigarettes-a-lifetime person is the same as the person who smoked as much as mr. blasco did, 50 to 60 cigarettes a day. that is addiction. and there is no definition of addiction per se. the judge is not going to tell you anything along the lines of -- he has not, you have heard the instructions, there is no specific definition. it is a definition that you apply using your common sense, listening to the evidence. if we talked about dr. henningfield for a second, number 8. video tech: 7 or 8? mr. freidin: no, his opinion. dr. henningfield said: the two most powerful indicators of addiction are the number of cigarettes -- and more than one pack per day is heavily dependent -- and how soon after waking. just because you are able to quit does not mean you were not addicted, by the way. everybody agrees with that. quitting, being able to quit does not relate to addiction. so in your class action questions it is not relevant. you do not have to be an expert to recognize addiction is what dr. henningfield said. it is a biological barrier to acting on free choice. it is a compromised free choice. now, remember, dr. dosovitz, you know, the truth sometimes slips out, said, well, my patients do not have a choice, some of them. do we have that one? yes, number 11. "many of my patients who are addicted, you know, that is what i do for a living. i treat people who are addicted, among other things. those people do not have a choice. that is the difference." that is dr. dosovitz. now, he later said, well, it is a compromised choice. he rebounded from i think the truth slipping out about this. i'm not contending that someone cannot quit. what we are contending is it is very, very hard and that is why there are 50 million people still smoking. i mean, you can say 50 million quit, but it is just as important, if not more, to say 50 million still are. are all of them not motivated, all the people that that includes? we know that eighty percent want to quit. we know that forty percent, half of those try to quit. and we know that the relapses are devastatingly high. i'm a little disorganized here. so let us show -- well, let me just talk to you about the surgeon general's report. let us put that up, number 18 and number 19 after that. these three, the surgeon general of the united states, the highest medical officer in the united states of america says, "cigarettes and other forms" -- that means i've used 20 minutes. mr. alvarez: right. mr. freidin: starting to get the hook. i can feel it. but i'll remain calm and i will not go faster, a little bit faster. "nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine addiction are similar to those as such drugs as heroin and cocaine." you do not have to conclude that heroin and cocaine are addicting. you just have to know that the highest ranking medical officer in the united states went on public record and issued a report and actually said that, and so did the fda and so did a number of other agencies, because they feel that it is true. dr. dosovitz does not feel it is true, but dr. dosovitz is the person who, out of 13 cases where he is testified, has never found anyone addicted. he is never found it. and dr. dosovitz is somebody who time and time again said things that were different than what were in his depositions of other cases. dr. dosovitz could not explain why four days after he gave his opinion in this case he was testifying in another case, i have not reached an opinion in the blasco case. dr. dosovitz could not explain why he said dsm-iv will be obsolete in a matter of a month. he could not explain so many things. why he had 3,000 patients but in another deposition it is 1,000 patients. he could not explain -- he did not explain so many different things. and the only thing he explained well was he is got three questions to answer and two of them are already done. you are never going to get an answer out of this man, their expert, the one they brought to you, they will say to you, we want you to rely on this expert even though 13 times in a row he is found the same thing. i mean, the odds -- you know, the statistics, he says 50 to sixty percent are addicted, well, the statistics are higher than that with everyone else, 60 to 80, 70 to 90, 85 to 90 from all these publications. when you talk about more likely than not in tipping the scales, if you take 100 people like mr. blasco, what percentage, just without even regard to how heavy a smoker he is, what percentage of them are probably addicted? the scales are already tipped. they are already much higher than fifty percent, just statistically. just like with the lung cancer, this is a large cell lung cancer. dr. abel testified -- if you can keep up with me and put them up. i know i'm running out of time. dr. abel testified five or six different times actually, i said, randy, you covered it pretty well. he kept saying more likely than not if he stopped smoking marlboros in 1972, then he said 1975, 1978, and i think 1982, he would not have gotten cancer. and there is no doubt, there is been no expert to oppose him. they did not put on anyone to say otherwise. this is a classic smoking cancer. as dr. abel said, 97 out of -- if you had a room of 100 people who had this cancer, 97 would be smokers. so if you talk about what is more likely than not, tipping the scales, these issues are all very simple in that sense. so the questions you have: was he addicted? common sense. of course dr. henningfield, you can tell -- he uses the fagerstrom test. he is addicted in triplicate. he is addicted under the dsm if you have a straightforward approach to it. can we show the number of cigarettes he smoked, please? down to about five minutes. okay. the last five are going to be -- i do not know. the court: it is up. they are showing it. mr. freidin: thank you. they gave me more than i could cover. look at the chart, you can look at the top or the bottom, and ask yourself, was addiction the cause of his death? and i think we did not show the surgeon general one, number 19. i'd like to show that. because this is right out of the surgeon general's report. that traces his report of showing how addiction, nicotine addiction on the left leads to lung cancer on the right. you do not have to really understand -- i'm not sure i could -- all that happens in between -- dr. dosovitz of course would not even look at that -- to know that that is the surgeon general, the highest ranking medical officer in this country, telling you. and then they bring on an expert who says, i do not believe it ever causes it. it never causes it. so that is a gimme for them, for philip morris. he will never testify, he will never look at the records of a case and feel that the plaintiff belongs in the class. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: you should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip concluded.) mr. freidin: i think i'm down to about a minute or two. mr. mcpharlin: four minutes. mr. freidin: you were instructed that we have to prove that this was a substantial contributing cause, more likely than not, again that tipping of the scales. every time you apply something just ask, were the scales tipped? that is all that is involved, because this is a civil case, not a criminal case. i guess what i want to just close with, because i know i'm running out of time. let me just look and see. i could go through all these tests, but i guess i want to cover one more thing. the court: i did not say anything. mr. freidin: starting to hear things. mr. mcpharlin: that was robert. mr. freidin: robert was asking which one i wanted to do. and i'd like to do the dsm criteria. that is number 15. that is where i'll end. again, common sense. this is what -- they built their case on he does not fit the dsm, okay. dsm does not say "serious and sustained quit attempts," which dr. dosovitz used about 20 times. you will not find the words "tearing at the fabric of someone's life" in the dsm. that came from him. that was his idea. you will not find a total control of someone from the dsm. you will find the question that begins, "these things manifested by three or more of these issues." the withdrawal -- number one, tolerance, he agreed on so we do not have to talk about that. number 2, withdrawal, he agreed on. number 3 he agreed on when i showed him the practice guidelines. and he said, oh, well, those are just practice guidelines. he built this entire edifice about the dsm, and then i said, well, what about the practice guidelines? he says, well, i guess she does apply it and she does fit that, but that is just practice guidelines. number 4 was the same thing. number 5 is the chart, spending a great deal of time using or recovering from the use of whatever. we showed you that in his average day he was spending between eight and ten hours with these (indicating). every day of his life. all day long, morning, noon and night, bedtime, in bed, causing a fire, waking up. he left church services. they said, well, he only went three times a year. he left concerts. he left the movies when he went with his son. he gets a lung removed, he is getting radiation and he is smoking. so you have got three questions that apply to what i'm talking about and i'll just say them quickly. number one, was he addicted? common sense, the evidence, the testimony of dr. henningfield, overwhelming. was the addiction a legal cause, a legal cause, of lung cancer? it is really in a way the same thing. it is the addiction that put him on the road to smoking. nothing else would make someone do that 60 times a day every day for their entire lives. and this is exactly what the plan was, and that is the irony of it. they argue, did not he enjoy it, when the whole plan was for him to enjoy it. their plan was he will enjoy it and he will keep doing it. and you will see later, mr. alvarez is going to show you, what they thought of it was it was like pavlov's dogs. did he enjoy it? they have -- i'm done. i'm going to say this: they come in here and they say, he enjoyed it. well, that was the plan all along, was not it? thank you. mr. alvarez: may it please the court? counsel. morning. what i want to talk to you about, because obviously i have limited time, is to get right into this case and talk about what this case is about. and this case is really about a conspiracy. this is about a conspiracy that started in december of 1953 that affected the lives of many, many, many people, including eduardo blasco. and the sad part about this is it could have been stopped right then. and i'm going to show you points in history where it could have stopped, where a difference -- if they would have stopped it would have made a difference, it would have saved his life. now, you heard one of the jury instructions about what philip morris is legally responsible for. and they are legally responsible for the acts of each of its co-conspirators named in the engle case, as long as those acts were done in furtherance of the conspiracy to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of smoking. what does that mean? it means that if you are in a group of people and you all get together to do something, you do not have to be the guy who throws the rock that hits somebody to be responsible. that is what that means. that is what the law is telling you. it is the statements that a co-conspirator made that he may have heard and he relied on. philip morris is on the hook for one hundred percent, even if they did not throw the rock. and i'm going to show you that they did throw some rocks. i'm going to skip, it is actually question 5, but i'm going to skip to question 5, which is the conspiracy question. "did eduardo blasco reasonably rely to his detriment on any act taken in furtherance of philip morris usa inc.'s agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. blasco's death?" and you know what the strongest evidence of this is, comes from this lady right here, who lived with this man, who knew this man since he was 18 years old. okay. and she will tell you that she was frustrated that one of the only things that he would not listen to her about was that, that every time she said you gotta quit in the '80s when she found out and she believed, she said, you have got to quit smoking, this is bad for you. he says, no, the tobacco representatives are saying no, it is not. now, you have got to think for a second. if you have someone who is highly addicted to smoking, two to three packs of cigarettes a day, who is highly addicted, okay, and he gets two competing messages: one is, smoking is bad for you, it can hurt you, it can harm you; and then the other one from the makers of the product who say, it has not been proven, do not worry about it, we will put filters on them, that will keep you safe, you know, it has not proven the science out, do not worry, there is a controversy about that, it is okay to keep smoking. if you are addicted, an addicted smoker hearing those two messages, which is the message that that addicted smoker is going to accept? and that is what frustrated this woman. so did he reasonably rely? and the answer to that is yes. but let me show you the evidence of that. first of all, i do not have to prove that there was a conspiracy, because that is a finding. it is binding upon you. that is the law of this case. philip morris agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information concerning the health effects of cigarettes and their addictive nature with the intent that smokers and the public would rely on them, on this information to their detriment. i do not have to prove that. that is the law of this case. they did it. they did it. the question that you have to decide was, did philip morris and the rest of their buddies, did eduardo rely on that information that he got? and there is plenty of evidence in this case that he did. because they created this atmosphere of normalcy, they used doctors and professionals and athletes to portray this thing as normal part of everyday life. that is what they wanted people to believe. play the tape. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked, what cigarette do you smoke, doctor? brand named most was camel. yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarettes. voice: do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris. and here's how you can prove it. light up a philip morris, take a puff, get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly let the smoke come through. voice: (singing inaudible.) voice: (singing inaudible.) voice: yes, dear. voice: give me a cigarette, will you. voice: do not say cigarette. say philip morris. voice: oh, is there any other kind? voice: not for you there is not. nothing but the best for mr. ricardo. voice: i got a better idea. let us take a winston break. voice: that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter blend. voice: yeah, fred. voice: why do not you settle back and have a full flavor. voice: television advertising of cigarettes ended in the u.s. in 1971, but marlboro made a smooth transition to print and outdoor advertising. today the marlboro man is a cowboy who has ridden around the world. voice: has something to do with that? voice: yeah, i think. voice: cigarette manufacturers do not make movies. voice: well, what do you think, that the moviemaker just showed marlboro on his own? voice: perhaps the moviemaker was a marlboro smoker. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: so they create this whole scheme, this whole scam, from 1953 to 2000. till eight years after this man died they kept this thing up, okay, for one purpose and one purpose only, was to dupe people into keep believing, keep doubting that their product is dangerous so that they keep smoking, that was it. and they did it for one reason and one reason only, so that they could make money. and they did not care who they hurt, who they killed and how many families they destroyed. they did not care. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. it is not a class action. the court: well, sustain that it does not apply for that purpose. mr. alvarez: so in 1953 they had an opportunity. listen, there is choices to be made here, i agree, but you know who can make choices, companies can make choices too. and in 1953 when they were being told by the scientists that this causes cancer, instead of telling the truth to people, instead of coming forward and saying, you know what, this is true, maybe we will sell less cigarettes, but we are not going to be killing people. they made another choice. and look what they said in 1953. "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." "boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette." "there is only one problem, confidence. how to free millions of americans from the guilty fear, regardless of pooh-poohing logic, every time they light up a cigarette." they knew back then in 1953 it was bad. we know it now because we have these documents. eduardo blasco did not have those documents. the american people did not have those documents. and what do they do? they take out a full-page ad in major cities and tell people that smoking, there is no proof, when they knew it was a lie. 1953. these are documents 1953. "studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and incidence of cancer of the lung." 1961. "partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens." and look at that. 1962, "obviously the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant," meaning little. this is 1962. this is what they knew. and it took them almost 40 years later until they finally -- too late for him, too late for him. 1961, "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particle [sic] of smoke." why is that important? because they knew that they could not take out carcinogens in smoke. they knew they could not put filters on cigarettes and do that. here's the report in 1963 to the surgeon general by them. "none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of smoker in the amounts reported in smoke. it is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters." they knew the filters did not work. they knew the stuff was bad. they were lying to the government. they were lying to the american people. here's more internal documents. 1969, "doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public. it is also the means of establishing a controversy." that is it, that is what they wanted, they wanted the american people to believe. let us put doubt on people who are addicted because you know they cannot stop or they are having trouble stopping. all you have to do is give them a reason. let us give them a reason to doubt this thing and they will keep buying our products and we will keep making money. that was the plan. that is what they wanted to do. "the most important story is that which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking." "we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." "if this committee had not been formed the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. the tirc has been a successful defensive operation." that is what they cared about. all they cared about was money. they did not care about people. "our basic proposition -- our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and may be subject to a finding, that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." somebody there in 1968 said, you know guys, he writes it internally, you know guys, what we are doing here is wrong. at some point it is going to come out and people are going to know that we were lying to them. they had broken promises. let us look at some of their statements from 1953 to 1970. go ahead. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. and that is where we stand. voice: if we do find anything that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette. voice: we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general's (inaudible) and we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck we hope we may find them. and if they are found they will be removed. voice: there is no program that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. voice: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? the witness: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: that was a lie. it was a boldfaced lie. he knew it when he said it that it was a lie. their internal documents told them that it was a lie. and they did it for one reason, to keep people smoking. hundreds of millions, they spent hundreds of millions of dollars on these front organizations so they could make it seem like they are doing real scientific research, right. "for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts -- litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of" -- here it goes, here's another confession -- "creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." i mean, do not take my word for it. because everything i've told you here is their words. there is a box of exhibits that we are going to send back there that have all these things. look at them. they are not me. do not believe me. do not believe me just because i'm wearing a tie. look at their words. believe them. this is what they thought. and from 1970 to 1990s -- and by the way, starting in 1967 mr. blasco was in the united states, okay. they are going to say, well, he was in the puerto rico. puerto rico is a commonwealth territory of the united states. puerto ricans are american citizens just like everybody else here, okay. american cigarette companies advertised in puerto rico, okay. so between 1970 and 1990, let us start hearing some of the things that they were saying that mr. blasco believed because he heard some of them. and he used it, he used it to foster that belief that smoking was not bad. now, you say, well, listen, you have got to be crazy to think about that. well, you cannot use your shoes of 2013, you just cannot, because what he believed in the '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s, it was a different time. go ahead. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the countries most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. voice: we simply do not know scientifically what makes a normal healthy cell suddenly go malignant. voice: and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. voice: would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. voice: if you were convinced that cigarettes were killing people would you stop making cigarettes? voice: well, i've personally been on record on that for a long time. i'm not in the business of killing people, obviously. i've said all along simply there are plenty of ways to make a living. i happen to believe in what i'm doing very strongly. voice: ...the company as a whole believed that cigarettes were really harmful we would not be in the business. we are a very moralistic company. i think the management of philip morris is sincere in this position. voice: case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced. voice: it may be or it may not be, we do not know. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. voice: do cigarettes cause cancer? voice: i do not know if they do or not. voice: i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. voice: we believe our product is not injurious to health. voice: as far as you are concerned, is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? voice: i would use the term "misguided." voice: if he is misguided then i take it that your opinion is he is wrong. voice: i was simply trying to be polite about it. voice: but not being polite about it in your opinion he is wrong, correct? voice: dead wrong. voice: congress is wrong in requiring these warnings, correct? voice: we do not think they are justified. voice: so they are wrong. voice: they are wrong. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: i mean, these are the statements that were being made when this man was in this country reading, looking and making an informed decision on whether to continue to smoke. they wanted him to believe. they wanted him to doubt it. they wanted him to have controversy brewing in his mind. they wanted that. and now they are going to come into court and say, hey, he should have known, everybody knew it was bad. well, a statement like that would have been blasphemy 20 years ago by the tobacco executives because they were saying the exact opposite. but now when it is convenient for them to defend this lawsuit and say everybody should have known, that is not what they were saying back then. that is not what they were saying to this woman's husband. that is not what was happening. and the level of this conspiracy, what they did to destroy evidence in this -- because we only see some of it. they destroyed a lot of documents. look what they have said: at the outset, arnold henson reminded us all participating at the meeting that there should be no written record of what transpired issued for distribution. 1977, "we have gone to great pains to eliminate any written contact with inbifo." now, remember that, dr. proctor talked about, inbifo was a company that they bought out in europe so that they could run tests to see if smoking causes cancer. and what they did not want was anyone to know anything about that because they did not want a lawyer like me subpoenaing those records. "if this procedure is unacceptable to you, perhaps we should consider a dummy mailing address in cologne," that is where this company was at, "for receipt of samples, since we have a major program in inbifo and since this is a locale where we might do some things which we are reluctant to do in this country." yeah, we are going to do stuff over there that we are not going to do here because we do not want lawyers and the public finding out about it. here's personal notes from one of the philip morris -- by the way, this is philip morris. this is not somebody else who threw a rock. this is them. i caught them with a rock in their hand. this is them. "ship all the documents to köln by tom. if important letters have to be sent, please send to home. i will act on them and destroy." "we do not foresee any difficulties to remove certain reports from research files once such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits. we will promptly remove all such reports. as an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the reports which appear objectionable." "this is to inform you that i have either returned to the library or destroyed all formal reports and the like, checked out to me. if, however, the results with nicotine are similar to those gotten with morphine and caffeine, we want to bury it. accordingly, there are only two copies of this memo, the one attached and the original, which i have." i mean, these guys went to great lengths, well, they stopped at nothing, they stopped at nothing, from forming corporations outside of the united states so they could do their dirty work over there, to destroying documents here, to lying to congress, to lying to the american people, to lying to the world, these guys stopped at nothing. because they had one thing and one thing in mind and all they cared about is making money that people keep buying their product. that is all they cared about. and here's -- when they found out that there was a researcher that was going to find an antagonist, something that would stop people from feeling the effects of nicotine, they went like, well -- and this is what they are talking about here, dr. seligman brought up the grant by "dr. abood in which one of the stated aims was to make a clinically acceptable antagonist to nicotine. this goal would have the potential of putting the tobacco manufacturers out of business." "dr. leo abood, whose presentation showed a high degree of competence, has on [sic] his aims a specific antagonist to nicotine. this is done by various chemical manipulations of nicotine and could well lead to a clinically accessible antagonist. it is my strong feeling that with the progress that has been claimed we are in the process of digging our own grave." so they are paying this guy to do research, we have got to shut this guy down. "i believe that the program as set up has the potential of great damage to the industry." shutting down research at -- you know, it was not just this one. it was any project that looked like it was going to hurt them, they shut it down. "ctr should not fund work largely by means -- excuse me. "ctr should fund work largely by means of contracts, thus reserving the right to control publications which might be detrimental to our industry." the long-term scientific program should be carefully planned such that the results obtained should not be able to harm the industry. recommendations for scientific programs will be given later." "attempts to relate human disease to smoking." so that is what they wanted, they said, listen, guys, we are just not going to fund -- and that is what they told the world, by the way, that is the problem. they went out there in 1953 when this mouse-painting study came out and said, hey, we are going to form this organization and we are really going to study this. we are really going to find out. if there is, we are going to tell you about it and we are going to stop it. and we are going to take bad things out of cigarettes, or we are going to put filters on there so it will take all the bad stuff, that is what they told the world, right. but internally they were saying, no, we are not going to do that. and then when the surgeon general report comes out, they attack the surgeon general. look at some of the things they say. "the tobacco industry has an obligation to see that the public is not hood-winked." "unjustified emotional campaigns based on the health scare technique." they are attacking the surgeon general. "the number one problem is to the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public. it is a gross insult to the scientific community." "turning a significant health question into a public stunt is an insult to serious science." these guys, so now when public health officials are coming out and saying, look, this is bad for you, we are finding this out, what do they do? instead of embracing it, that is another opportunity. 1964 was another opportunity, another opportunity to tell the truth. what do they do? they take swings at the surgeon general. they call him reckless. "after years of well-funded research, it has not been established that cigarette smoking produces a physical dependence to nicotine." play the tape. this is the former president of the american tobacco company. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: throughout your tenure with american it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? voice: through my tenure? voice: yes. voice: yes, that is so. voice: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? voice: yes. voice: it is a statement that american tobacco takes great reliance on. voice: we issued that statement, yes, certainly we wanted them to believe it. voice: as far as you are concerned, a person is justified on relying on that statement. voice: yes. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: i mean, they wanted the american public to believe. that is what they are saying. no, we wanted them to rely, we wanted them to believe this. and now when this family comes in and says he believed it, they are saying no. that is called catch-22. no matter which way it comes out, they want to win. why did philip morris do what they did? "who ain't for more money?" "do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? it is of course, but there are dangerous fda implications." "that is to say that if the exit gate from the market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." "moving towards reduction or elimination of nicotine from our product, then we shall eventually liquidate our business." they know that if they take nicotine or reduce the level of nicotine so it is not addictive anymore, people are not going to smoke 60 cigarettes a day. they may not even smoke one cigarette a day. the only reason people smoke is because they are addicted. "products we are making and selling was in any way harmful to our customer's health and our own as well, we would voluntarily go out of business." that is what they said, right. "if our product is harmful, says james bowling, vice-president of philip morris, we will stop making it. we do not know if smoking is harmful to health and we think someone ought to find out [sic]." you know, this is 1972, right. this is 1972, the year he moves to miami, right, and these guys still got this sham going on. when their records back in the '50s and in the early '60s they have already identified all the carcinogens in smoke. they already know it is addictive. they already know that it can kill people. and they are still lying about it. "without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, pm," philip morris, "would collapse, and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees." that is all they cared about. they did not care about eduardo blasco. they did not care about him. "a cigarette is a perfect type of a perfect pleasure. it is exquisite and it leaves one unsatisfied. all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank." that is all they cared about. so when you get this question, which i think is actually question 5, "did eduardo blasco reasonably rely to his detriment on any act taken in furtherance of philip morris usa inc.'s agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. blasco's death, the answer should be yes. and i will tell you, reading that verdict form, they all should be yes. do not exclude her from the class. the next question is, "did eduardo blasco reasonably rely to his detriment on any statements or omissions of material fact made by philip morris that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. blasco's death?" that is them throwing the rock. that question is, hey, did philip morris throw a rock and hit him? did he rely on something that philip morris said or failed to say that was material? and i'm going to show you that it was. remember, i do not have to prove that they did that, that they concealed or omitted information. that is an engle finding. the question is, did eduardo reasonably rely? well, you have got to ask yourself this question. this guy smoked chesterfields for most of his life early on, right. then he came to puerto rico and for five years he smoked winston, which is a filter, because chesterfield is an unfiltered cigarette. so he smoked a filtered cigarette and then he came to miami and he smoked for 20 years a filtered cigarette. why the switch to filters? why the switch to filters? right. why did he go from an unfiltered cigarette to a filtered cigarette? why? because they wanted, they wanted people to believe that filters were safer. because in the 1950s less than 1 percent of the cigarettes were filtered. by 1960, 51 percent and by 2000, 99 percent. they created this whole filter scam to get people to believe that if you smoke a filtered cigarette it would be safer for you, but it is not, it is more dangerous for you. okay. they sold marlboro, a filtered cigarette. "the smokers of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette." this is a 1976 memo after he is already here in miami, okay, this is an internal memo. "the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration." i'm going to skip through these because these deal with nicotine and i think we have heard a lot about nicotine and filters, but the reality is they knew that if they put filters on cigarettes and sold them as a safer alternative people would buy them, and that is what mr. blasco did. okay. so why in 1972 when he came to miami, why would he all of a sudden switch to marlboro? why? why did not he keep smoking winston? why did he keep smoking chesterfield? why did he pick their brand to smoke for the next 20 years until he died? why? well, i'm going to tell you. let us listen to them because they are going to tell you why smokers would do it. play it. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: the image of the marlboro man in marlboro country has gone beyond cultural differences. it has been adapted internationally by maintaining a consistent heroic look around the world. in 1955 marlboro sales in the united states were a modest 6 billion. however, within only one year volume nearly tripled and marlboro sales to smokers took off domestically. at that time marlboro had just been introduced internationally in limited markets. throughout the 1960s marlboro sales to smokers gained even more momentum, both domestically and around the world. in fact, total volume for marlboro sales to smokers more than doubled during this decade. as a result, combined sales reached 105 billion in 1972, making marlboro the best selling cigarette in the world and it has remained the leader ever since. marlboro is far and away the leader in the cigarette industry, and the trend is continually upward. in 1990 marlboro sold more than 344 billion cigarettes worldwide. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: why in 1972? because that was the number one cigarette in the world, was marlboro. and in 1992 you saw how many billions it was selling. they wanted him, they wanted him and they got him. and now they are responsible for him. they cannot hide from their responsibility. so when this question comes up in the verdict form, did eduardo blasco reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement or omission of material fact made by philip morris that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause, the answer to that is yes. because they could have made a difference. in 1967 when he came to puerto rico they could have said -- they could have told the truth. when he came in 1972, instead of spending all that money on advertising to make marlboro the number one cigarette in the world, if they came out and told the truth to people, they told the truth to mr. blasco it would have made a difference. so the next question they are going to ask you is about comparing fault, okay. and you answer this question if you believe that the cigarettes that he smoked starting in 1972 caused his lung cancer. and you heard from dr. abel. he said, look, it is ridiculous to think that if this guy got cancer in 1991 that this cancer was in his body before 1972. this guy did not walk around with cancer for 19 years and it not show up. his cancer occurred when he was smoking their cigarettes. so the question here is, what is the percent of responsibility from 1972 to 1991 or 1992 until his death, those 20 years, those 20 years? because our claim against them for the negligence is for those 20 years. now, could he have quit? could he have tried harder? yeah. if he tried 10 times, could he have tried 11? if he tried 20, could he have tried 21? if he had gone three days, could he have gone four days? listen, everybody could try harder. but this man had an addiction, because he smoked on the high end of the number of cigarettes that you could smoke. and this is not 50/50. you know why this is not 50/50? because 50/50, when you say something went bad between two parties, there is always fault on both sides, right. but that only assumes one thing and one thing only, that both sides have the same information and one is not lying to the other. because when one side lies to the other then it ain't 50/50. it ain't 50/50. so do not do 50/50, because it is not 50/50. you can do whatever you want. what i'm suggesting to you is it should be closer to -- and i'll get to the number. let me build up to it. i got a build up to that number. all right. now, one of the instructions that you are going to get as part of the engle findings if he is a class member, philip morris is negligent and that they sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective and placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. i do not have to prove there is a defect in the cigarette. that is already been proven. i do not have to prove that they were negligent. that is already been proven, okay. i do not have to prove that to you. you have to accept that that is the law of the case. so nicotine caused death, look, they are in the business of selling nicotine. this is their own words. "cigarettes that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation." "nicotine is a potent drug. our industry is based upon the design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage and forms of nicotine." "most of those who have smoked for any significant time would like to stop. many, but not most, of those would like to stop smoking and are able to do so." "...we should be able to maintain the size of the total market by influencing exit/entry rates." "we cannot be comfortable marketing a product which most of our customers would do without if they could." so this is what they are doing. they are saying, look, guys, we are going to manipulate cigarettes. we are going to make sure that we maintain an adequate amount of nicotine in there to keep people addicted to smoking, keep them duped. we will create this controversy, we will do this. you know, this is like the perfect scam. you have got them from both ends. you are producing an addictive product and you tell them it is not addictive and it is not bad and they are so diminished in their capacity to want to believe you because they are addicted they will do anything to keep doing it. it is like a perfect scam. "without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine." duh. "the product is nicotine, think of cigarettes as a dispenser for the dose unit of nicotine. think of a puff of smoke as a vehicle of nicotine." "smoke is beyond question the most optimized vehicle of nicotine in a cigarette and the most optimized dispenser of smoke." "the lawyers remind us that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney could have in a lung cancer cigarette case." i've got to pause and read this slowly. "we cannot defend 'free choice' if the person was addicted." this is them in 1980 when this man was in this country smoking their product, and they are saying, "we cannot defend 'free choice' if the person was addicted." choice. their words, not mine. the court: it is been an hour and 15 minutes. mr. alvarez: i'm going to bleed into it a few minutes. it says, please state the percentage of any fault which was a legal cause of eduardo's lung cancer and death that you charge to philip morris and eduardo blasco. remember, i said it was not 50/50 because both people do not know the same information. i think it was 85 percent for philip morris and 15 percent for eduardo blasco. you may think it should be one hundred percent, and that is up to you. it could be one hundred percent against philip morris, that is up to you. i'm suggesting 85/15. but it certainly is not 50/50 because both people did not know the same information. so let me tell you, this is it. this is the end. this is where i get to talk about my client, who is a -- i got to know. and they just do not make women like that anymore. she is the original. this is a generation that is almost gone. this is a generation that when you met and you fell in love and you made a vow, those vows meant something, they meant something. she was born in a time where virtue, a woman's virtue meant something. she loved one man and one man only for the rest of her life. look at the magnitude of her loss. at 55, 56 she became a widow. you know, there is nothing more beautiful than watching an elderly couple just walking down the sidewalk holding hands, watching a viejita holding on to her viejito. he was a great husband, a wonderful father and what he wanted to be that was taken away from her watching him do was be a great grandfather. that joy of watching your husband immerse into the arms of your grandchild and that unconditional love that they would share together is gone. you know, there is one vow, though, that, you know, she did not keep, and that was the vow that said until death do us part. that vow she did not keep, because she is still married today to him. she never took off her ring. but she took off his ring and she puts it over her ring, and to her they are still married. so i'm going to suggest a figure. and you may think it is too high or you may think it is too low, but no one can tell you what that amount should be. that is for you to decide. and i would suggest the amount of 12 million dollars is a fair and reasonable in light of the evidence and in light of the loss that this woman has suffered.