ms. luther: yes, your honor. good morning, everyone, your honor. may it please the court. this case boils down to the four bullet points i put up with dr. webster yesterday. if you could. that is what this case comes down to. ms. blitch had multiple risk factors for the development of esophageal cancer, including alcohol abuse, hpv, gerd and smoking. and so everyone is clear on this point, i made this chart, i did. dr. webster did not. and i did put smoking last in that first bullet point because that is -- with liggett the only tobacco company in this case, that is exactly where smoking belongs, at the very end of that list of risk factors. mrs. blitch's alcohol abuse, her hpv and -- that is not the current -- that is not the right chart. anyhow, her alcohol abuse, her hpv and gerd -- that point two is missing, two of the three factors -- were significant risk factors in the development of her esophageal cancer. we talked about that in detail. if the only risk factor she had was smoking, no one can say that she would have gone on to develop esophageal cancer. she would have had a risk for going on to develop esophageal cancer but kind of like mr. wilner's fatal bullet concept, she probably would not have had that fatal bullet if you only have smoking as a risk factor in this case. the esophageal cancer -- or the gerd the hpv and the alcohol abuse are the bullets that put her over the top for developing the esophageal cancer. now, the total dose of liggett brand cigarettes was not enough to have caused or substantially contributed to cause mrs. blitch's development of the esophageal cancer. that is what this case boils down to. should liggett be held responsible for ms. blitch's esophageal cancer? should liggett be required to pay -- and mr. wilner told you about compensatory damages. he thinks we should pay jonelle and james blitch millions of dollars for their mother's lifestyle choices over the almost 60 years that she smoked and drank. as i mentioned to you in my opening, which obviously was the last time that i got to speak with you directly, liggett does have sympathy for the blitch family. i mean, it is never easy to lose a parent. it is not. but that does not mean that liggett is responsible for mrs. blitch's injuries or liggett should be required to compensate jim and jonelle for that loss. before i turn to what the evidence showed, i want to highlight a couple of the instructions that judge arnold is going to give you and as mr. wilner mentioned, we were working on the instructions well into the night. i normally would have put it up so i could show you what it said, but we do not have a final copy with me, so i'm just going to read it to you. judge arnold's going to instruct you in determining the facts, which is what your job is. as the jury, you are the fact finders in this case. you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. you may make deductions and reach conclusions which reason and common sense lead you to draw from the facts shown by the evidence. judge arnold is also going to instruct you that in determining the believability of any witness and the weight to be given to the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, the intelligence of the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case, the means and the opportunity that the witness had to know the facts about which the witness testified, the ability of the witness to remember the facts about the witness testified and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all the evidence in the case and in light of your own experience and common sense. reason and common sense. you did not leave either of those things outside this courtroom when you came in and were selected to sit as jurors. we ask that you rely on both of those things, your reason and your common sense as you evaluate the testimony of the various witnesses who testified in this case. so with that in mind what did the evidence show? what kind of person was betty blitch? everyone who came into this courtroom who knew betty blitch pretty much described her in the same way. jim said his mother was intelligent, strong-willed independent, and she had her opinions. jonelle said her mother was smart, strong-willed, hardheaded. once she made up her mind, she was going to do it her way. she was able to gather information that was available to her. jonelle never once, even after betty became sick, heard her mother say that she regretted smoking. gail clements said that betty was a very elegant woman and cigarettes were part of her persona with the cigarette and the tip and she smoked the cigarette with the tip once and said, what are you doing? she said, do not i look cool. gail described betty as intelligent, principled, not easily influenced. she had very strong opinions. again, not the first time we have heard that in the evidence. she could make a decision and stick to it. she was aware of what was going on around her in the world and if she thought something was right, she would back it up. even mary sapp who did not testify for a long time, she considered betty well-read and intelligent and everyone agreed that betty enjoyed smoking. this is the kind of person who would have been able to quit if she had decided she wanted to quit. plaintiff spent a fair amount of time in this case trying to run away from critical established facts. they tried to make the liggett brand more extensive than it really was. in doing that they minimized the most critical piece of evidence we have in this case, evidence brought to us by betty blitch herself, the questionnaire. if you could just show us the first page of that questionnaire. this document was filled out by betty blitch herself before she passed away and it was filled out sometime around the beginning of march of 1997. the date on the middle of that page is march 12, 1997. through the fact witnesses who came to testify in this case, they tried to make betty's eve smoking history more than what it really was. i mean, i get it. liggett's the only company they sued, so obviously they need to emphasize her smoking of liggett brands. but aside from the questionnaire, what do we really know about mrs. blitch's smoking history? what did the evidence show us about mrs. blitch's smoking history? and as you have already figured out, i like making charts. so i made a chart. nope, wrong chart. the one with the testimony. okay. so the smoking history is really all over the board. the people who knew betty best, her son jonelle -- her daughter, jonelle, and her son, james, do not really know what betty smoked and when she smoked it. in her answers to interrogatories what you were told about, jonelle said that her mother smoked salem, virginia slim, winston, and benson & hedges. no mention of eve. and you saw yesterday when i read to you from interrogatories they could have supplemented that response at any time, because they did it with regards to some of the other answers, but they did not supplement that answer. in her deposition she said she saw her mother smoke winston, marlboro, salem, benson & hedges, virginia slim, marlboro light, and misty, but benson & hedges was the brand she remembered her mom smoking the most. most significantly jonelle said betty was the person who knew best what she smoked. and jim's testimony is comparable. jim remembered that she smoked benson & hedges, virginia slim, eve, misty, and lucky strike. towards the end, meaning the end of her life, he recalls her buying her benson & hedges, misty, and eve, but when he was deposed, he could not remember any of the time frames. he -- he kind of tried to fight mr. feiwus on that. he is like, no, no. i just could not remember specific days. well, he was not asked specific days. he was asked time frames and he could not give them in his deposition but when he came here to you to explain what he believed the smoking history was, he was conveniently able to come up with time frames. what did gail clements say about the smoking history? what is interesting is that the two people who testified with the most particularity about her liggett smoking history were actually the two people who came into this courtroom with the least relationship with betty blitch; gail clements and mary sapp, not the children. so gail said she did not know what betty smoked when she first met her, which was around 1975 or 1976, except to say it was a long, slender cigarette. and she also confirmed during her testimony that misty is a long slender cigarette. virginia slim is a long slender cigarette and benson & hedges is a long slender cigarette and she did not know what was in the clutch, the cigarette holder, unless betty actually ran out of a pack and took the empty pack out and replaced it and she said that only happened, i do not know, maybe 12, maybe more than 24 times. well, given the fact that she knew betty blitch for about 22 years, if you take that number, she only saw her take the cigarette pack out of the holder about once a year over the average of time that they knew each other. so for her to come and tell you that she knew she was smoking eve, that is just not credible. she remembers that betty smoked eve in the 1980s and we do not dispute that. we think that the questionnaire is what controls here. that is what betty said and everybody, jonelle, james, gail and mary sapp, all four of them said betty is the person who would know best what betty smoked. and what did mary sapp have to say? you know, mr. wilner said, oh, you know, mary sapp remembered that she was -- that betty was smoking eve in the 1970s. well, you know what, that is not what mary sapp said. let us take a look at what mary sapp said. the court: let me interrupt you just a second. tracy, could you hand me what i gave you earlier to type for me. go ahead. ms. luther: mary sapp, when she came to us to testify, was 76, almost 77 years old. she is an old family friend and no matter how the plaintiff represents it to you, she did not say what they said she said. this is what she actually said. this is an excerpt from the trial transcript. that is what the court reporters have been doing this whole time. we have a complete transcript of everything that everybody said. so what did mary sapp say? do you recall when you began smoking eve cigarettes? and remember they tried to show that betty had been smoking eve longer than mary because mary remembered when she was smoking eve. she does not remember when she started smoking eve. that is what she told you. do you recall whether or not you were smoking eve cigarettes before or after ms. betty blitch? i believe after. not, oh, i know it was after. i believe it was after. she thinks it was after. so you believe betty blitch started smoking eve before you started smoking eve? yes, sir. okay. and do you recall an event in your life when you began working at a new job at holiday inn? yes, sir. do you recall about when that was? again, i believe it was about 1976. and were you smoking eve when you were working at the holiday inn in 1976? again, i believe so. this is not definitive testimony. she is speculating. she is not sure when she started smoking eve cigarettes. and you testified that you believed betty blitch was smoking eve before you were smoking eve? yes. so on cross i tried to clear this up. and i said, now, i get the impression from your testimony that you believed that ms. blitch was smoking eve cigarettes in the 1960s; is that right? and she said: i do not know when it was. all i know is that she smoked them and i was smoking them. so that is what we -- that is what mary sapp really said about when she and betty were smoking. she does not know when they started, but she does know that it was later on in their relationship, and betty knew best what betty smoked. she would defer to what betty said about what she smoked. that is what mary sapp said about smoking eve. then we have gail clements and i touched on her briefly in the last slide. she actually filled out the questionnaire with betty blitch. she knew the reason that she was filling out the questionnaire. she understood it was an important document, and it was important to get it right. i mean, she is the person who actually filled in the brands in the brand section of the questionnaire. that is gail clements's handwriting. and when betty said, i smoked eve from 1980 to 1987, gail did not say, now, hold on there, betty. i know i bought you eve cigarettes since 1987. she did not do that. she wrote down what betty said because back then she knew it was the truth. now, liggett is the only defendant in this courtroom. now that it is the only defendant in this courtroom, it is no longer a convenient truth. now gail told you that betty was a truthful person. so to minimize the importance of the questionnaire, she told you, and mr. wilner repeated this in the first part of his closing. she told you when they filled out this questionnaire, betty was a very sick woman and she was very tired. and -- but instead of minimizing the importance of the questionnaire, that testimony really only emphasizes that the information contained in the questionnaire is trustworthy. she confirmed that she and betty took the time filling out the brands and when betty got tired, she took a break because betty understood that the questionnaire was important and she wanted to get it right. plaintiff's counsel tried to run away from the questionnaire by implying that, well, you know, maybe betty was not quite in her right mind when she filled this out. you may recall both jonelle and jim were asked questions on their direct along the lines of, well, is not it true that your mother was not quite in her right mind towards the end, but neither of them took the bait. they both said, no, she was fine right up until the end. jim said she did not have any cognitive mental difficulties at the end. and this was not at the end. this was in march. her recurrence was diagnosed in november of '97. jim said she had her faculties all the way to the end and jonelle even said, after the occurrence after november when she had a session of chemotherapy which made her very ill that it did not affect her mind at all. on top of that, contrary to what gail would have you believe, there is no evidence that betty was ill at the time she filled out the questionnaire. in fact, there is a medical record dated february of 1997, february 20th of 1997. if you could pull that up, please. she was just going for routine monitoring of the lung cancer -- or the esophageal cancer and she is with dr. -- mr. lantinberg: objection, your honor. the document date is '96, not '97. ms. luther: i apologize. you are absolutely correct. i misread the document. well, i take that back then. in 1996 she felt well, but regardless, that does not change the argument. the recurrence occurred in november of '97 and in march of '97 she was still living on her own and there was no indication, other than gail's self-serving statement trying to run away from the questionnaire, that she was not feeling well and that the cancer had already started to deteriorate her system. in fact, evidently we do not even have any medical records from that point in time. if she was feeling ill, she would have sought medical attention. now, i get why they are trying to distance themselves from the questionnaire. they know that it is the best evidence of what betty smoked and when, and when you look at the questionnaire -- it is coming back into the jury room with you, it is defendant's exhibit number 1 -- they have to distance themselves from the questionnaire because it does not make sense when you look at that brand history that liggett's the only defendant in this courtroom. the questionnaire proves that betty blitch only smoked chesterfield for a short time, between 1945 and 1946, and then eve from 1980 to 1987. now the brand chart. and as you are aware, because you have seen this chart a number of times, what i did was, i took the brands that were listed alphabetically in the questionnaire and i put them in chronological order. that chart is not evidence. it is not going to come back into the jury room with you, but you can make your own chart and confirm that what i'm telling you is right. chesterfield from '45 to '46; eve from '80 to '87, and none of the other brands listed in that questionnaire are liggett brands. now, the two experts who came in here and talked to you about the science were dr. feingold and dr. webster and they both agreed that the dose of cigarette exposure is relevant to the response or to the disease that you get from that dose and in the scheme of her overall smoking, the chesterfield smoking was not consequential at all. it was a blip, because it happened in 1945, almost 50 years before she ultimately went on to develop her disease. and the eve smoking in and of itself does not rise to a level of a sufficient dose to increase her risk of developing esophageal cancer. dr. webster told you, you have to have 20 to 30 years of exposure to cigarette smoking to increase your risk of going on to develop esophageal cancer. essentially what plaintiff is attempting to do in this courtroom is to hold liggett responsible for brands that it did not manufacture. so the only witness plaintiff called into this courtroom to talk about what actually caused mrs. blitch's esophageal cancer was dr. feingold. who is dr. feingold or more importantly what is dr. feingold? dr. feingold is, in his own words, a lung specialist. well, this is not a lung cancer case. this is an esophageal cancer case, which i know you have been hit over the head with since we started, and dr. feingold is someone who wants the cigarette companies to close their doors. do not get me wrong, dr. feingold is a qualified lung doctor and if we were here because mrs. blitch died of lung cancer or emphysema or any other disease process of the lung, it would make sense that the plaintiff would bring you a lung doctor to talk about these ailments, but what was he doing here? this case is not about a disease of the lung. it is about esophageal cancer. you heard dr. webster, someone who is an otolaryngologist. in this country, board certified pulmonologists do not practice otolaryngology. it is below the standard of care for a pulmonologist to treat esophageal cancer. dr. feingold knows this. that is why he was evasive when i asked him questions about that. he never really did give me a straight answer. no, i'm involved in their care and treatment. i'm involved in their care and treatment, but the esophageal cancer is treated by an otolaryngologist or an oncologist or somebody who has a specialty to dealing with that. that is not dr. feingold. plaintiff brought you a professional witness, a man who is worked up over 10,000 asbestos cases and has been disclosed in over 250 tobacco lawsuits. 80 to ninety percent of his income comes from reviewing and preparing cases so he can come to court to testify, and in tobacco cases he only testifies on behalf of plaintiffs. he does not spend most of his time treating patients. and when he does see patients he is not treating them for esophageal cancer. even so, dr. feingold is the person the plaintiff brought you to tell you that mrs. blitch's esophageal cancer was caused by her smoking and not by any of the other risk factors that were present in this case. i suggest you give his testimony the weight it deserves when you go back to the jury room to deliberate. dr. feingold did not even know that having moderate to massive gerd meant that the entire esophagus was involved and mrs. blitch's gerd was more than a risk factor for developing esophageal cancer in this instance. but dr. webster, who is practice actually involves treating patients with gerd, he was able to explain to you how gerd can cause esophageal cancer and he explained when you have massive to moderate gerd the stomach acid goes from your stomach -- and obviously this is not to scale -- from your stomach up your throat and your throat is not supposed to be exposed to stomach acid and the esophagus -- the tissue of the esophagus is affected by the acid and that allows the process to develop whereby you can go on to develop esophageal cancer. dr. feingold also did not mention hpv as a risk factor on his direct examination. despite the fact that there have been studies that have looked at the increased risk of a person with one hpv cancer, meaning the cervical cancer in mrs. blitch's case, going on to develop another hpv cancer, in this case the esophageal cancer. there are particularly studies to show that a person with cervical cancer going on to develop a head and neck cancer carries an increased risk. dr. feingold knew about the cervical cancer and he knew that most cervical cancers are caused by high risk hpv viruses but he did not bring you that evidence. i elicited some of the evidence on cross-examination. in attempting to attack the credibility of dr. webster on this risk factor, mr. wilner used old science. he referred to the 1989 surgeon general's report and a 2003 article. well, we are in 2011. now science is making progress by leaps and bounds everyday. as it turns out dr. webster spent a great deal of time doing research to make sure his opinions were current; that they complied with the current state of medicine. and the current knowledge is that hpv causes esophageal cancer. it is not a hypothesis anymore. then there was the alcohol abuse as a risk factor. another example of plaintiff trying to distance herself from the evidence. plaintiff tried to suggest that mrs. blitch stopped drinking to excess after her 30 days of involuntary commitment in 1977. a voluntary commitment that -- proceeding that were started by mrs. blitch's mother because she had had a drinking problem since she was 16 years old. the evidence proves that the inference that betty blitch stopped smoking (sic) after that 30 days's detox is just flat out wrong. that is not what the facts demonstrate. we know she was arrested for disorderly conduct in 1978. we know she had a -- she fell so hard that she ended up with a subdural hematoma that they treated by drilling holes in her head in 1979. we know that she continued to fall and she continued to break bones throughout the 1980s. this information is contained in her medical records. these are documents in evidence as plaintiff's exhibit 1a and i'll show you some examples of the medical records but i want to -- excuse me -- explain something first. at the bottom of every page of the medical records is a bates stamp number and this might help you as i go through. i'm going to refer to the bates stamp number as opposed to the evidence number. it will be easier for you to find these medical records when you take them back to the jury room. she broke two hips. she broke her right humerus. she tore her rotator cuff. she was injured badly enough on another occasion that they felt a need to x-ray her facial bones. and they never tried to say that these falls were caused by anything other than her use of alcohol consumption. we know she continued to drink until just before she passed away because that is what the people who knew her said. jonelle, jim, mary, they all told us that she continued drinking after 1977. they were a little cagey about the drinking after 1977. they hedged their answers but they conceded she did continue drinking after that date. the witnesses were asked something along the lines of, did she have a drinking problem after 1977, and they said things like, not that i noticed or not that i saw, but when pushed, they did concede that even though they had not actually seen her drunk after 1977, they had certainly heard that she had been and the medical records tell their own story. if we could pull up -- okay. we have got a couple of different records up here. one is bates number 210315.010.000024. to make it easy, i'm just going to refer to the bates numbers, the last six numbers, 10.24. you will be able to find it that way. so 10.24, has consumed heavy alcohol in the past. 10.29, moderate drinker in the past. stopped four to five months ago and that was dated june 22nd of 1994. so that means she stopped drinking in approximately, you know, january of '94, just a few -- about 11 months before her esophageal cancer was actually diagnosed. and 10.30, she has gait ataxia. the pattern is most consistent with an anterior cerebellar syndrome which may have been related in part to her previous alcohol use. 104.1 (sic), there is some history of heavy alcohol use in the past. 10.17, gait ataxia, this is most likely a combination of degenerative and alcoholic cerebellar degeneration. 10.42, used to be a heavy drinker. 10.7, he felt her gait ataxia was most likely a combination of degenerative and degeneration. those are some of the records that confirm she was a heavy drinker and she continued drinking until at least june -- or at least january of 1994 by what she reported to her physicians. now, who did liggett call as its expert witness regarding the science issues? we called dr. webster. he is an otolaryngologist. he is highly qualified. he is got gold plated credentials. i mean, he went to yale medical school and he did his residency and his internship at the number one ranked hospital facility for otolaryngology at the time that he was in medical school. he treats diseases of the ear, nose and throat. he is even done original research on oncogenes and he explained to you the proteins that have a relationship to causing cancer. he treats patients every day for diseases of the ear, nose and throat. dr. webster only spends about one percent of his time doing legal consulting. he is as far from a professional witness as you can get. and i think i might be getting short on time so i'm going to skip some stuff. dr. webster confirmed that more likely than not smoking did not play a role in mrs. blitch's esophageal cancer. and her smoking of liggett brands definitely did not play a role in her esophageal cancer. even if you were to remove all of betty blitch's smoking, she had a substantial risk of going on to develop her esophageal cancer because of the other risk factors that she had. in her lifetime, despite the fact that she only smoked two liggett brands and she had three significant risk factors for the development of escc, separate and apart from smoking. so we have got the medical record that talks about her having moderate to massive gastroesophageal reflux. that is significant. it is significant gerd. and people who never smoked and never drank but had gerd had an increased risk of going on to develop esophageal cancer. and there was an issue with the cell type, you know, whether it was a risk factor for squamous cell carcinoma, and dr. webster agreed it is more usually associated with adenocarcinoma which is the cell type that mrs. blitch did not have, but he said there are studies that confirm that it can cause squamous cell carcinoma as well. we know mrs. blitch had cervical cancer for which she had a hysterectomy. we know that virtually all cervical cancers are caused by the virus strains of hpv. we know that there is a great incidence of head and neck cancers, including esophageal cancer, in people who already had a history of hpv caused cancer. we do not know how mrs. blitch was exposed to the hpv, but we know she was because we know she had cervical cancer and we also know women who have had cervical cancer are more likely to go on to develop second hpv caused cancer than women who never had hpv caused cancer. alcohol as a risk factor, the studies are clear. a heavy drinker who never smoked has a higher risk than a smoker who never drank of getting esophageal cancer. some studies have found that the risk from drinking is almost double the risk of smoking. the evidence was also clear, if you stopped smoking or you stopped drinking, you reduce your risk of getting esophageal cancer, but -- and this is important -- the risk of getting esophageal cancer presented by heavy alcohol consumption stays with the drinker for a lot longer than the risk of smoking stays with that person. according to one of the studies, it took almost three times longer for the risk acquired from heavy drinking to go back to the baseline of a nondrinker as compared to a smoker. dr. webster said that after a smoker stops smoking for three to five years, she reduces her risk of going on to get esophageal cancer significantly and after ten years she is back to the baseline of a never smoker. meaning her risk of getting esophageal cancer after ten years is the same as if she never smoked. for alcohol cessation it took about 15 to 20 years for the risk of developing esophageal cancer to drop significantly and even longer to go back to the baseline of a never drinker. so clearly the affects of heavy alcohol consumption in the context of esophageal cancer have more of an impact on the development of the esophageal cancer, if it takes that much longer for you to get it out of your system once you stop. bottom line, the alcohol consumption is this. even if she never smoked a single cigarette, she would have had a significant risk of going on to develop esophageal cancer. taking all of this into consideration, plaintiff has failed to satisfy her burden and that is an important part of the instructions that you are going to get from the court. it is the plaintiff's burden. i do not have to come in here and prove anything. the plaintiff has to prove that it was the smoking to the greater weight of the evidence, that her addiction to smoking cigarettes caused her esophageal cancer. she did not satisfy that burden, let alone liggett cigarettes did. now, nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. everyone agrees. this was not a secret at any point in time. it is not information that the tobacco companies were hiding from the world and nobody came in here and claimed that it was. dr. feingold acknowledged that there was a great deal of information contained in the public literature going as far back as the 19th century regarding nicotine's pharmacologic affect. going back to 1931, dr. dibacco showed you excerpts from text in elementary schools that told students that the tobacco habit grows on most people. it gets worse. they smoke more and more until they are smoking all the time and bad habits are hard to stop, so do not start them. there are other examples that dr. dibacco talked about during his examination yesterday that demonstrate the people have long known that once you start smoking, it could be difficult to stop. i'm not going to go into them. betty knew there was nicotine in cigarettes and she knew that nicotine was part of reason she was smoking. she used to tell her son jim, i'm having a nicotine fit. the only quit of which we are aware of is a quit that no one thought was sincere. no one believed she actually meant to quit. it was something she did because she thought that what she -- she thought that was what betty and jonelle -- i'm sorry -- jonelle and gail wanted her to say. jim and jonelle were not even aware of her having quit during this week. they testified they were not aware of quit attempts. gail learned about this quit attempt shortly after she resumed smoking and agreed she did not notice betty smoking once during that one week. betty never mentioned to any of them she had withdrawal affects during that week of smoking cessation. dr. feingold confirmed that nicotine's out of your system within a couple days of stopping smoking. most importantly betty never told anyone she thought that she was addicted, nor did she ever tell anyone she was unable to quit. no one came in here and told you that being addicted means you cannot quit. dr. feingold said it does not mean you are a robot, that you have no control over your actions. and even dr. feingold agrees that a smoker chooses to smoke the first cigarette and continue smoking after that first cigarette. he agreed mrs. blitch could have stopped smoking. everybody can quit smoking. addiction does not prevent people from stopping smoking or wanting to stop or acting to stop. and the more often you sincerely try to stop, the better your chance of actually succeeding. so was mrs. blitch addicted to nicotine? maybe. if you believe dr. feingold, she was addicted by the time she was 15. he said that teen-agers are addicted within three years of their smoking initiation. this is well before she ever smoked a liggett product. she started smoking in 1936. she did not smoke her first liggett product until 1945. she was about 21 years old when she smoked her first liggett product. it was about nine years later. the important question, did the addiction to nicotine cause her esophageal cancer? and the answer to that question is definitely not. more importantly did an addiction to liggett brand cigarettes cause her esophageal cancer? again, definitely not. plaintiff takes the position in this case that liggett concealed material information from betty blitch and if she had had that information that was supposedly concealed that she would have been able to avoid her esophageal cancer. that is just not credible based on everything we know about the evidence in this case. we have a wealth of information that demonstrates the falsity of that claim. betty blitch had available to her the information we talked about in her school books. the surgeon general's 1964 report was considered one of the top news stories of the 20th century. news that the surgeon general had concluded that smoking caused lung cancer in men was everywhere you turned back then. she was well-read. she stayed up with current events. she watched the television news every night. rates of smoking in the united states started to decline even before the 1964 surgeon general's report came out. and the rates of smoking continued to go down to the point that today only twenty percent of the us population smokes. more than half of every smokers have quit. more people than not have quit smoking. there is no reason that betty blitch, if she had wanted to quit, could not have been part of that group. betty saw the warnings on the cigarettes packs starting in 1966. i'm not going to read them to you. you have seen them a bunch in this case. when jim was in high school from about 1970 to 1975 he tried to get betty to quit. he said, we all did. we thought it was a nasty habit and he did not like her doing it. he tried to stop her from doing something that he knew was hurting her. so what did betty do when her only son told her to quit because he was concerned for her health, she ignored his warnings. he was a child. she was the adult. she would listen to him, but she did not have to defend herself to him. these are his words. she was an adult and she was doing what she was accustomed to doing. in 1969, around the same time she was actually diagnosed with a cancer, her cervical cancer, her personal physician told her to stop smoking. she knew enough about the health risks of smoking that she did not smoke around her granddaughter. jim actually forbid it. he expressed wholeheartedly to her he did not want his child exposed to cigarette smoke. betty did not argue with him about this. she loved spending time with her granddaughter more than she wanted to smoke. with all of this personal information available to her, she clearly knew that smoking caused cancer risk. she could have chosen to stop smoking at any one of these points in time. it is true, the more technologically advanced therapies that are available to today to help people quit smoking were not available before mrs. blitch passed away. there were things available she could have tried if she had been inclined, which she was not. she could have tried nicotine gum. dr. feingold said that was available in the 1970s. she could have tried the nicotine patch. that was available in 1992. she did not know that she was going to go on to develop an esophageal cancer in 1994. she could have tried to use the patch. she did not. i mean, there is the rub. even dr. feingold conceded this point. in order to quit, you have to decide you want to quit and you actually have to try to quit. betty never decided that she wanted to quit. betty never told anyone that she wanted to quit and betty never actually did want to quit. she knew that smoking came with health risks and she continued smoking anyway. dr. goldenberg is the witness plaintiff called to discuss marketing with you. he clearly had his own agenda. it was abundantly clear he does not like cigarettes. that is his choice, but it is an example of one of the things you can consider when determining the weight to give to his testimony. dr. goldenberg showed us a number of advertisements from the past 70 years. some of them were liggett ads, but most of them were ads from products manufactured by other companies. i'm not going to spend time talking about other companies's ads because dr. goldenberg agreed, liggett did not participate in the marketing of its competitors brand. that is just common sense. liggett's not responsible for the contents of the advertisements that its competitors put out into the market. and interestingly, liggett brands did not experience an increase in their market share just because the marlboro man was a successful ad campaign. what do these other companies brands have to do with liggett? for that matter, what do they have to do with betty blitch? the answer to both questions is absolutely nothing. none of the ads that were shown to you during plaintiff's case had anything to do with betty blitch or the facts of this case. you may recall that in my opening, i acknowledged that there was a lot of cigarette advertising in the past. and i told you that you might have to decide if cigarette advertising had anything to do with why mrs. blitch started and continued smoking. more to the point, was there anything false in liggett's advertising that mrs. blitch saw -- and this is the important part -- relied on. that is critical. that is like the lynchpin of plaintiff's case. they have to prove liggett did or said something that betty blitch relied on and that caused her -- and that reliance caused her to develop her esophageal cancer. did liggett fail to warn mrs. blitch of anything that it had a legal obligation to warn her of? before i go on, you will hear this when judge arnold instructs you. plaintiff does not have a claim for failure to warn after 1969. so any of those ads that dr. goldenberg talked about, they neutralize. they made it look glamorous. those ads are not in play if they were after 1969. now, dr. goldenberg came here to tell you that advertising drives sales and market share. over the years, he is been paid three quarters of a million dollars to tell juries that advertising drives sales and market shares. okay. i mean, that is common sense, is not it? that is why companies advertise. obviously the goal of advertising is to sell a product. it is not a phenomenon that is unique to the tobacco industry. cigarettes are legal and liggett's allowed to advertise its cigarettes as long as it complies with the law in this country, and there is no evidence it did not do that. dr. goldenberg also spoke briefly about the health-based ads from very early on, in the early '50s, the tobacco manufacturers were using to promote their products. on their face, some of those ads sound pretty farfetched today. dr. goldenberg raised an interesting point with regard to those health-based ads though. he pointed out that the companies did not use those campaigns for very long because rather than reassure smokers, they actually had the affect of reminding smokers of the raging debate going on regarding the health risks of smoking. and those health-based ads stopped running in about 1954, 1955. now, the crux of what i took away from dr. goldenberg's testimony was that the tobacco companies's advertisements were deceitful because the imagery was pretty and made smoking look glamorous and healthy; snow skiing, water skiing, canoeing, skydiving, without actually getting injured. these activities are just that, they are activities. they are not false statements. dr. goldenberg also talked about eve advertising specifically. he had no idea how much liggett spent on marketing eve. he mentioned in 1971 a marketing plan where all of the magazines where eve was going to be advertised was listed over a period of a number of years. he had no information regarding eve advertising during the period betty blitch actually smoked eve and we know from the interrogatories that i read into the record yesterday afternoon that betty blitch read national geographic, the florida times union, southern living, and better homes and gardens. and i took a look at that marketing plan. eve was not advertised in those publications. we knew what publications mrs. blitch read. that information was available to dr. goldenberg too. he did not even attempt to tie his testimony regarding eve advertising to magazines we know betty blitch read. regardless of what dr. goldenberg said, there is no evidence that betty blitch ever relied on any of the ads that he showed you in making her smoking decisions. dr. goldenberg never said, this is an ad that betty blitch saw. he never said, this is an ad that betty blitch relied on. he never said, this is an ad that impacted betty blitch's smoking-related decisions. i mean, how could he have? he did not know betty blitch. and the people who did know her never once told you that she relied on advertising. they did not talk to her about cigarette advertising. they did not know if she relied on cigarette advertising either. there is no evidence she relied on anything in cigarette advertising for making her smoking-related decisions. in fact, betty started smoking long before the majority of the ads that were shown to you even appeared. now, dr. goldenberg talked about the tobacco institute too. and i plan to talk about it in a little more detail when i talk about the liggett side of the story, but since i'm talking about dr. goldenberg and the impact of what he talked about on betty blitch, i think it is important to note that betty blitch started smoking 22 years before the tobacco institute even came into existence. you know, presumably you were shown all this information as evidence that liggett hid the ball regarding smoking and health. so what was liggett supposed to have hidden that would have made a difference in betty's smoking decisions? i submit absolutely nothing. now i'm going to turn to what i referred to in my opening as the side story. i've been talking about the main story up to now. so the side story is about liggett. what does the evidence show about what liggett did and what does the evidence show about what the other major tobacco companies -- the court: let me interrupt you just for a second because i do not want to break at the end of yours. i want to give you a little more time and then mr. wilner comes right in. is this a convenient time to take a brief recess? ms. luther: sure. the court: let us take a ten-minute recess. ladies and gentlemen, we will come back and finish up the arguments. the bailiff: court's in recess for ten minutes. ms. luther: judge, by my calculation i have about 35 minutes left. is that your understanding as well? the court: let us see. we recessed at 11:07 -- or 08, so you have 42 and eight would be 40 (sic), so you have 35 minutes left. ms. luther: outstanding. thank you. (a recess was taken.) the court: did you find it now, tracy? ms. thompson: i'm sorry? the court: did ms. hartley show you -- ms. hartley: they had already corrected it, your honor. the court: it just was not corrected on my copy. it still is not corrected on my copy. ms. hartley: i think it is the way it is appearing on your screen, your honor. the court: just so that the one we hand to the jury has a space everything's fine. otherwise one of you has to go get it. ms. hartley: it will be tracy, your honor. mr. feiwus: your honor, not my word perfect, not my document, but it may be because you have full justification on. sometimes when you have full justification it messes up the spacing. the court: okay. good. because i do not know nothing about what full justification is. mr. feiwus: it means when it is straight on both sides. the court: okay. bring the jury in. (whereupon, the jurors entered the courtroom.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, what we are going to do, i'm going to let counsel for both sides finish their argument. i do not want to break for lunch and just have one side finish their argument, which will put us going to lunch a little bit later than usual, but not much. then we will go to lunch and give you instructions of law right after lunch. go ahead, mrs. luther. ms. luther: as i was saying, i'm going to turn now to the liggett story, the side story. what does the evidence show about what liggett did and what does the evidence show about what the other major companies did? the evidence showed that liggett was a responsible tobacco company. it took a path independent from the rest of the industry during critical parts of the tobacco and health story. we saw evidence that beginning in the late 1940s and culminating with the 1964 surgeon general's report there was a merging scientific evidence concerning the lung cancer risk from smoking. the first widely publicized story was the 1950 statistical study of wynder and graham. this was followed by the doll and hill study in 1952 and the wynder graham mouse painting studies in 1953. and these are all studies that were discussed during the testimony of dr. feingold and were also mentioned during the testimony of dr. dibacco. there is no question that these early scientific studies were very important. and by today's standards we know that they were largely correct. now, today, in 2011, looking back, no one today disputes cigarettes are an important cause of lung cancer and other diseases, but in the 1950s this issue was not yet resolved. there was a debate, a scientific debate, a controversy of sorts, liggett scientists -- regardless of what mr. wilner tells you -- on both side of the question as to what these studies really meant. you heard dr. feingold testify that even the famous dr. evarts graham himself -- mr. wilner referred to him as the grand old man -- in the early 1950s was not convinced of the evidence. he and other scientists acknowledged that a correlation existed between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. as you heard dr. feingold testify, physicians and scientists were skeptical because they needed more evidence before they could draw conclusions about disease causation. correlation studies are important to science because they identify topics for future research but in and of themselves, they are not proof. while we may only remember the famous scientific studies, science is a process. even landmark experiments must be repeated with alternative explanations investigated and further research undertaken until the evidence grows to a point where a scientific consensus emerges. this is exactly what started happening in the 1950s. so while these studies in the early '50s were important, they were not dispositive of the issue and this makes sense, and as we would expect, scientific studies continued throughout the 1950s and the early 1960s on the issue of lung cancer and cigarette smoking. the evidence mounted, but it was not until 1964 and the first surgeon general's report that a scientific consensus on lung cancer was finally reached. indeed, you heard what dr. feingold admitted at the end of his cross-examination. the surgeon general did not even come to the conclusion that there was a causal link between esophageal cancer and cigarette smoking until the 1982 surgeon general 's report. that was a fact that plaintiff's conveniently ignored in their case in chief. so what did liggett do in response to this information coming out in the early 1950s and what did the other companies do? you will see that there is a critical distinction between the two. liggett responded to the controversy by investing enormous resources and a biological testing program with arthur d. little. you heard that arthur d. little was a reputable scientific consulting firm, a group of scientists from mit who broke off and started this consulting firm. they consulted with government officials. they consulted with nasa. the man in charge of liggett's testing program at arthur d. little was dr. charles kensler. he was a preeminent scientists from sloan-kettering, one of the top cancer institutions in the country, in new york city and he had impeccable credentials, and together liggett and arthur d. little headed out to do two things. first to coordinate with dr. wynder himself and see if the wynder and graham skin mouse painting test could be duplicated. and second to see if they could identify what -- if anything, what specifically in the cigarette smoke could be identified as the problem. with the hope if they could identify it, they could remove it. essentially they were trying to figure out what in cigarette smoke was responsible for producing the tumors on the mouse skin. the wynder graham mouse painting test was a landmark experiment. you have seen a lot of coverage of it and when the results were released some of the top research labs in the country, sloan-kettering, roswell park, yale, all tried to start replicating dr. wynder's results. liggett was not the only one trying to do this. wynder himself said replicating the results was an important scientific endeavor and that he himself participated with liggett and arthur d. little in this endeavor. other public health officials were also invited to participate in liggett's replication of these studies. you saw the report by arthur d. little and liggett concerning the results of their testing. they were, in fact, able to replicate dr. wynder's results, but they got significantly lower incidences of tumors than dr. wynder did and when they applied a less amount of tar, they received no papillomas or cancers at all. and you heard that dr. kensler was reluctant to publish those results because he did not want to undermine the information that was already out in the open about the causal connection. he did not want liggett to be taking the position that, you know what, maybe those results are not valid. we know that liggett continued in earnest with its biological testing program throughout the 1950s and we know that liggett's researchers were able to identify important carcinogens in cigarette smoke that they believed were contributing to the biological activity in wynder's tests and the abl test. and at the appropriate time liggett made that science publicly available. it published its results when dr. kensler spoke at the new york academy of science in 1960 and even more significantly, it voluntarily provided all of its research, all of its data to the surgeon general's advisory committee in the 1960s. the volume is in evidence. it is extensive. it is about this much material. you know, it is a ream of scientific studies and the results of those studies. and mr. wilner says that liggett lied to the surgeon general. well, you know what, the surgeon general did not think that liggett lied to the surgeon general. the surgeon general's committee was very grateful for the work that liggett gave and shared with them, and they recognized that and they acknowledged that and they said, simple gratitude is not enough to thank you for your sharing those results with us. there is no indication that liggett lied in that submission. now, mr. wilner has tried to turn liggett's positive efforts, its extensive research and consultation with dr. wynder and its cooperation with the surgeon general's advisory committee on its head instead of congratulating liggett on what no other tobacco company did. mr. wilner criticizes liggett because liggett tried to do the right things back in the 1950s and '60s. it is the independent science on important issues at hand and made all of its research and all of its data available to the public health community whose job it was to protect the public. it is very easy for dr. feingold to come in here 60 years later and apply present day scientific standard about what we know today to disease causation in the 1950s. but that is not a fair judgment and its not an accurate judgment. the scientists working for liggett did exactly what legitimate scientists do and most importantly they shared their data. i know i'm harping on that but it is important. it is important to know liggett was not hiding the studies that they were doing. you know, mr. wilner said, we call these the secret documents. they were not secret documents. all of this information was shared in the scientific community and with public health officials. you will see in the nine volume submission that we have identified specific carcinogens that appear in tobacco smoke, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, benzopyrene and a host of others. now, mr. wilner -- or not -- maybe not specifically mr. wilner, but plaintiff's counsel repeatedly showed you a document called l&m, a perspective review. if we could get the elmo, please. i am not going to show you the whole document. it is in evidence. you can take a look at it. and they harped on what i've got highlighted here. these five lines essentially where arthur d. little wrote, there are biologically active materials present in tobacco. these are cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful. liggett did not hide this ball. all of this information is information that was contained within the nine volume submission. it was information that liggett shared with the surgeon general's committee. it was not a secret document. so let us contrast liggett's responsible conduct with its competitors, the other tobacco companies in the 1950s. what did they do? dr. feingold testified to that during his examination. they got together at the plaza hotel in new york city in 1953. they hired the pr firm of hill & knowlton. they created an organization called the tobacco industry research committee, otherwise known as tirc. and liggett did not belong to that organization when it was known as tirc. it was created in 1953, 1954. liggett became a member of the council for tobacco research, which was the successor to the tirc, in 1964, but for that ten-year period of time, between 1954 and 1964, liggett had nothing to do with that organization. liggett only belonged to the council for tobacco research from march of 1964 to january of 1968. so it was is a very short period of time. the document that mr. feiwus showed on his cross of dr. feingold, which we have referred to as the trip report, demonstrates that liggett did not participate in those activities. and i'm just going to show you the relevant paragraphs. so the document that i'm about to show you is a document from 1958. it was authored by a tobacco company scientist from england who met with all the tobacco companies and many reputable individuals who were involved in the tobacco and science issues of the day. and what did they write about liggett? looking specifically at the area in the brackets -- and i confess, i'm not very adept at this zooming thing. all right. so it says, liggett & myers stayed out of tirc originally because they doubted the sincerity of tirc motives -- tirc motives and believed that the organization was too unwieldily to work efficiently. they remain convinced that their misgivings were justified. in their opinion, tirc has done little, if anything, constructive. the constantly reiterated, not proven statements in the face of mounting contrary evidence has thoroughly discredited tirc and the sab, which stands for scientific advisory board, of the tirc is supporting almost, without exception, projects which are not related directly to smoking and lung cancer. liggett felt that the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large scale investment by the company directly in experimental research on smoke and cancer. accepting privately that a strong case against tobacco had been made out and avoiding any public components until their own research had provided something concrete to offer. unlike the other companies who were involved with the tirc, liggett engaged in serious science and did not speak on the issues until it had solid concrete science to offer. when it had scientific results, it did. it shared them with the surgeon general's committee. what would mr. wilner have you believe? he wants you to believe all these companies are the same. he wants you to buy into the concept of guilt by association. just because liggett was a tobacco company, it should be lumped in with all these other tobacco companies despite the evidence, its conduct is distinguishable from these other companies. you should not accept that. there is no evidence of that. what mr. wilner is arguing is one fact that his whole conspiracy theory rests on and that one fact is that in 1958 liggett joined the tobacco institute, which i touched on briefly during the main story. mr. wilner's claim is, because liggett was a member of this industry group, it is now responsible for what every other tobacco company did or said for a 50-year period of time. that does not meet the common sense standard. you heard what dr. goldenberg said about the tobacco institute. you can see it had many members, at least 17. it included tobacco growers. it included everybody who had any interest in tobacco. he conceded that the principal role of the tobacco institute as set forth in its charter was lobbying, representing the tobacco industry in washington and in state governments and activity that is protected by our constitution. and the evidence showed that liggett was a minor player at best in terms of financial contributions to the tobacco institute, in terms of governance and control. but what mr. wilner wants you believe is that every letter, every comment, every statement by the tobacco institute or by philip morris or by reynolds or by brown & williamson or the american tobacco company regarding smoking or tobacco health issues is somehow attributable to liggett and somehow part of a conspiracy. that is simply not true. ask yourself what documents or letters did you see from any liggett personnel authorizing or directing tobacco institute conduct or tobacco institute statements or components. there were not any. now there is shortcut for all of this, a crucial test for evaluating the claims on this case. did any of the statements by the tobacco institute, liggett, philip morris, rj reynolds, american tobacco company, brown & williamson or anyone else play any role in betty blitch's decisions to start smoking, to continue to smoke or to not quit smoking? there is not a stitch of evidence of any of this. there is no evidence that any of this made any difference to mrs. blitch. now, dr. dibacco told you only about six percent of the overall information regarding smoking and health came from the companies or their representatives. and that number actually declined over the years. does anyone believe that any of those ads or any of that information had any impact on betty blitch's decision to start smoking in 1936? i mean, the primary information that you were shown started in the 1950s. dr. feingold said the conspiracy started in 1953 at the plaza hotel meeting. it had nothing to do with betty blitch's decision to start smoking 22 years earlier. does it make any sense that any of liggett's chesterfield ads that ran in the 1950s would have any impact on her decision to start smoking in the late '30s and to smoke chesterfield in 1945? the chesterfield ads in the 1950s certainly did not persuade her to smoke chesterfield in the 1950s. professor dibacco also showed you widespread information on cancer coming out in the 1950s and '60s. there were widespread efforts coming out on health groups and the federal government on the health risks of smoking and the attempt to regulate cigarettes. by 1968 daniel horn who is one of the scientists from the 1954 hammond and horn epidemiological studies was quoted as saying, you could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. it is not credible to believe that by 1968 that betty blitch who was an intelligent, well-read, strong-willed personality that she did not know what every other person referred to by dr. horn knew at that time and that is, that cigarettes are dangerous. mr. wilner suggests that mrs. blitch could not have known the risks. all of this information was somehow lost on her because of the marketing and advertising campaign by the companies and the lobbying group, tobacco institute. ask yourself, is this really credible argument? does it make sense? i think professor dibacco said it the best. nobody was looking to the tobacco companies and nobody was looking to the advertisements to get the health information. one of last things i want to talk to you about are the issue of punitive damages. plaintiffs have a claim for punitive damages in this case. punitive damages are a category of damages that are separate and apart from compensatory damages. remember, they have asked you to award jonelle and jim millions of dollars to compensate them for the loss of their mother. punitive damages are damages that are intended to punish the company and to deter it from acting or engaging in bad behavior going forward. the judge will instruct you on the standard for punitive damages. it is important to note that it is different than the standard for compensatory damage. for compensatory damages they only have to establish their claim by the greater weight of the evidence. for punitive damages the standard is much higher, and that is a clear and convincing standard and the instructions will explain to you what the difference is between the two. but in order for the plaintiff to prove by clear and convincing evidence that plaintiff is entitled to an award of punitive damages, they have to show that there is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation as to the matter at issue. here, whether there is any such evidence that liggett's wrongful conduct caused damage to betty blitch and whether it is necessary to send a message to liggett to punish liggett for the way it is currently doing business, that is what you need to apply the clear and convincing standard to. back in the day, liggett acted the way a responsible cigarette manufacturer should have acted. it conducted independent research to corroborate the results of dr. wynder's mouse skin painting studies. it turned over almost a decade worth of research to the surgeon general's committee. the information provided to the surgeon general's committee was instrumental in allowing the surgeon general to conclude in 1964 that smoking was associated with lung cancer in men; that it did cause lung cancer in men and even after the warnings went on the packs in 1966, liggett continued to do research and development to try and make its product safe for its smokers, at least safer. liggett today is the smallest of the major companies. it has approximately two percent of the market share. back in 1996 it was the first tobacco company to publicly admit that smoking causes certain diseases and is addictive. and this is all evidence that mr. lebow testified to. liggett puts a warning on its cigarettes that is not required by congress stating that smoking is addictive. liggett discloses its ingredients on its cartons of cigarettes. liggett is doing business as a responsible tobacco manufacturer. more importantly, not to beat a dead horse, but liggett's conduct over the years had no bearing on betty blitch. liggett does not deserve to be punished. now, before i sit down, i just want to go over a couple of the more important jury instructions and the verdict form that you are going to take back into the jury room with you. and i still do not have copies of those. so normally i would put the verdict form up on the screen and show you how we think it would be appropriate to fill the verdict form out. but first i want to reiterate, plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case. it is up to her to prove betty blitch was addicted to smoking and that her addiction to smoking was the legal cause of her death and plaintiff has to prove that by the greater weight of the evidence. as far as the verdict form is concerned, rather than checking everything off as we go, since i cannot do that, i'm just going to highlight the first question that mr. wilner talked to you about and that is -- it is my draft copy -- was laura elizabeth blitch, hereafter betty blitch, addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and if so, was cigarette smoking during such addiction a legal cause of the cancer that caused her death? the answer to that question should be no based on the evidence that we have just discussed. if you answer no to that question, your job is done. you sign the verdict form and you come back and your jury duty is over. if you do not agree with liggett's assessment of the evidence in this case, you would go on to answer other questions on the verdict form. was liggett group's negligence a legal cause of betty blitch's death? we submit the answer to that question again is no. and you know what, there is so many scribbles on this that i do not want to go into it and read the wrong thing, but suffice it to say that we believe your response to questions one, two, three, and four should be no and if that is the case, then your verdict will be for liggett and we believe that is the appropriate finding in this case given the evidence. i appreciate your time and attention. i apologize for going on for as long as i did. and we thank you very much for your services. thanks.