mr. wilner: not going to rush. we have been here a long time. thank you, your honor. may it please the court. i've been looking forward to the ability to address you directly. we have been through a week or so of quite a lot of material. it is been a lot. it is been a lot for us. i'm sure it is been a lot for you, but a -- i hope fascinating disturbing, disturbing -- very disturbing serious amount of information that we have learned about what is happened in this country and what is happened to betty blitch. and in the next few minutes i'm going to try and not -- i'm not going to try and persuade you because i -- because the evidence that i suggest you make your decision on you have already heard and you will see because we backed up every single thing we said, everything, with reports from the government, with evidence from inside the companies. every single thing anybody said on the plaintiff's side, we have backed up a hundred times and sometimes more than we needed to, but we thought you deserved it. and if it took time, i'm sorry, but that is the way it was. but there are silent witnesses to -- in addition to the outstanding testimony you heard from dr. allen feingold, the precision, the knowledge -- and he is my friend. i'm so honored. i am. just the ability to know that much and to have studied that much and to be so -- to be able to cite everything like that i think you deserved it. it was a lot. but the silent witnesses are the witnesses that cannot be changed today and here they are. and you will see them. and might i -- might i get one of the boxes. the clerk: a box. mr. wilner: any box will do right now. thank you. this is one box. you are going to get for your deliberation these boxes that are sitting back here. and they are marked in a way that hopefully will make some sense. for instance -- and i just picked up one. this is marked plaintiff's 5b. it is called plaintiff's composite exhibits book sg. and sg -- i just picked up one at random -- are excerpts from the reports of the united states surgeon general. now, we had no time to read all of this and maybe you will not have time to read them all either but they are all here. are they all -- are they the full text? of course not because that would be ten feet high. but they are here and they substantiate everything we said scientifically, in terms of the -- how the history developed. here's the first one, smoking and health 1964, this is the real thing. number two is 1967 and they go on up to 2010. nothing we said, i submit to you, may -- i hope i did not make a mistake. every single thing we said we totally agree with the united states surgeon general, unlike some folks here. we also -- sorry to trouble you. another one, please. keep them coming. the clerk: well -- mr. wilner: thank you. this is a light one too. i'm not going to mess them all up. here are book s. this is really interesting stuff. book s are a compilation -- dr. feingold talked about it -- of actual scientific journals in chronologic order showing how the scientists discovered and published the horrors of nicotine and what that -- cigarettes and what it does to you. starting with the great ochsner. so it is here, with wynder and graham. and this is the entire article. levin, shrink, (phonetic) mills, doll and hill. and you may know these people in a way. they are our friends. they are the friends of truth today. and they are all there. please another one. for you to see. thank you. now, forgive me in advance if i trip on these since i've been tripping on stuff. here is book l. book l, several volumes, are what we call the liggett book. these are chronological order of liggett documents from inside their own company. we call them secret documents but they are here now to look at. we have discussed many but not all. and as you go through these, you will see they are in -- we tried to make them in chronological order. there may be a few mistakes, but you will see what went on inside this company, what they did. they cannot change this stuff. i mean no matter who they hire, the words are here. you have seen a lot of them. i'll put a couple up in a few minutes here. no time to go through them all, but you have the right. you can divide it up. you can say someone read this, someone read that. that is all up to you. we would not be doing what i believe in doing which is complete scientific valid verifiable stuff if i did not give you everything we -- we could possible -- not everything possible. we would be here for months, but a reasonable sample. and then i got something to say about that in a second. okay. and then we have another set -- i will not bother to get it now -- volume p. volume p is the public statements and the conspiracy between liggett and the tobacco institute. not between, because liggett was a founding member. i meant to say liggett as part of the tobacco institute. and we have only scratched the surface of that. so let me say first that although you have heard a lot of testimony -- and it is been powerful -- there is a lot more here. and we will stand by everything that is here. it is words and all and we have tried to put it in. if it is a lot, we are sorry but it means something. so, now, why are we -- what is left to do? well, let me make another remark. when we did our jury selection and i believe it is a -- and i said it was -- a tremendous american privilege to sit where you are sitting and we respect you. we really do. today's a voting day and how fitting and proper, you know, it really is. it is proper and you not only will -- if you wish to exercise that right, will have another right because you have now been elevated -- i'll use the word elevated -- you have been elevated to be able to make important decisions after hearing things that perhaps only a very few people in the world have heard. there are very few people who know what you know now. there are very few people who have access to all these -- all this information. there are few people who have listened to dr. allen feingold and dr. goldenberg, excellent, knowledgeable people discuss this -- these subjects in depth, and there are few people who will have the opportunity to look through these internal documents in depth because that is what we want you to do is to make a considered decision. but you have been elevated and we respect that. and all we ask of you is that you continue to keep your mind open and that you not lose your common sense of course because that is part of you. we want that. but that you follow your good judgment and your common sense, what makes the most sense, what hangs together, who is telling the truth here, who is not. so where are we? well, as jurors in this situation, you have been able to see under the door maybe through the key hole, but we do not have key holes anymore. it is an old expression. under the door, you have seen under a crack. we have been able -- we have seen under a crack, under the door and we have looked inside. we looked inside the tobacco industry. we have looked inside the tobacco institute. and we have looked inside of liggett. and it is not pretty. it is not a pretty way. it is not a legitimate way to run companies in america. in america we allow great freedom of operation. we allow you to sell product. we do not have -- we have an economy that is based on an individual making money. that is all okay. but -- here's the big but. this is why this country is so great. because with that freedom, with the freedom to make money and the freedom to be a capitalist, which is what we all want -- that is brought us the best living in the world -- comes a responsibility. that is the power of this country. it is that with your freedom you are responsible for what you do. you get it but you got to know you are going to be called to the table should you do something that is not proper. and one of the things that you must do if you are a manufacturer is you must tell the truth about your product. you have to do it. it is part of the deal. you get to do it, but you tell the truth. and once you go down the dark side, once you start saying, oh, no, not true, it does not cause cancer, does not do this, does not do that, and once you get involved with the rest of the industry and you link together and you do all the things -- i'm going to talk about what they are -- that are mind boggling in their scope and power, once you do that, once you commit, you are walking down a line, you are able to sell your product and up comes a question. a scientist in 1941, the great dr. ochsner has been looking at lung cancer rates and they are going up. why? why is lung cancer going up? you remember that (makes noise). it is the canary in the coal mine. it is serious. people die. this is not a game. it is shooting up. people have not changed. people are not changing their genetics that fast. so it has to be an outside source, and in 1941 -- and maybe there were a few early ones. ochsner wrote, it is our -- we have looked at all this other stuff. we are scientifically evaluating everything, the tar in the roads, this, that and the other, and you know what, it is cigarettes because they are going up too. and it is biologically plausible because of the stuff that is in them. so you are a manufacturer and you are making cigarettes. you are doing pretty good, and all of the sudden -- let us leave it aside whether you should -- whether liggett should have been the one to do the discovery and not ochsner because i think they should have. i think it should have been liggett out in front. i think it should have been liggett doing the research to protect its customers. but let us even forget that. let us say they were just happy. they did not buy it. and then ochsner comes. now you have got to decide what path are we going to take. you know, what, -where are we going? are we going in this direction which is with ochsner? are we going to go there and say, let us do -- let us not fight, let us err on the side of full disclosure? if there is a problem, let us err on the side of full disclosure. that is the correct thing to do. that is the reasonable thing to do. that is what america requires you to do. you get the right to sell a product, but you got to make the right decision. you got the responsibility. if there is anything coming up that says your customers -- and this is not soap. this is deadly stuff. fifty percent it turned out of regular smokers died. nothing like that. it is mind boggling and yet people are still addicted and they still smoke and people do smoke, and how is it that this something of fifty percent fatality rates with -- and not easy deaths either, horrible deaths, is still -- you know, it is still with us. dropped down a lot but still with us. well, you know, i know why. we know why, but -- so my thesis is this. my idea is this, that when you take the fatal -- when you take the wrong turn -- you know, you are going down -- here's ochsner. after that there is wynder. after that there is doll and hill and they are all saying and you go, hum, do i want to go there? hum, what you going to do? it is going to hurt sales. that is the problem. going to wynder, going to ochsner, it is going to hurt the sales. so they are on the horns of the most classic dilemma, all -- you know, that a business can be in. they have got to make that decision. is it going to be our sales or are we going to protect our customers? because it is very clear had they gone that way, had they made the right turn instead of the left, the world would be different. i'll show that with some graphs. i mean, the skyrocketing would be different. the massive counterattack of the tobacco institute on the science would be different. the addiction, it would be out in the open. the research on addiction should have happened 30 years before it did. instead of this, oh, it is not addictive, not addictive. the people who knew the most about the product should have been the ones out there realizing really fast that they are not dealing with an ordinary, as i say, bar of soap or even an ordinary thing that you can pick up and put down. we are dealing with something that is not only toxic but also very addictive. and that combination kills fifty percent of the people. that is a loaded gun in your face. it -- that is a terrible thing. so instead of making the right turn, they make the left turn. and what do they do? and i'm -- it is interesting all through this trial i've been -- we have been on the board showing you stuff, but i'm not now because i think i just wanted to get this out. so they go, no, i'm not going there. and i know liggett's probably going to say, well, we tried to, you know, do this with arthur d. little and we painted the mice and, yes, we found out they got cancer, but we told the surgeon general and i'm going to prove to you -- we already did that once with dr. feingold -- that is just nonsense. yeah, they did the mice. then they lied to the surgeon general, and i've got the document here that they -- in their big presentation they totally lied. they did not even say anything about the inhalation, they would proven cancer. they kept trying to minimize it. their whole presentation is like it is not as bad. so -- so that is a distraction. they took the left fork. they went towards the dark side. what was over there? what was on that dark side? well, it is very interesting. so what they did -- what liggett did -- this is all a summary. i'll go over some of this in more detail. but what did liggett do when they took the dark side turn? well, the first thing they did of course is they went back to the public and they put this -- put on their little statement again. that was pretty good. can you put on slide 18. that was this publication. that was really one of their first steps on to the dark side. because -- because, remember, this is 1954 and a year before -- would you put on 16. i'm not going to go back over all this stuff, but, you know, this was powerful in its day. this was the -- you know, the right side starting to call out. and let me totally agree with certain things dr. dibacco said although most of it sounds rather incredible, but the -- people did see that. a lot of people did. and then of course, they began to see the dark side. so this was out there. go back to 18. so liggett then knowing what is there, knowing full well that carcinogens, things that cause cancer had been found to cause it in those rats which -- you know, which -- in those mice which was a serious thing. let me get my pointer because i forgot it. then they come out with this mealy mouth double talk, which is like from all the thousands of analyses, our research department's found no reason to believe the isolation and elimination of any element native to cigarette, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. the point was, you know, do not worry people, because we got great research. we are going to, you know, take care of you. do not listen to this mice business. do not listen to the scientists. listen to us. we know what we are talking about. we got a big machine. and, you know, why would they say that? why would not they take out an ad that says, the great dr. wynder who has proven that cigarettes cause cancer using epidemiology, not just statistics but epidemiology, including clinical medicine, has also established biologic plausibility and this is a very serious finding and we think everybody who is smoking our cigarettes or thinking about it ought to know about it. instead it is this. do not worry. this is only one of probably hundreds of things that you will see as you go through the things that i've talked about. so once you get to the dark side, what else happens? well, the -- 160 -- and incidentally you will see that they are all tabbed, and if you want to go back and refer to one of these -- take a note or something of what it is, you can. but this was the next -- one of the next big steps on the dark side. i'll just hold it up. it is all right. this is the minutes of the first board of directors of the tobacco institute showing that liggett & myers, along with all the major tobacco companies, sat down, sketched it out, what was going to happen. what was the purpose of the tobacco institute? it was to sell cigarettes. because it helps to sell them if you could keep people quiet and not worried so much. and that was the whole point. the whole point was to give people assurances. the whole point was to create doubt in their minds that the scientists were not quite right, or that there was another side to the story. now, dr. dibacco seemed to think, although he is not a scientist, that, oh, yeah, these are eminent scientists who disagreed. well, i challenge anyone to come forward -- i challenged him of course. he was not a scientist, could not answer -- to come forward with a single legitimate epidemiologic study or biologic study that disproved anything that wynder, graham, doll, hill, hammond, horn had said, and there never was. all those scientists that you heard were paid by the tobacco institute and the tobacco companies to basically doubt things, to come in and say, oh, not so sure. oh, cannot quite tell. and then since everybody loved research, they all said, well, more research is needed. well, sure there was. there was always more research needed. of course everyone likes research, but that has nothing to do with the fact that people are dying right now today, today, pick up the cigarette, 1954, draw on the cigarette, you are getting addicted, you are going to die from it one day. what is that got to do with research being needed? sure there was research needed, and, in fact, the research that was needed was not done because the research that was needed was a cure for addiction. and that was never done. they did not do it. it is true that they sought, i mean, inside their laboratories probably some way to get the cancer out of the product. i'm sure they tried, because they do not want to kill people. i'm not saying that they like to kill people. what they want to do is sell cigarettes. that is the number one thing that liggett needs to do. that is it. they need to sell cigarettes. so let us think about this. if they could get the cancer out of the product and still sell the product, well, that would be fine. we would be fine with that. but they never did. they never could. but the one thing that they never wanted to do -- and i think you will see in these documents totally backs us up. the one thing they never wanted to do, never seriously wanted, was to cure the addiction. and why not, you might ask. well, you know why. because it is the addiction that brings you back to the cash register. there is not anything like addiction to make your sales. if you are selling a pack a day to 50 million people, as an industry you have a huge amount of sales. if those people are un-addicted and can just decide, well, today i'm not going to smoke because i just do not feel like it or i'm sick today or it is raining today or i have a cold -- lots of reasons that people would not choose to pick up a cigarette, but not the addicted people. they smoke day in and day out. they smoke colds, flus. they smoke through holes in their throat. they smoke, as dr. ochsner said -- remember that piece, after they are told their legs are going to come off, they are going to lose their legs, they smoke. what power of addiction. you know, powerful. and, sure, we will bring up cases of people who have quit though they are addicted, and that has nothing to do with anything because it does happen. heroin attics do quit. the fact is that if you want -- if you are addicted and everything goes right for you and you get the right help and you really, really believe that you have to quit, you have a higher chance of quitting than if you do not. and dr. feingold put up on his board, there on our board -- and he talks to everybody that comes in his office. that is -- a lot of these people are dying from a cigarette-related disease and he gives them -- he throws a book at them. the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, ten percent after that. he -- if he gave them doubts and said, oh, but there are these scientists over here that think it is a problem, none. if he gave them -- if he on the other hand gives them the new drugs that have recently come out long since betty blitch died, then it goes up another ten percent. i mean, that is about -- drugs are good. they are not a cure-all. and so -- thank you. all right. so i'm going to go -- i've spent probably too much time already in introducing things and i need to get to the heart of the matter. so the first question when you retire to -- retire -- we are not going to retire you, but when you get charged by the by his honor, judge arnold, he will give you instructions and ask you to follow them. and we do too of course. you are pledged to. and then you will get a verdict form and it has -- it is being typed up now, so we do not have the exact verdict form, but it is going to have something like -- i'll try and write it down. the first question will be -- is about the class. and i have not talked to you too much about the class. but you will be instructed that if betty blitch is found to be a class member, that there are a list of things which you are to accept and they include that liggett was negligent and they include that liggett belonged to a -- an agreement among defendants -- among cigarette companies, and they also include that liggett put a defective product on the market. so that is already been done. that was done in the engle case in 1997. those findings if -- if betty blitch is a member of the class, those findings are binding on you because it is already been litigated. so what -- oh, and then the question is, is she a member of the class? well, it is kind of a no-brainer because you are asked to find whether she was addicted and whether cigarettes containing nicotine or words to this effect caused her death due to esophageal cancer. and just a second on that. i do not think anyone in this courtroom -- there has been no testimony from liggett trying to get away from addiction. people who smoke all their lives we now know have those brain changes. those receptors in the brain change after what they call chronic exposure. it does not really matter whether you believe that -- what you -- what betty blitch thought about smoking was good, bad or indifferent or none of that matters. your brain gets changed. it does not make you a robot. it does not make you -- it does not make it impossible to quit. i do not know, maybe she could have, maybe she could not. that is not the point. the point is she had the brain changes. no one disputes it. so there is no way to get around that. this is what we deal with today, every day. the next question, did cigarettes cause her cancer? and that is pretty obvious, seems a no-brainer. even dr. webster who was put up to say that liggett cigarettes did not cause her cancer -- he did not really say that either, but when he lumped all these things together, he said, well, it is got alcohol and hpv, which maybe is a little bit of a stretch, and reflux disease, which we do not know how long she had it, and cigarettes, which she had everyday, and they are all contributory. and you will hear an instruction from his honor, judge arnold, that a legal cause can operate with other causes and there is no -- it is not the only cause. it does not even have to be the biggest cause. it is a part of cause of other causes. it is called a chain of causation. and so that is a legal cause. no one suggested -- he did not suggest that smoking was not a cause. these carcinogens, as you saw in the 2010 surgeon general report, are specific -- the nnn and nnk are specific for esophageal cancer as you will see in the materials. in the 1989 report, ten times the number of people get esophageal cancer than people -- who smoke than do not. that includes people with all these other things. so it is not really that -- it is pretty much a no-brainer. if you find that betty blitch was a class member, then you go on to the next question. and the next questions do concern what liggett did. before you get there, you are -- you will then be asked or -- if you find she is a class member -- which i mean what was the purpose of the class? obviously this is the kind of person that is in it. and if you find that she is, as i say, a number of findings that have already been made attach. and you will be asked to find -- and then you will be asked to find more specific things about liggett which is, did they fraudulently conceal things which betty blitch relied on? and were they in a conspiracy which betty blitch relied on or, you know, was damaged by? and were they -- should liggett be held liable for punitive damages which are punishment damages. and let me start -- you will also be asked what -- how much compensatory -- how much ordinary damages should be allocated or should be given to what is called betty blitch's survivors which are jonelle and james blitch, her children. and you will also be asked to apportion negligence or fault between betty blitch and others. and let me just say about that as you get to that, if betty blitch should not have smoked as -- we accept that. and if you want to put responsibility on betty blitch or negligence on betty blitch a percentage, okay. consider when you do that the counterattack that went on, you know, the tobacco institute's counterattack. and do we know exactly what story she would have read had they not killed the stories? do we know what she did read? do we know all the details? of course not. this was a combined massive effort to sell cigarettes that liggett belonged to and everybody else belonged to. as we look under the door and see the ugliness inside, this was the biggest conspiracy, the biggest public relations blitz in american history. and i'm not pulling that out of the air because you will see it written by the federal trade commission, surgeon general reports, monograph 19 of the national cancer institute. no question. and of course this was an industry that had the power to spend $250 billion on advertising in this time frame. and so the power that they pushed their message, but so considerate. that is all. and if betty blitch is lacking, should have tried to quit sooner even though there was nothing available to help her -- but people did, so we will take that. take whatever percentage you think is fair. liggett says they did nothing wrong. and, of course, that is where we began this discussion. when they took the step to the dark side, that is what they did wrong. and i cannot list for you all the individual things. all i can do is suggest to you to take a big picture of what they did wrong and how they joined up and how they counterattacked and how then they did the research inside their company -- and you will see that in their documents too -- on how to fine tune the cigarettes so they delivered what they call the physiologic dose of nicotine -- dr. feingold talked about that -- and how they failed at the same time to understand that their customers needed a cure. why did not they go that direction instead of going the other direction to make their cigarettes more addictive? that is the dark side. that is where they went on the dark side. so then you will be asked to put compensatory damages down for jonelle and james, the son and the daughter of betty blitch. now, i do not -- you know, we are dealing here with human suffering. you will be told to -- that it is their loss of companionship, support and services of their mother. well, this is really one of the most difficult things that a jury can do. i mean, first we know we cannot bring her back. that is the truth. so this is all we have got. but it is an honorable thing. it is honorable. you are allowed. you would not be here if you were not allowed. and how do you do it? well, we know that she lost somewhere around 13 years of life. maybe a few years less because she was not -- you know, she had other diseases, though some of those were due to cigarette smoking as we recall. ms. luther: objection, your honor. the court: what is your objection? ms. luther: other diseases are not at issue in this case and should not be taken into consideration by the jury in awarding damages. the court: i think on the issue of life expectancy they can be considered. go ahead, mr. wilner. mr. wilner: so you have got 13 years, by the accounting maybe ten years. nobody knows. but ten good years would be a lot different than four years on a feeding tube, you know, in complete destruction. so let us say that watching that i -- i think that that is a multimillion dollar issue as human suffering goes. that is high on the list. it is high on the list. as dr. feingold said, that is not a way that i would like anyone to go. ms. luther: objection, your honor. the court: hold on just a minute. ms. luther: decedent's pain and suffering is not an element of damages. the court: ladies and gentlemen, the issue of pain and suffering in this case is the pain and suffering of the surviving children. of course you may take into consideration what they observed and saw concerning their mother. go ahead, mr. wilner. mr. wilner: okay. so this is -- it is -- and we are only talking about jonelle, the daughter, and james, the son, what they had to go through to see this happening in front of them instead of the ten, 12, 13 years of companionship and comfort they might have. that is a multimillion dollar issue. people are worth a lot. betty blitch's company and motherhood was worth a lot. having to go through that is unnecessary. and i'll also say betty blitch's death was unnecessary. it did not have to happen. and it happened because of -- because of a long, complicated process that started -- it started when liggett went on the dark side. and there were other things involved. but the epidemic of half of the people dying of -- and there is a document you will see, 157 million years of life lost liggett computed itself. that did not have to happen at all. now, the next -- what liggett will say -- i'll cover this and then reserve the last of my time. so i suggest that for jonelle and james it is several million dollars, and you can decide because i'm not going to try and compute human suffering. so two minutes. what does liggett want to really do here? well, we are now 13 -- 14 years after their ceo bennett lebow, confessed. and we put on his confession, and he said, yes, we are in a conspiracy. we were -- we combined with the other companies. he said, we lied. 30 years, 40 years. he confessed. they are back now 13 years later, and this was around the time of this engle case, as we heard, and now they are back 13 years later and we are hearing the same stuff. the confession happened, and in addition, the findings of negligence and conspiracy and defect are binding on class members. but now for some reason we are hearing more. well, it is not really true. it may not be true and was not us. so perhaps their biggest defense and one that i'll talk about later is, well, it is not really us. it is just -- it is always somebody else. well, number one, when you get in with other people -- you get in bed with them, you are in bed with them. you are -- you are them. and this was the biggest combined conspiracy in america and they were a charter member. number two, they want to do the math and say, oh, but eve cigarettes were only so many years because betty blitch wrote that down just before she died. i do not know how good a recollection it was because mary sapp, her friend, remembers eve being a big deal in her later life, from 19 -- mid '70s and was buying her eve cigarettes in the '90s. and they want to put their whole defense on that and then ignore everything else. but the real issue -- and even dr. webster said, well, if that is true, then i guess you know eve would be an issue, and do not forget the chesterfield and everything else. but that is not as important an issue. it is an important issue and it is ridiculous what they are trying to suggest. even if it is from only '80 to '87, that is two packs a day. that is year and years of smoking. and remember the fatal bullet theory, that the last bullet is within ten years of the disease, and that was definitely -- that comes -- even under their idea that is all eve. but i'm not saying it is all eve. i'm not saying that. if you -- if we took one of these -- we will not do it because it spills. if we took one of these bottles of water and start adding some water to it, we get to the point where it overflows, spills out. was it the first water that made it spill, the middle or the end? well, i do not know. nobody knows that. that does not matter. they all did. we are happy with that. they are all together. liggett is together -- liggett sold its brand but it also sold cigarettes with the tobacco institute with their counterattack with the way that they smoothed the waters for smoking, and they had a very, very powerful ally and that ally was nicotine and its infinity for the human brain and together they were almost unstoppable, but not quite, because eventually science, reason and justice have prevailed. i'll -- and i'll see you in a few minutes. mr. wilner: just to set the record straight, not to be too personal, consider what counsel just said a bunch of double talk, nonsense, misstatements of what happened and stuff that does not happen. so just to get the record straight, but it may take me a second to do that. but i'll try. turn -- could you activate my controls there. thank you. ms. luther: mr. wilner, the control is actually right there. mr. wilner: thank you. and the control is -- ms. luther: right there. mr. wilner: i wondered when counsel was going to -- thank you. you are a lifesaver. i wondered when counsel for liggett was going to acknowledge their own -- the man in charge of liggett because he did not say the same thing they said. actually here's what he said. this is bennett lebow who pulled the strings of liggett. he was the ceo of the company that owned liggett. he could replace anyone in liggett who he chose to. he ran liggett, came in in the '80s, and he says, when you first acquired liggett, you understood that liggett cooperated in terms of positions it took with other tobacco companies? he says, i knew that. liggett and all the other tobacco companies acted together. and he said -- this is interesting -- the tobacco companies had these documents totally contrary. if these things ever came out, it would be devastating. i mean, they have not told the truth -- excuse me, counsel. mr. luther: i'm just clarifying. the tobacco -- that the actual testimony says the tobacco companies in parenthesis. mr. wilner: yes, counsel, i could not hear you. the tobacco companies had these documents totally contrary. if these things ever came out, it would be devastating to them. somebody could not spell. i mean, they have not told the truth the past 30 or 40 years. they had been hiding the documents through their lawyers pretty much. the lawyers, they had been hiding them under the guise of attorney-client privilege a lot of these devastating documents. now, when i came up earlier and i said, you know, you are going to get to see secret documents, counsel over there says, oh, no, there is no secrets. well, what about this? this is the guy who ran the company. now -- and he admitted, he confessed. what is happened to liggett since that confession? why are we still hearing this? why? what is it going to take to finally get to the truth here? their own ceo confesses and says, yes, it was a conspiracy. we hid the documents. we did not tell the truth. over and over we got together with everybody else, and now we hear from their own lawyers 12, 15 years later, oh, no, none of that was true. we are going back to the old way. we are going back to the hiding. you know, it is unbelievable. i did not write this. this is their own -- this is the man who is in charge. it is absurd. the industry's position for 40 years was totally absurd. it confirmed what i had suspected. now i had confirmation. and then -- and they had not disclosed it. that is correct. the documents confirmed that liggett -- that liggett lawyers told me there were things that confirmed information about the addictive nature of smoking, that a lot of these things -- you know, the health effects of smoking, which the companies all knew, things of this nature and there were certain documents that discussed that various lawyers were not releasing the documents that should have been released. on the question of smoking and health or whether or not cigarettes caused disease, had you heard the official position that was the official -- the tobacco institute that counsel said three words about which was the biggest conspiracy in us history and, yes, they joined it in '58, not in '54. did they ever come out and say, oh, by the way, the stuff that was done in '54, we do not want to be part of it? no. they joined in full. the tobacco institute became the public relations arm, the lobbying arm, the arm of secrecy, the arm of pressure, and they -- and they joined it in '58 as a charter member and now they want to say, oh, but no, no, no. well, how about this, the tobacco company position on the question of smoking and health whether or not cigarettes caused disease, have you heard the official position or stance of the industry was that there was doubt or a controversy about whether cigarettes caused disease? they put up a witness in this day and age of who still wanted to say, oh, there was a controversy. well, there was. but the -- excuse me, counsel. but there was. but, you know, it was a general -- it was a manufactured controversy by the tobacco institute. that was the point. so the tobacco company position was a lie. says their own ceo in a moment of candor, i knew they were lying all long. why did not we hear that from counsel? why did not they admit this? he says tobacco still in 1997 was taking an absurd position. they are still standing up saying smoking's not addictive, does not cause problems. and, you know, they did it here, i mean, in a way. they said, well, it is addictive, but maybe not here. and they say, well, it causes cancer but not here, not here. not -- oh, because there is other issues. there is viruses and there is alcohol. we admitted all that from the start. not so sure about the virus. i think that is a stretch, but who cares. it does not matter. a cause is a cause. and dr. feingold got up -- i'll show you the graph in a minute -- and said together the smoking and the alcohol combined to be a much higher risk. counsel said we never said anything about that. that was our whole testimony. of course it is true. synergy works. it took them both. and i'll tell you another thing, it took all her cigarette exposure too. it did. we are not backing away from that. it is all a cause. all -- everything that -- every carcinogen she took in, including smoking from when she was 12 till god knows when, bathing the esophagus in carcinogens, it is a fact, and the alcohol it is a fact. what it does is it stops the body from metabolizing or taking away the cigarette carcinogens, but okay. if you want to blame her for that, for being addicted to alcohol -- apparently she was, though she tried to meet that. do not know exactly -- blame her. put it on the verdict form a certain percentage. it is okay. i mean, i'm standing up here telling you take responsibility, and if you feel also that it is such a big deal that even though all this -- there was all this controversy in the news, she should have known better, it is okay. however, their own ceo says on the question of nicotine being addictive, did you get an understanding that one of the industry positions was that smoking is a matter of free will and free choice? well, we went through this in detail. it is in a way. but it is not really free choice when your brain has those receptors that have grown, and it is a kind of free choice and it is a very interesting scientific matter, but it is not so simple to say, oh, well, nobody held her down, right. that is true. on the question of nicotine -- and i heard it a million times. did you understand that nicotine was found to be addictive, it would contradict smoking as being a matter of free choice, and it does. it does, and he said, that is right. or that if nicotine was addictive, smoking was not a matter of free will anymore, he says, that is correct. and if nicotine was addictive, maybe the personal responsibility of the smoker would somehow be in doubt because he or she, i would say, is addicted and he says, that is correct, which explains, i think, all this stuff that we heard about the tobacco company standing up in front of congress saying it is not addictive, not addictive, not addictive because they knew blaming people for smoking, unbelievably which is what they are doing, blaming their own customers for buying their product that they make and claiming that their customers should have known what they denied. let me say it once more. publicly at least liggett denied cigarettes cause cancer through the tobacco institute into the '80s. first time they admitted it, as you heard from their own witness, was in '97 -- you know, this confession type thing happened in '97. before that, stood together with the industry, never admitted a thing. privately we have learned -- and we will -- i'll show you that document in a minute, the one that was up. well, they well knew cancer causing -- cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful getting into a little bit of the action of nicotine there. so they well knew these things. 1961 that particular one was. so -- and continued to deny these as they did addiction, and they denied addiction into the '90s and thereby deprived, i think, a lot of folks the ability to really understand how to deal with it. because if you just harp on someone like betty blitch and you say, you need to quit smoking, people do not respond well to nagging. we have heard that before. and betty blitch was a very proud individual. and to have to admit time and time again that she failed to quit would be not what a proud individual likes, and so it is no secret, absolutely none that people who are heavily addicted, they do not want to announce, they do not want to admit they would even try for ten minutes because they are going to fail. they know they are going to fail. they know they cannot do it. now, maybe if they had therapy, if it was well out in the open, this is an addiction, do not blame yourself, do not have the guilt, because people do, they feel guilty, they say, well, why am i doing this. i know it is not good for me. people have told me, why am i -- why did i light a cigarette this morning? why? i do not want to. in a way they do not. many people do not. they say, why am i smoking? i'll put it down. and then they do not. everyday they are going to be asked, did you quit? they will say, well, no, i tried but i could not. well, what is wrong with you? it is a horrible thing. if the science was out there and these guys knew it, that we are dealing with a brain disease, with a clinical pattern of addiction, then we do not go into all this moralistic stuff about, well, i'm just not a strong person or i am a strong person. we go directly to the drugs and we try and get the brain receptors fixed, any more than you blame somebody for getting a disease. you cannot blame people for smoking. you cannot blame people for getting addicted and maybe dr. feingold kept talking about that. he said, you know, when i was younger, i was kind of (makes noise). now i kind of understand. i kind of get it. you know, people do things and they get sick, and when they get sick it is a sad thing. and addiction is a sickness. it is nothing. it is not a moral issue. and some people get well and a lot of people do not. so 1961 -- oh. okay. here's the deal. here's what i'm willing to stand on in this case. here's what i'm willing to say is a fact -- is an issue. i want you to compare 1961 -- how's my time? ms. hartley: good. 15 minutes. the court: 30 minutes. mr. wilner: 30 minutes more. thank you. and good. i like -- good. all right. and i want you to compare 1961 cancer causing secret document. oh, we just heard for the first time that this was turned over. well, you will have it in the -- in the submission to the surgeon general. if you can find it, more power to 'em, because we have looked. it is sure not there. nothing even like it is there. this was secret stuff back in the '60s. all right. i want -- here's what is called -- i do not know -- juxtaposition or something. so here it is, cancer causing and here it is ten years later, maybe this. now, they are quick to jump on poor betty blitch who paid with her life for her addiction, for her being a customer of theirs. they are quick to blame betty blitch for -- and say now, well, we do not know what she saw. i mean, how do we know? she is not here. we cannot bring her back. you want a list of ads each particular day that she saw? how is that possible? could not do that if she was alive. nobody knows that. that is not what dr. goldenberg said and it is not -- it does not make any sense. the $250 billion was spent for a reason. the $250 billion was spent to get the word out, among other things, to promote the smoking of cigarettes. and she was part of the public. and there was no way in the world we can ever go back and say what day, what she saw, but we know a few things. we do know that betty blitch in -- somewhere in the '70s -- and i love this. oh, well, mary sapp does not know what she is talking about. and it is not even that big a deal. i mean, frankly whether she started in '75, '76, '77, 1970 when the eves came out or '71 and smoked till '80 or '90 or '94 it is not that big a deal. they are a contributing cause, a cause as you will hear from the -- from the instructions. they cannot erase that. it is a link on the chain. we have never said it is everything. we are just saying, yeah, it is a part. and, in fact, when you talk to people who are around her, they remember this eve a lot more, and it goes along with her personality as counsel was talking about. she was glamorous. and what more can you say? look at this. now, here's my thesis. i say that the combination of this cancer causing -- that is not the right page. it is over here. cancer causing, cancer promoting and flavorful -- i took it back with me -- the combination of -- i say the combination of cancer causing, cancer promoting -- interesting how that word came out because, you know, the later smoking of the eve promoting we talked a little bit about that or the fatal bullet -- i'm not making a claim that we know exactly which bullet. i'm saying you cannot take it out of the equation either. the combination of this from one company and this, i'm willing to tell -- i'm willing to say that when you make a representation -- first of all we heard, well, that was not really a representation. a picture is a thousand words. a million words in this case. and you know how many pictures are out there? a million pictures. and this is a picture of a lady that betty blitch wanted to be. and you know what, she tried to be. but hidden in this picture is the problem. and the problem is that that lady if she is really smoking eve cigarettes or any cigarette has a fifty percent probability of dying prematurely from that product. and how in the world is that not a misrepresentation? so this is a big case in that it challenges some of the things that we have come to accept in this country. perhaps we have come to accept that advertising is just everywhere. but should we consider -- and we should in this case because we know more about it -- that you cannot do this -- you can advertise a product all you want, but you cannot do this with that knowledge, with that knowledge, and i'll add to it that smoking is addictive. add that to it and then do that. ms. luther: objection, your honor, his argument is preempted by the federal cigarette labeling act. the court: i do not think he is talking about warnings specifically. your objection's overruled. mr. wilner: so i say that that is really -- that that is a misrepresentation and that was relied on, among many others. but we know this one. we do not know all the others, but we know this one. now, a couple other things. liggett says, it is just a small company. and i think that is what -- we need to take a look at that for a second. a small company. i think the -- this was done earlier. and really a couple -- there are 300 billion cigarettes, 300 billion -- 343 billion cigarettes sold. two percent of that is six billion cigarettes sold per year by liggett, even if you accept two percent. you figure out how big a company sells six billion cigarettes and tell me that is a small amount. number two, we heard about -- i want to talk about causation for a minute and then i'll be back. now, i think counsel for liggett intended you to believe that you had to find for -- to find that betty blitch was a class member, that you had to find that specifically she was addicted to liggett cigarettes and that liggett cigarettes caused her cancer. well, she was addicted to liggett cigarettes and they did contribute to her cancer, but you will not be asked that first. i just want to make sure that we all understood -- that that is clear, because the first question does not ask anything about liggett. class members are class members and everybody was -- all the defendant -- all the tobacco industry was in the class. so the question about whether you are a class member is just, were you addicted to cigarettes, any cigarettes, and were any cigarettes the cause of your death? so what is that? well, i went around the mulberry bush with dr. webster about it, finally got the answer that it is alcohol according to him, hpv, reflux and cigarettes, but they are all contributory because, remember, i hid one. i said, what about that, what about that, what about that. so he said, well, you cannot take any of them out of the equation. so that is fine. i do not think that is really exactly a good representation of how these risks lie because we did talk about this. it is ten to one for smoking, and much smaller for others, but together with the alcohol it is even bigger. and we agreed that is the first thing we said, but that means that they are both responsible. and if you -- and throw in the virus if you want. it does not matter because she is not -- there is no fault in having a virus. so it does not matter. makes no difference. so the first question remains a no-brainer. i do not understand what counsel was saying. the second question about liggett we just talked about. it is in the process of carcinogenics which is how cancer's formed. it is the lottery tickets. you buy them. we do not know whose lottery ticket got caught, but all of them together caused the issue, caused the cancer. so liggett's trying to escape by playing this game of what -- when various smoking occurred and when it did not. and we talked about that. i forgot where that is. that was dr. feingold's progression, and we get precancerous changes all along until we get the fatal bullet within ten years of the disease. and it make sense. it makes sense. so -- but two different questions. all right. i'm going to go quickly through the next -- okay. thanks. you will have all of this written evidence including take a look at 14 -- p143, that is the one we put up about how the tobacco institute did all this stuff to try and block the surgeon general's report. fantastic, read it. that is exactly what happened for years, not just then. but this is really what this case is about. this is l40 and it is -- what they did is they asked arthur d. little to go and look at what the human cost from smoking -- from cigarettes was. and could you zoom that a little, karen. thank you. and the human cost -- they said, well, maybe we can go to the surgeon general here and tell them that smoking's not so bad if it turns out that like motor vehicle accidents or something like that are worse. so they went and they did this comparison. of course, this never saw the light of day. and they said the number of years of life expected to be lost due to fatal motor vehicle accidents, 18 million, right here, and the number of years lost due to cigarettes only 157 million years. of course that never went anywhere except inside their own company. and so now we hear liggett in a continuation of the old ways come back in here and out of these hundred and seven -- 57 million life -- million years lost somehow try to say that betty blitch's 15 years as part of this -- of what happened in this country being the biggest -- the biggest advertising push and the biggest conspiracy armed with a chemical addiction of nicotine and able to do it that somehow for some reason, well, she is just -- let us just ignore her. she is not part. no. it is time now to get liggett back into the real world. their ceo confessed. we know what happened now. we have laid it out. betty blitch is one of the hundred and 57 million years lost. and the only way we are going to do it is to send liggett a message, it is time to get real. it is time to get back in the real world in the scientific world. it is time to consider what you have done to this country. thank you.