19 mr. mcpharlin: thank you, your honor. counsel; your honor. good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. mcpharlin: so, on behalf of sharon and, of course, lillian -- lillian started this lawsuit. she is endured through this litigation from the beginning. she filed her lawsuit in 2007, but, unfortunately, did not make it to see the end of that. and, so, that is what we are here to do today, to do this week, to see it through. and we know that you have given up a huge chunk of your life over these last few weeks to be here. without you, this process does not work. wrongs do not get adjudicated. those who committed those wrongs escape accountability if we do not have a process like this, if folks like you are not willing to give up the time that you have given us. so, of course -- and, obviously, we thank you. and i'm going to try not to waste any of your time today. i'm going to move as quickly as i can. somebody will probably slow me down eventually. and i'm going to try to take you through everything that i think that i can highlight to you, that will show you, as we go through -- as what you will go through in the verdict form as part of your responsibility in this case. as it has always been with the cigarette industry, they do not want you to focus on them. they do not want you to look at what they did and what they created. and this is what they created (indicating). this is what they did. we talked about the importance of these time frames, we talked about the importance of consumption and changes in the product that they created, that were done intentionally by them. these were not mistakes. these were not done by accident. this is what they did. this is what they created. this graph is still growing. this graph is not finished. lillian is a victim, a part of this now. they want you to think that it is just a bunch of people who wanted to smoke themselves to death. that is what they want you to think. it is not about their conduct, it is not about their product, it is not about their engineering, it is not about what they did; it is just a bunch of people who did not have the will to stop doing what they knew from the '30s and the '40s would eventually kill them. they are going to tell you that selling cigarettes is legal, marketing and advertising cigarettes are legal, but that is only half of the sentence. that is only half of the statement. what they cannot do is lie, what they cannot do is create fake scientific organizations, tell the public health community, hey, we have got your back, we have got the public's interest as our paramount consideration, and we promise you -- we promise that we are going to get to the bottom of this, we promise that we are going to figure it out. science, to date, has not proven that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, or any other disease, but you do not have to worry about it. we are going to put tens and hundreds of millions of dollars into scientific organizations, independent, neutral organizations, that are going to get to the bottom of this question. so, selling a legal product, yeah, that is great, that is business, that is what we have, that is what our country prides itself on; but what we also pride ourself on is not deceiving consumers and our children, the public. so you can market something if you want to, but you better do it honestly. you can market something if you want to make money, but you better do it the right way. and when you do not, when you harm somebody because of the way that you have conducted yourself, you are responsible for the harms that you caused. it is very simple. it is not a complicated equation. they want you to think it is complicated, but it is not. they lied, they misled, they deceived, they confused. these are not my words; these are their own words. the choices that they made were to create a litigation strategy, not a legitimate effort to protect their consumers, not a legitimate effort to help public health officials get to the bottom of the question. their strategy was litigation. their strategy was selling their product at any price. the price -- the price were lies. the price were one out of two people were going to die using the product that they told everybody was okay to use. the engle jury, the engle class action jury told them: you lied, you deceived, you manufactured a product that caused harm. you did it so people would rely on it. you concealed, with your other manufacturers, other organizations that you created, to deceive the public. they got caught. and, so, we spent a lot of time talking about what they did, a lot of time showing you where we started and where we ended up. we did not do it because we were trying to re-prove what the jury in the engle class action decided. that is not the purpose of it. a couple of reasons: one, because you have to know. you have to know what that history is. and the very last question on your verdict form is going to be, is what they did, what they did to this country, what they did to lillian, what they did, was it reprehensible? does it require us to spend a little more time so that a punishment, an appropriate punishment, can be exacted out on them, to punish them for what they did, and to deter them from doing it again, and to deter others from thinking that this is an okay way to conduct yourself, that corporations will know that this was not appropriate? so the first thing -- let us go to the slides. we get to the very first issue for you, and what i'm going to try to do is i'm going to try to take us through, essentially, the verdict form for you, and i'm going to do the best i can. there is a lot of evidence, there is a lot of things that have been discussed, there is a lot of issues for you. i think they are going to try to make them seem to be very complicated, but let us talk about the first one. the first one is class membership. and it is really not that complicated, all right? it is not about fault, it is not about awareness, it is not about choices, it is not about what brands she smoked. it is not about any of that. was she addicted? did her addiction cause her to continue to smoke until -- did it contribute to that, until she was -- until she contracted copd? very simple: addiction and copd. it is very straightforward, it is very important, because obviously if your answer to that question is "no," then the case is over. if your answer to that question is "no," you have determined that lillian is not a part of the class, r.j. reynolds wins, and the case is over. it is simple because it is very straightforward. and we have to prove our claim by the greater weight of the evidence, right? that is our burden of proof, greater weight of the evidence. what is more likely than not? what do we have to do? we have to prove to you everything that we have to prove. every question on this verdict form, every issue that we have the burden on, is by that standard, greater weight of the evidence, what is more likely than not. it is not reasonable doubt, it is not significantly more than the other; it is what is more likely than not. and i think, based on the evidence that we have presented you with, we have clearly met that burden and we have far exceeded "more likely than not." but that is the standard. that is what we have to prove our case by. and, so, let us start with the very first issue, her copd. what caused her copd? well, the judge read to you, in the instructions, approximately five or six things that r.j. reynolds agreed to. of those five or six things, one of them was not that cigarette smoking was the cause of her copd. because of that, because of their -- because of that, we have to prove it, right? if they do not agree to it, we have to prove it. now, despite that, we have what you were read -- what was read to you in trial. this was an admission by r.j. reynolds. all right. this is from his honor: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the plaintiff's request for admissions on the defendant r.j. reynolds tobacco company prior to trial, their responses have been recorded. you are to accept these facts as true. proceed. admit that lillian kaplan's copd was caused by smoking cigarettes. answer: reynolds admits that smoking was the medical cause of lillian kaplan's copd. now, despite that, we still had to prove it to you at trial. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: we had to prove it to you at trial. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. proceed, counsel. mr. mcpharlin: so what did we do? we presented you with the testimony of -- well, we presented you their admission. we presented you with the testimony of dr. weiner. what did dr. weiner say? dr. weiner said -- dr. weiner said clearly in his testimony -- i'll find it -- that her copd -- if you remember, if your recollections are -- her copd was caused by cigarette smoking. dr. keller, their expert, said -- testified under oath that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking. so we have r.j. reynolds' admission, we have testimony from dr. weiner, and we have the sworn testimony from their own expert that her copd was caused by smoking. and, so, i think that leaves that issue alone, that you should not have to worry about that issue. it gets us to the next issue on addiction: was lillian kaplan addicted? did lillian kaplan's addiction cause copd? did it substantially contribute to her copd? all right. and, so, one of the things you are going to get, one of the things -- instructions you have already gotten is legal cause. addiction is a legal cause of her copd if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such copd, so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, the copd would not have occurred. but for the addiction, if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked two packs a day for almost 50 years? two packs a day, 40 cigarettes a day. that is 10,900 cigarettes a year; 547,000 over her lifetime. we talked about how much nicotine that is, how much -- how many doses of nicotine that is that somebody is taking throughout the day, throughout the week, throughout the year, throughout their lifetime. 6,843,000. 114,000 hours spent smoking. 7,000 days spent smoking. 19.5 years. did her addiction substantially contribute to that behavior? what is more likely than not? that she did it -- like dr. kaplan wants you to think, that she did it because she liked the taste, that she spent all that time because she liked the smell, that she went back to it time and time again, after trying to quit, because she liked the social aspect of it? is that reasonable? so what it is not about -- and, remember, legal cause is a cause. it is not the only cause; it is one of the causes. so did her -- was her addiction a cause, a legal cause? did it substantially contribute, among many other things, but did that substantially contribute to her continued smoking and the development of her copd? so it is not about choice. that is not part of the question, that is not part of the instructions that you are getting, that is not the answer that you are asked on the verdict form. that is an issue that they raised, that is an issue they want you to focus on; right? but it has nothing to do with class membership. zero. nothing. was she addicted and did that addiction substantially contribute to her developing copd? and, so, we have to look at her. we have to look at what her smoking behavior was. she started at age 12, smoked a pack a day, unfiltered camels, moved up to two packs a day, and she told you why. she just needed to smoke more. she smoked first thing in the morning. she is grabbing her cigarettes before her feet hit the floor, within minutes of waking up, since she was in high school. that is what she did. that is what compelled her. she smoked while she was pregnant. she smoked around her children. she took in huge doses of nicotine every single day. her brain was flushed with nicotine every single day. she bought cigarettes by the carton, she inhaled deeply like they wanted her to do, like they were teaching the public how to do. she could smoke anywhere. she just craved it. and she tried to quit for decades. even dr. kaplan admits that she tried to quit. her children saw her trying to quit. dr. kaplan says that because she could not remember or report how she felt when she quit in '94, it just means that all of those other years, all of those other decades, all of those other attempts, everything her kids noticed, everything lillian noticed, everything she felt, that was not withdrawal. it could not have been. she hits what we see as rock bottom in 1994, when what she is given, in her mind, is a death sentence. she obviously did not know at that time that her death would be caused by lung cancer, but what she thought was a death sentence was from her copd. and they wheeled in oxygen, and they put her on oxygen, and the doctor diagnosed her with copd. and she was severely limited in her breathing, severely limited in her lung function, and, because of that, she cannot remember or recall how she was feeling. she was more focused on living, surviving, using her oxygen, getting through that moment in her life. she tried to quit with her husband, she tried to quit on her own. she told you, her words, she needed to smoke. she craved it. they asked her about enjoyment. it was not that i enjoyed it. i hated myself for it. it was something i had to do. the only evidence in the case that you have is that, with her quit attempts, her many, many quit attempts, she got distracted, she felt all different kinds of withdrawal symptoms. there is no evidence to dispute that. her son talked about flu-like symptoms. he saw her sick in bed when she was trying to quit. she would get irritable, nervous. she would get angry. she yelled at her kids, which she never did. she yelled at her husband, which she did not do. she was a different person. that was the observations of her family, and there is no evidence to contradict that. so that is the evidence about what she went through when she tried to quit. and despite going through that, she tried it again and again and again. even dr. kaplan admitted that there is not only one way to look at addiction. we know that through dr. kaplan, because when he started testifying for the tobacco companies in the late '90s, he did not think cigarette smoking was addictive, he did not think nicotine was a drug, and he did not think, so he says, that nicotine was addictive. that is what he said under oath in 1999, when he testified for the cigarette industry in the engle class action. compulsive need for and use of a habit-forming substance characterized by tolerance with well-defined physiological symptoms upon withdrawal. persistent, compulsive use of a substance known by the user to be harmful. that fits lillian kaplan to a tee. that fits the evidence that you have seen, and there is no substantial evidence to the contrary. the definition recognized by even dr. kaplan, "addiction" is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive use -- compulsive drug-seeking and use, despite the harmful consequences. a chronic, relapsing brain disease. dr. cummings talked to you about it. even dr. kaplan admitted that nicotine changes your brain, and it changes it in a considerable way. and the only one who is done research, the only one who has been consulted by the surgeon general, the cdc, the national institutes of health, international and domestic organizations that are designed for public health, was dr. cummings. and he talked to you about how significant this impacts our brain, how significant it impacts the brain of a teenager, of a child, and how important that is in the -- in creating, developing and sustaining addiction. and she started when she was 12. she is a pack a day by the time she is 17. so, by the mid-'40s, she is a pack a day. her brain has already started changing. she is not even 20 years old yet. the american psychiatric association defines "addiction" as a chronic brain disease that causes compulsive substance use despite harmful consequences. compulsive substance use. dr. cummings talked about the key features of lillian's smoking behavior. she had persistent daily use. the time to her first cigarette, which has been validated and scientifically studied for many decades, how important that is, what that means, how much -- how important that is in terms of how hard it is going to be for somebody to quit smoking, she smoked within minutes. she smoked two packs a day. she started early. she tried to quit. she went through withdrawal symptoms. she continued despite hearing rumors. at the very least, she is concerned and she is trying to quit. the judge read you an instruction that you may accept such opinion -- regarding expert testimony, you may accept such opinions -- opinion testimony, reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves, considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training or education of the witness. they want you to think that she smoked enough -- they will admit that she smoked enough to cause a life-threatening disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but not any of it, not part of it, not even a little bit of it was because she smoked because of an addiction. that is what they want you to think. she smoked herself into a fatal disease, but her addiction had nothing to do with it. we talked about the product, itself, what they created, what they knew they were doing to folks. 1963: moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are, then, in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanisms. 1972: for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire. therefore, in designing any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. they knew exactly what they were doing to the public. they knew what they were doing to kids and teenagers. they knew that their business were high school kids, and that that is when they were starting, and this is why they were smoking. this is what was creating their need to continue to smoke. 1972: the tobacco -- tobacco products can contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug, with a variety of physiological effects. our industry is based upon design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. we provide a product that is an essential commodity and a habitual act. put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in the cage, the rat will push the lever. smoking the cigarette is the lever push. they knew exactly what they were doing. they knew the impact that this had on people's brains. they studied it better than anybody. they knew more than anybody about their product, what it was doing to people, both on an addiction level and on a health level. and we know from their own records that addiction is not a choice that these folks are making. it is not what they are setting themselves out for. they are not setting themselves out to become addicted, they are not setting themselves out to die from a smoking-related disease, one out of two. who would do that? who would choose to do that? the absorption through nicotine -- of nicotine through lungs is as quick as the junkie's fix. in 20 to 30 minutes after the smoker has finished his cigarette, most of the nicotine has left, and this is just about the time that the heavily dependent smoker needs his next cigarette. 1980, they addressed this very issue. cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke. then they go on to say: we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. they know that it is not a choice that these people are making. it is a reaction to the product that they are giving them. it is a reaction to their engineering, to the specifications that they put into it. the desired specification is addiction, through the appropriate dosing of nicotine, inhaled so it gets as fast to the brain as humanly possible. 9 10 follows:) voice: our nation has mobilized enormous resources -- (video clip paused.) ms. baker: excuse me. can we approach? (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: yes, ma'am? ms. baker: i apologize, and i apologize to interrupt. i thought that your honor had sustained my objection to the schematic at the bottom of that slide. the court: no, ma'am. i overruled it. ms. baker: that was from the '94 surgeon general's report. the court: i overruled it. ms. baker: okay. i'm sorry. the court: no problem. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following was held in open court:) 6 7 follows:) voice: our nation has mobilized enormous resources to wage a war on drugs, illicit drugs. we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip concluded.) mr. mcpharlin: so we talked about this with dr. villa, and he explained to you the mechanism and the process, the exposure, that continued exposure. and there is no question that that continued exposure, 20, 40 times a day, hundreds of times a day, thousands of times a week, tens of thousands of times a year, hundreds of thousands of times over a lifetime, they are not doing it because of choice. they are not choosing to get lung cancer. they are not choosing to get carcinogens into their -- deep into their lungs. that is not what they are choosing to do. you heard dr. kaplan recognize, when asked -- many years ago, of course -- what is your definition of "addiction"? well, most clinicians use the 1988 surgeon general report. and most clinicians use, and i would use it, as the definition of "addiction" -- he changed his testimony in trial, but what he said was, that definition was persistent daily use -- the primary features of his definition of "addiction" back in 2002 were persistent daily use, time to first cigarette, amount smoked per day. right? i'll get it right for you. but you remember that. persistent use, compulsive use, drug-reinforcing behavior, psychoactive effects, right? psychoactive effects, drug-reinforcing behavior, compulsive use. he changed his testimony about what compulsive use was. it used to be he would say compulsive use is smoking cigarettes multiple times a day, every day. nicotine, by its nature, produces psychoactive effects. and he did admit lillian exhibited drug-reinforcing behavior. so, by his own admission, by a definition that he thought was perfectly fine a few years ago, she would fit that criteria, she would be addicted by the surgeon general's definition of "addiction." and dr. cummings told you that the clear medical consensus is that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people continue to use cigarettes. the fundamental reason. not part of it, not some of it; the fundamental reason. and you heard only from dr. kaplan something different. if that was not the medical consensus that we have formed today and over the last many years, you would have heard it. now, i'm not going to go through these again. dr. cummings talked in detail. he talked to you about the heaviness of smoking index, how significant -- how validated and reliable it is, and what those indications are to somebody who -- how heavily addicted they are, how hard it will be for them to quit. lillian scored high dependence on the heaviness of smoking. he took her through the fagerstrom, which is a validated measure of how addicted somebody is. and it is only for persistent daily users. it is only for persistent daily users. they are trying to make it sound like anybody who ever smoked a cigarette would be addicted under this. well, that is just not how it is applied. that is completely misleading. it is applied to persistent daily users. and then, once you have that, okay, let us go through it. lillian was heavily addicted, severely, under that measure, validated measure. even with the dsm, if we took her through the dsm, dr. kaplan's subjective use of the dsm, who could possibly meet his criteria? you would have to have a cognitive disorder like dementia or psychosis, a serious psychiatric condition like psychosis, in order for you to meet his interpretation of the dsm. and it is plain english, but he will not admit it. a maladaptive pattern of substance abuse leading to clinically significant impairment or distress as manifested by three or more. that was the dsm-iv. the same question for the dsm-5: as manifested by two or more of the following. he does admit that, according to the dsm-iv, 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence. somehow lillian is that rare exception. ninety-five percent of regular smokers started as teens. classic signs of withdrawal, all of what we saw with lillian. and he also admitted that you do not even use -- you are not even supposed to use the dsm for somebody who is not currently using the substance. without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse. pm would collapse, we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. this is from r.j. reynolds. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. most who have smoked for any significant time would like to stop. we know lillian did. we know she wanted to. many, but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. that is what they said. that is what they recognized in their own research. however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. so addiction is a legal cause, a cause of her continued smoking, a cause of her continued exposure to the carcinogens and toxins in their cigarettes that led to her copd. this question is not about -- it is not about fault. fault will come later. it is not about whether addicts can quit. even dr. kaplan admitted that heavy addicts can quit. it is not about reliance, it is not about responsibility. it is about addiction, and did that addiction contribute to her developing her disease. and, so, clearly -- i'm going to move through it quick -- the answer to question 1 is "yes." more likely than not, was she addicted? more likely than not, did that addiction contribute to her continued smoking? yes. dr. kaplan would have you believe that nobody smokes -- go to 156 -- because of addiction. that is who they brought in. that is who their expert was. that is their rebuttal to all of the science, their own business records, their own knowledge, dr. kaplan, who does not think anybody smokes at all, even a little bit, because of addiction. so the very simple answer, was she addicted, did that addiction contribute to her disease? yes. now, the next thing i have to talk to you about is statute of limitations. and their defense is that lillian knew or should have known that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. that is their defense. that is their burden, not ours. it is theirs. they have to prove to you that she had copd before may of 1990, and that she knew or should have known that she had copd. not did she have a cough, not did she have a smoker's cough. that is not the standard, that is not what they have to prove. they have to prove that she knew or should have known she had it, had copd. now, we know -- this admission was read to you: admit that r.j. reynolds tobacco company is not in possession of any medical records indicating that lillian kaplan was diagnosed with copd prior to may 5th, 1990. response: reynolds admits that it is not in possession of medical records indicating that lillian kaplan was diagnosed with copd prior to may 5th, 1990. there is no evidence of it. zero. you heard from dr. weiner. aside from the coughing, and aside from the cough -- this is arthur, rather. i'm sorry. aside from the coughing, did you ever notice your mother having any breathing difficulties? coughing from cigarettes can sometimes -- you can catch -- you cannot catch your breath. that is it. that is it. a cough, and nothing more. lillian was asked: do you recall any relatives ever being diagnosed with emphysema? no. what about copd? no. talked about her husband, what she found on his death certificate. she never had a pulmonary function test. dr. weiner is the one who gave her her first pulmonary function test. how soon after florida -- moving to florida? about two years. did you experience difficulty breathing when you lived in new york? no. there is no evidence that she did. short of breath in the '90s. there is no evidence that she was short of breath before that. she bowled in new york. she was active, did what she wanted. there is no evidence that she was limited in any way, shape or form. they told you that she believed her sister died from -- her lung cancer was caused by smoking. that is not what her testimony was. her testimony was that she did not believe it was caused by smoking. all right. so here's dr. kaplan. dr. kaplan was asked: you were asked about factor number 9 in the dsm-iv, which is, essentially, smoking in the face of a known risk; correct? and you gave -- you did not give mrs. kaplan that one because when she went to the doctor, she was told about her copd and she stopped at that time; right? correct. not -- not just the known risks, but the person believes that they have a medical or psychological problem as a consequence of the substance. and the first time that she believed that was when she saw dr. weiner, he tells her -- he tells her, she stopped. so she would not fulfill that. the first time she believed was when she saw dr. weiner. that is from their own expert. he read her medical records, he read all the depositions. you saw the long list. he spent $55,000 preparing to talk to you folks. and his testimony is she did not believe it or know it until dr. weiner told her. so, from 12 years old, up until 1994, it is your opinion that she did not continue smoking believing it was causing her any harm or could potentially cause her harm; correct? no. she -- that is a different question. she shared with me -- when i asked her about the risk of harm, she shared with me multiple things. she shared with me that she knew about the surgeon general's warning. she thought it -- she thought, since the '70s, she knew it could be dangerous, she knew about the films and newspaper and other things, so she knew it could be harmful; but in terms of her smoking, knowing that she had a medical problem from smoke, no. that evidence is very clear. she sees a doctor, the doctor says, you have got serious lung problems, you need to stop smoking. boom, right in the office, she throws her cigarettes out. so when she found out she had a physical problem related to tobacco use, she stopped on that day. so, in your opinion, she did not know she had a medical condition prior to that time? correct. that was caused by smoking. dr. keller: he admits that there is no evidence that she had dyspnea on exertion before 1990. correct? answer: yes. no evidence of shortness of breath before 1990? correct. no history of sputum production as it relates to lillian. and he says: no, no, not true. according to the testimony of her son, she did have sputum production. that is not what he said. so he is wrong about that. he did not use the word "sputum?" no. no record during the entire time that she was seeing dr. doben, from '91 to '93, in that time frame, no record said she was diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, true? and here's something interesting from dr. keller. i'm going to speed through this. all right. what i can tell you is, from treating thousands of patients with copd, that that is the paramount symptom in someone with copd; and it is very clear, when you read the doctor's notes from those patients, dyspnea is always there. it is always there. it is a chronic symptom, it is gradually progressive, and you cannot even entertain a diagnosis of copd on someone who does not have exertion dyspnea. did i read that correctly? answer: yes. there was no evidence that anybody noticed shortness of breath before 1990? yes. so there is no dyspnea? nothing, zero. all right. and, so, this is what you were told. you got a pretty long instruction on this, and one of the things that the judge told you is: defendant need not prove that lillian was actually diagnosed with copd before may 1990 in order to prevail on that defense. we agree. for purposes of this defense, the critical event is not when her copd was actually diagnosed by a physician, but when her copd first manifested itself. a disease manifests itself when it becomes diagnosable through evaluation of the plaintiff -- patient's symptoms. paramount to the diagnosis is dyspnea. she never had it. even he admits that there is no way that she could have been diagnosable prior to may of 1990. when it becomes diagnosable through evaluation of a patient's symptoms. and she did not have the paramount one that he said she needed. dr. weiner said it, too. cough is probably the hardest diagnosis for me to figure out when they come in to see me in the office, because there are so many different things that can result in cough. and, so, when you are asked -- when you get to that section, question 2, did she know or reasonably have known, even their own expert says she could not have known. could not have known, did not know. not maybe she knew; she did not know. the answer to that has to be "no." has to be "no." now -- yeah, that is true. and dr. keller said -- and just use your memory on this one -- he talked about dr. doben, and he talked about how he did not blame dr. doben for not diagnosing her because dr. doben was not a specialist like dr. keller is. and specialists do not have the training and techniques in order to be able to discern that stuff. so it was not dr. doben's fault that he did not know she had copd before dr. weiner diagnosed her. that is what dr. keller said. now, the next question you are going to get to is apportionment of fault, and you are going to have to decide how much r.j. reynolds is responsible for -- remember, it is not just r.j. reynolds. it is r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson, american tobacco, lorillard. that is all r.j. reynolds. it is all of their conduct, all of their knowledge, versus lillian; right? that is what you have to decide. now, this section does not apply to the intentional wrongs that r.j. reynolds committed, and so this apportionment of fault only applies to the negligence claims. if you decide that they did something intentional, the court, as he told you, will not reduce your award by this percentage. but it is still something you have to fill out, it is still something you have to figure out amongst yourselves, and use your best judgment and your common sense as to who is more at fault. who is significantly more at fault here, the company that manufactured the product, or the 12-year-old who started, or the 17-year-old who started, or the lady who -- the mom who was smoking 25 years before the first warning went on, the warning that they fought, that they never gave her before that, and that they continued to deny after that? reynolds placed cigarettes that were unreasonably dangerous and defective on the market. that is a finding that you have to accept and you have to follow. it is the finding of the engle jury they were negligent. once you get past question 2, you apply all of those findings, and then you answer question 3 with all of those findings in mind. that is lillian, as you know, 12 years old. this is the one that they are saying today should have known everything that she needed to know about cigarette smoking. twelve years old, 17 years old. dr. kaplan thinks that she is just as mature as an adult at 12, lillian kaplan was. that is what dr. kaplan said. they misled the public about filters, they gave the public a crutch, they gave the public an excuse. forget about the things that they said, the lie -- just the direct lies that they gave -- they made. they -- they marketed and advertised a product that made people think you could continue doing this without the possibilities, without the potentials that these other folks are saying they are. but they are not. but smoke these, because this is what it will do for you. the industry does not believe there are any bad elements. if there are any bad elements, they will be removed. we say, here is our triple, quadruple, quintuple filter, capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspect, while delivering the full flavor and, incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. and if we are the first to be able to make and sustain that claim, what price kent? this is reynolds at the top here, too: in most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than she would have gotten from a regular cigarette. she had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the grounds of reduced risk to health. the illusion of filtration. as we know, all too often, the smoker who switches to a hi-fi cigarette winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had. there is no way that lillian kaplan knew that. there is no way that she knew that the claims that they were making were totally false. there is absolutely no way she could have known that. they withheld that. they did it intentionally. they used ingredients in their products to affect the delivery of nicotine for one reason and one reason only, as you saw by their own business records: to affect their sales. why? because they are addicting people. ammonia, in their secret documents, on their list, on their website. ammonia. they used flu-curing to make them inhalable. they put in additives to manipulate nicotine delivery. they used bronchodilators to open up their lungs. flavorings, leaf blending, ammoniation, freebasing nicotine. that is what r.j. reynolds did. 16 17 follows:) voice: truck driver, dennis gaines, a grandfather, says he is been smoking for 30 years and is still not convinced cigarettes are dangerous. voice: you know they say it causes cancer and heart disease. do you believe that? voice: no, i do not. not -- not in my heart, i cannot believe it. i look back at the peoples that make the cigarettes and i feel like that the one that make the cigarettes should know what they are doing. (video clip concluded.) mr. mcpharlin: the ones that make the cigarettes should know what they are doing. that is what they told the public: we know what we are doing, we know exactly what we are doing, we know what we are selling, there is no proof it causes harm. despite their novel invention, filters, lung cancer deaths continued to rise, skyrocket. filters are going up. here we see the jump increasing. it dips a little bit and then it continues to go up. why? because of filters. ninety-five percent of the market is quickly all filters. why? because of the way they were advertising them, because of the way that they were informing the public about their -- about their efficiency, about their effectiveness. so when you are talking about a company versus a 12-year-old, a 17-year-old, a young mom, somebody just trying to get through life, somebody just trying to raise their kids, who -- what are we comparing? that is what you are comparing: r.j. reynolds, american tobacco, brown & williamson, lorillard tobacco, to lillian kaplan, to lilly. now, the next thing i'm going to talk to you about is lung cancer. what caused her lung cancer? again, it is something we have to prove, so we brought in dr. villa. does each dose of those years -- do each of those years substantially -- of her cigarette smoking, do each of those years substantially contribute to the development of her lung cancer? absolutely. he testified, unequivocally, that the years that she smoked, all of those years, the years that she smoked kent, barclay, winston, carlton, lucky strikes, camel, all substantially contributed to the development of her lung cancer. their own expert, dr. bishopric, who is board certified in internal medicine, went to medical school, it was her opinion that cigarette smoking was the cause of lillian's lung cancer. dr. villa talked to you about -- i mean, just the likelihood that it was not from smoking. he talked about the percentages of adenocarcinomas. you heard about the percentage of adenocarcinoma increased as a result of filters. she was obviously a filtered cigarette smoker. she had adenocarcinoma. dr. villa took you through that very specifically. he even talked to you about, when you look at populations of women who smoke over a certain number of years -- we talked about 40 years. so i asked him: that population of women who develop lung cancer, what is the percentage of that population that their lung cancer is caused by smoking? ninety-seven percent. ninety-seven percent. are we to believe that lillian kaplan is somehow in that three percent? what is more likely than not? remember, what is more likely than not? that she is in the three percent or the 97 percent? that her cigarette smoking caused her lung cancer, like dr. bishopric said, and like dr. villa said? and the only thing contrary you have from them is dr. keller, who just simply said, i do not know. he is not a pathologist, he is not an oncologist. his opinion was, i do not know. that does not rebut, that does not negate the evidence that you have. there is no evidence to the contrary, that her cigarette smoking did not cause her lung cancer. and, so, i think the evidence is overwhelming. it is certainly more likely than not, and it far exceeds that. that, yes, her smoking cigarettes, manufactured by r.j. reynolds and all of the companies that they are responsible for, substantially contributed to the cause -- it was a cause of her lung cancer. as he told you, i have a limited amount of time. i have two opportunities to speak to you, and i'm sorry if i'm going too fast. i'm sure you want me to finish. and i do have a time limit, so i will finish. i have to talk about damages, and i have to talk about them in two different ways, because you have two questions on the verdict form -- two different sets of questions on the verdict form which apply to damages. i do not think there is any question as to what your answer needs to be as far as what damages you would look at, lung cancer causing her death, but let me talk about lillian for a moment as it relates to her copd and her lung cancer, and then i'll talk about her death. she was diagnosed in 1994. she was put on oxygen. she was routinely diagnosed with severe air flow limitation. severe air flow limitation. she was routinely, at one point, placed on oxygen. she talked to you about how limited her life was. that is not how her life was supposed to be. that is not the life that she expected, it is not the life she set out for, but it is certainly not the life she knew she was going to get when she was 12 years old, 17 years old. but that is the life that she had, and that is what you have to consider in determining what her damages are, what amount of money is going to be commensurate with the injury, how to compensate for that injury. and, so, for 18 years -- sorry -- 18 years, she lived with her copd, the limitations that it brought with it, the doctor visits. how many times did she go to the doctor? all of the medications, the emergency inhalers, the oxygen tanks. embarrassing as it was, she did not want to bring her oxygen with her. she was an independent, strong lady, who did not want to be dragging around her oxygen tanks. it limited what she was able to do, it limited her interactions with her family. if dr. keller does not think that that is a limitation, he is in the wrong business. what is he doing taking care of folks like that? severe. very limited. affected everything about her life. she talked to you about that. when she would clean her house, she would have to stop making her bed, take her inhaler, use her oxygen. well, they asked her, well, you have a dishwasher, do not you? yeah, i have a dishwasher. it affected every aspect of her life. her life mattered to her, mattered to sharon, mattered to her friends, people in her community. it clearly -- from all the evidence that you have seen in this case, from the 1940s up until they were raising their hand, swearing to god to tell the truth in 1994, it is clear that her life did not matter to them, but her life mattered to a lot of people, and specifically to her daughter sharon. now, r.j. reynolds can judge their relationship, if they want to, but lillian kaplan was an independent lady who wanted to try to do for herself, who did not want to be a burden on her daughter, even though her daughter did not think of her that way, but that is how lillian wanted to be. and if they want to judge her for their relationship, i do not even see how that is possible. but her life mattered to sharon. she lost her mom. they were very close. the evidence is clear. there is no evidence to the contrary. they were friends, they were family, and her life mattered to her. and, so, what reynolds did, what they did over all of those years, was wrong. what they did to millions -- tens of millions of people like her was wrong. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. mcpharlin: and you have to decide how to compensate. and i know that is difficult. you have the medical bills. 227,000, that is the stipulated amount for her medical bills. based on her relationship with her daughter, i think the appropriate amount is $4 million. if you decide that her death was caused by smoking, she died from lung cancer, it is obviously a wrongful death case and you have to decide how much money are we going to include in our verdict for that -- for those harms, to compensate for all of those harms, for the life that she would have continued to live with her, the life that they would have continued to have together, $4 million. if you decide that it is not a wrongful death case and that you have to compensate lillian for those 18 years, for that 18-year period of time, for her copd and her lung cancer, i think the appropriate amount is $8 million for that period of time. now, lillian had the right to have all of the facts. she had the right to have the truth. she had the right to know what their product was, what they were doing to it, how addictive it was, and how truly harmful it was. that was her right when she was a child, when she was a teenager, when she was a young adult, for the rest of her life. that was what they owed her. they had that responsibility to her and millions of other people like her. and what they chose to do with that responsibility, the responsibility that they had to the public, to their consumers, to the promises that they made to the public, to public health, was concealed. it is not something that they can dispute anymore. they cannot dispute that they concealed what they knew about cigarettes, that they concealed what they knew about how addictive and how harmful their product was. and you heard all of the evidence, you saw what they did, in order to get to that, in order to do that, in order to execute that strategy. did lillian kaplan reasonably rely on any concealment or omission of material information by r.j. reynolds, concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, if such -- if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her loss, injury or damage? and, remember, a legal cause. it does not have to be the only thing that she relied on, it does not have to be the only thing that caused her to rely on what they did. it is a legal cause, their concealment. and did they conceal? of course, they did. they told the world that there was nothing wrong with our product. you heard her. she remembers a company saying there is nothing wrong, it is okay, it is safe to smoke. because that is what they did. that is what they told the public for decades. did lillian kaplan reasonably rely on any act or omission taken by r.j. reynolds in furtherance of an agreement between the other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause? again, as i told you, reynolds is responsible for the acts of all of the co-conspirators. philip morris -- and you heard, why are we seeing all these documents? because they are part of the conspiracy. philip morris, liggett & myers, the ti, the tirc, they were all part of it. they are all primary players in it. they were all in it together for one purpose: protect their profits. they concealed that they formed a conspiracy. obviously, lillian did not know that. she did not know that what they were doing was a big fraud, a big public relations front. she did not know that they hired scientists and doctors to mislead the public. she did not know that they were researching and studying nicotine to figure out how they could deliver it faster, to figure out how they could deliver the right amount to make sure that they created and sustained addiction. she did not know that one out of two people were going to die. she did not know they manipulated nicotine, that there were 70 cancer-causing agents in every puff that she inhaled. arsenic, cyanide. she did not know filtered cigarettes were no safer and likely more harmful. she did not know that r.j. reynolds and their conspirators purposely misled the public about the safety of filters and low-tar cigarettes. she did not know any of that. that was all part of their game. that was all part of their strategy. she did not know they met at the hotel and devised this scheme to mislead the public. is not it fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break? boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? that is 1953. they produced this frank statement, interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every consideration in our business. totally not true. a complete false statement. it was a litigation strategy perpetuated by a public relations campaign. no doubt or confusion. internally, they knew what they were doing. they knew they were addicting, they knew they were killing people. the individuals we met believe that smoking causes lung cancer. that is 1958. that is an internal document. they knew, without a doubt, by 1958, that their cigarettes were causing lung cancer. they knew it before. they were studying, they were following everything; and while they are following these studies, they are putting out advertising, more doctors smoke camels, dentists, nurses. they are playing on every feeling, every concept that is going to convince people that it is okay, it is safe to smoke. carcinogens are found in every -- practically every class of compound in smoke. the amount of evidence accumulated to indict the cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. that is r.j. reynolds, 1962. this is brown & williamson, r.j. reynolds, 1963: cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. they cause lung cancer. lillian kaplan did not know they knew this. they withheld that from her. they cannot come in today and say, she did not rely on anything. she smoked their products for decades without this information. they created an atmosphere, a wallpaper of acceptability, that it is okay, it is glamorous, it is no problem. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. mcpharlin: yes, sir. if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry would by now have been in a deplorable position. so that is the -- that is the entity -- remember the tirc? that is what they did. they created an organization to perpetuate their public relations campaign. not to do science, not to save the public, not to answer the question. a public relations campaign. give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. that is exactly what they did with their advertising, with their public statements, with their withholding information, concealing what they knew. filters, doubt is our product. lillian kaplan did not know that. the most important story is that which casts doubt on the cause-and-effect theory of diseases and -- effect theory of disease and smoking. for example, a report indicating some factor or factors other than smoking may be involved. 14 15 follows:) voice: we want to be the detectives just as much as the surgeon general and the ama, and we will cooperate in every way. voice: well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon generals, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. voice: we -- we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that, because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. voice: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proven to be safe, mr. cullman? voice: i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. (video clip concluded.) mr. mcpharlin: lillian was asked in her deposition about quitting and about how she thought she had done over the times that she tried to quit. and she said, if i knew then what i know now... if she knew then what she knew now. there is no question they concealed from her. there is no question that she relied on it. the law -- there is no instruction in there that says we have to show she relied on this statement or that statement. we have shown you what they did, we have shown you their advertising, their marketing. we have shown you what their own witnesses say that was designed to do. it was designed to get the public to rely on what we were saying. and that is what happened. more likely than not, was what they were doing over decades, did it have an impact on her? more likely than not. for 20 years, the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles -- "win important battles," it should say -- it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge, without actually denying it. the tirc, the ctr was an industry shield. special projects are the best way for -- that monies are spent. the ctr has acted as a front. ctr is the best and cheapest insurance for the tobacco industry. in the cigarette controversy, the public, especially those who are present and potential supporters, must perceive and understand and believe in evidence to sustain their opinions that smoking may not be the causal factor. 10 11 follows:) voice: take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. voice: turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. voice: and i have to disagree with you, in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, "yes" or "no"? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. voice: all right, sir. voice: it has not been causally established. voice: cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? voice: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful? you are not convinced? voice: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. voice: i am saying that the science to date, and over $100 million of our industry, indicates that there is no causal link. voice: they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? voice: it may. voice: do you know whether it does? voice: i do not. voice: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (video clip concluded.) 7 8 follows:) q. and they wanted people to be able to believe that and rely upon that, did they not? a. i believe, in general, yes. q. and as late as '88 or '89 or '90, the tobacco institute was saying they still did not know whether smoking caused cancer, correct? that is what they were telling the public, correct? a. they did not know that, they could not make that determination, is what they said in the video. q. and they wanted the people to believe them, correct? a. i would say they would, yes. (video clip concluded.) mr. mcpharlin: that is r.j. reynolds' corporate representative. it was -- the intent was for people to rely, and they knew they were. their own research showed that they were. our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and subject to a finding that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. of course they were. that is what they knew, though. 1968. they knew filters were doing nothing for folks. nothing, zero. cigarette manufacturers have deceived the american public through their advertising of filter-tip cigarettes. the american public have paid a premium for filter cigarettes for, quote, protection they did not receive. from lorillard: kent was marketed as a safer cigarette for smokers concerned about smoking and health. in 1956, when an innocent third party in reader's digest created an awareness to the consumer that kent was the safest of all popular filter cigarettes, lorillard exploited this advantage so that within a short period of two years, the kent volume grew from less than four billion cigarettes to 38 billion. they exploited so many things over so many decades in so many different ways. that was -- they were experts at exploiting. this is on -- this is brown & williamson. brand image of carlton, lillian's last cigarette. go ahead. the carlton smokers are -- more freely admit that they wish they did not smoke at all than with any other brand. they are desperate, trying to quit, or have not been able to quit and they end up with those. 16 17 follows:) q. people rely on advertisements. otherwise, it would not make a difference whether you were truthful or not, right? a. i think people rely on advertising that they see. q. can you describe for me any circumstances in which a corporation should withhold information from consumers regarding the dangers of its products? a. no. (video clip concluded.) mr. mcpharlin: so when you get to questions 4 and 5, based on their own documents, based on their own research, based on their own business records, they knew consumers were relying. lillian was one of their consumers. she told you what she heard. she told you what she knew and understood. she told you what she believed about what they were saying about their products. there is no evidence to the contrary. the answers to those questions, 4 and 5, are "yes." and the reason those are important is because you have to answer one of those questions "yes" in order to get to the last question, which is whether or not, under the circumstances, by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds. and based on everything that you have heard, based on all of the evidence that you have seen, there is no question that r.j. reynolds should be punished for what they have done, for their reprehensible conduct, for the harm that they have caused. there is no question that the answer to that is "yes." that requires phase ii, but i assure you, phase ii will be very short. our case in phase ii will be about an hour. all right. so i'm going to sit down. i've eaten up some of my time on the back end, and i want to be able to have an opportunity to talk to you when they are finished. thank you for listening. mr. mcpharlin: i am thick-skinned. i do not have to like everything i hear. it does not matter what he says, what r.j. reynolds says in this courtroom. they cannot change the past. mr. kaczynski told you that after this trial you should search those document websites. i agree one hundred percent. i agree it should be a class. it should be a class that is offered in school, so people can see, so children can see the despicable history that they put this country through. i agree. kids, teenagers, should be searching it for hours. you know what would have been great? if those documents that are now available -- and believe me, you did not see all of them -- not even close -- those documents that are now available, they should have been available decades ago. the truth in those business records should have been available decades ago. i heard about rewriting history. well, that is exactly what you saw in front of you today; an attempt to rewrite history. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence. this is argument. proceed, counsel. mr. mcpharlin: r.j. reynolds was a good, responsible company. they did good things. they were looking out for the public. tobacco working group. they were researching nicotine, from what we just heard, because they were concerned about the health of consumers. they were researching nicotine because they were responding to the public health community. that is what you were just told. it was not like we showed you in their documents where they were just jealous of philip morris and how well they were doing with kids, teenagers, with marlboro, with ammonia. no, mr. kaczynski just told you they were researching nicotine because they were worried about the consumers. that is the rest of the story that r.j. reynolds is telling in 2015. what have they learned? what has r.j. reynolds learned from their conduct, from being caught doing what they did? they do not acknowledge today that they have done anything wrong. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. mr. mcpharlin: it is testimony, judge. the court: counsel, objection sustained. mr. mcpharlin: he talks about the master settlement agreement. not one penny goes to victims, not one penny. he talks about all the money that they put into it. but all that money is after all their profits. you have not even heard how much they make, after paying all of those things. he talks about the tobacco working group, another example of them looking out for the public health. we showed you the documents. it was intelligence-gathering. they did it so they could keep an eye on the government. we do not believe there is anything wrong with our product. we do not believe that a safer cigarette needs to be investigated, but we will participate. and what do they see secretly? we will work to influence what happens in those groups. we can influence dr. gori, because we are paying him a lot of money. dr. gori is worried -- he is running the group. he is worried that people are going to start giving him push-back because he is so tied into the industry. they said in their secret documents that we can try to influence, we can keep an eye on what they are doing. that is them looking out for the public health? he mentioned the green monster, bought and paid for by the tobacco industry, authored by two scientists who have been in their pocket for decades before that. he told you -- use your memory. but he told you we do not, we do not go after kids. we are not interested in children. 1533. this one is in. show this one. preference-wise, camel and winston are shown as holding their shares substantially constant, while salem increased its share, especially among high school students. this is in 1959. they were desperate to get kids. desperate. talked about filters, another effort by reynolds and the industry to look out for the public health. that is what he told you. this is from one of their head scientists, dr. teague: while use of such color change materials would probably have little or no effect on the actual efficiency of the filter tip material, the advertising and sales advantages are obvious. you can see where their hearts are. they are really worried about people. 1958. i mean, this is just one good, clear example. we showed you examples from 1953 of what they knew. this is from 1958. caution: -- causation of lung cancer. r.j. reynolds was at this meeting. this was the industry getting together. they are meeting, talking about, because they were worried. they are not worried about health, the sake of the public. they are worried about their profits. with one exception, hsn greene, the individuals whom we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer, if by causation we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable link. in the usa, only berkson apparently is now prepared to doubt the statistical evidence, and his reasoning is nowhere thought to be sound. hueper of the national cancer institute accepts that cigarette smoke is capable of causing lung cancer, but believes that, as compared with other environmental carcinogens, the contribution of smoking to the total mortality from lung cancer is being greatly exaggerated. if by causation we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer. he spent a little bit of time talking about lillian kaplan. and... i'm glad i do have thick skin. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. mcpharlin: an 84-year-old, a million dollars for the passing of an 84-year-old? her name was lillian kaplan. her life mattered. her life mattered to her family. her life mattered to herself. it obviously did not matter to r.j. reynolds. the fact that she was 84 means she lived long enough, and it does not matter that we took her life? not debilitating. she was fine. who wants to walk around with an oxygen bottle strapped to their face? who wants to sleep on oxygen every night? who wants to take emergency inhalers because they cannot clean their room, they cannot make their bed without using an inhaler? sounds great to me. sounds perfect. sounds ideal. mr. kaczynski told you that mr. johnston, the ceo of r.j. reynolds, was just not given -- not given an opportunity to speak his mind. he just was not being treated fairly when he was testifying before congress. we know what was on his mind. we know what he thought. we know what his scientists thought. we know what the executives thought. they all new their cigarettes caused cancer. they all knew they were addictive. he got up there, and he lied. he got up there and he spun -- he tried to weasel out of what he knew to be true. so he was given plenty of opportunity. they were given decades to tell the truth. showed you an interrogatory answer, without telling you what the context was, without telling you anything it meant. lillian kaplan was not looking -- video technician: elmo, please. i'm sorry. mr. mcpharlin: lillian kaplan was not pursuing damages other than medical expenses. do you believe that? that is what he told you. what are the injuries that you are seeking compensation for in this lawsuit? i am going to die from this. i have no other alternatives, because i cannot get new lungs. mr. kaczynski's rest of the story? not the rest of the story. you are going to -- on the verdict form, you are going to get those questions. and you were told that the engle findings, which another jury sat through trial and determined and have been upheld by the florida supreme court, made findings. and you were told that those findings do not mean anything to this case, do not mean anything to lillian kaplan. well, those findings apply to lillian kaplan. once you get past question 1, those findings apply. and the engle findings tell you that the defendant, r.j. reynolds, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. that is what r.j. reynolds did. that finding applies to that. the defendants agreed with other companies and industry organizations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information, to their detriment. with the intention they would rely. that applies to lillian kaplan. those companies include rjr nabisco, inc., lorillard, brown & williamson, individuals, american tobacco, and a list of others, all because they were involved, all because they were in agreement together. all of those findings apply. these findings may not be denied or questioned by you. they must carry the same weight as if you had determined them yourselves. as if you had determined them yourself. they were never interested in the public's health. the only thing they were interested in were huge profits. look at the documents. you want to talk about what they were interested in? i do not have it at my fingertips. there is plenty of documents in there for you to look at. they talk about how they are looking at trends. they are seeing trends in the 12 to 17-year-old age group, going down for one of their brands. this is r.j. reynolds. and they are talking about how they can -- what they are going to do, what do we have planned this year to reverse that trend? that is not r.j. reynolds interested in targeting teens and getting kids? 1975. expand nationally, "meet the turk." to increase our young adult franchise. to ensure increased and long-term growth -- growth -- for the camel filter, the brand must increase its share penetration among 14 to 24-year-olds. they want to penetrate that age group, 14 to 24. mr. kaczynski told you we are not interested in kids. they are not? this is what they told lillian. you can see the proof of kent's health protection. more scientists and educators smoke kent with the micronite filter. more doctors smoke camel. dentists, nurses. mr. kaczynski thinks, we have been punished enough. how have they been punished? how have they been punished for what they did to lillian kaplan? how have they been punished for what they have done to millions of people? they have not. they cannot even -- did he show you -- did he get up here and say you know what? we lied, we misled and we concealed. absolutely not. he got up and said just about everything else but that. how is that a company that is changed? how is that a company that does not need to be told you cannot do that? that is not okay. they were after kids; there is no question. they made a business decision to go after children, they made a business decision to lie, conceal and mislead, to create products that would convince the public that they were giving them a benefit, a health benefit. doing something good for them. that was a business decision r.j. reynolds made. and they made those business decisions decades ago, and they have harmed millions of people because of their business decisions. what happened is no surprise to them. what happened to lillian was not a surprise to r.j. reynolds. they knew it was going to happen. they knew it was going to happen over and over and over again. is their conduct worthy of punishment? how could it not be? is their conduct worthy of setting an example for other corporations? how could it not be? kids were replacement smokers to them. that is what their record said, "replacement smokers." this came in through dr. figlar, i think: if the adult rate of smoking were to continue at the present level, the impact of smoking on future health and welfare of today's children would be enormous. research has shown that one-fourth or more of all regular cigarette smokers die of smoking-related diseases. if 20 million of the 70 million children now living in the united states smoke cigarettes as adults, 29 percent of them, then at least 5 million of them will die of smoking-related diseases. this figure should alarm anyone who is concerned with the future health of today's children. that is not r.j. reynolds. 1958, 1959. they are very interested in how well they are doing with kids. there is a backlog of youth who have refrained from taking up smoking in the face of the report. a substantial number of these can be expected to join with this year's crop of prospects to produce a healthy increase in the number of new smokers. r.j. reynolds. many manufacturers have studied the 14-to-20 market in the hopes of uncovering the secret of the instant popularity some brands enjoy, almost to complete exclusion of others. creating a fad in this market can be a great bonanza, 14 to 20. this is r.j. reynolds: in 1960, this young adult market, the 14-to-24 age group represented 21 percent of the population. they represent tomorrow's cigarette business. that is not r.j. reynolds interested in kids? as this 14-to-24 age group matures for at least the next 25 years, it may well be to consider another aspect of our business; that is, factors which induce a pre-smoker -- a kid, a teenager -- or nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker. he does not start to smoke to satisfy a nonexistent craving for nicotine. rather, he appears to start to smoke for purely psychological reasons, to emulate a valued image. a valued image they wallpapered across the country. they made smoking look glamorous, athletic. this is from lillian. this is from her 2008 deposition. mr. kaczynski told you she never talked about what the companies said, until she had her stroke. he talked about her stroke a lot. this is '08. this is 2008: because everything was supposed to be so good. the affidavits from the big shot, the stars, the doctors smoked camels, the best cigarette. and arthur godfrey smoked his chesterfields. even perry como. i saw the original oceans 11 on tv a few weeks ago. every one of them smoked. nothing was ever said. and this was well until the '60s and '70s. nothing was said, that it was going to kill you. it is going to hurt you or anything. i do not remember every hearing it in those days. did the tobacco companies, my clients, specifically, philip morris and lorillard, ever say it was safe to smoke cigarettes? yes. in the beginning, yes. when and what? it is safe, it is tasty. they had all kind of affidavits from all the people that smoked. there was nothing wrong. so he told you the only time she ever said anything like that was in the deposition after she had her stroke. not true. you specifically remember advertisements that it was safe to smoke cigarettes? yes. who were those advertisements for, ma'am? you mean what particular brands? i do not even remember. i just lumped them all together. smoking was smoking. so your instructions do not tell you what brand was the statement or act associated with. what company was it associated with? we do not have to do that. the reason we do not have to do that, they were involved together. they were conspirators in a strategy to keep people smoking. they are all part of the conspiracy. i do not have to show you this one said that or this one said this. that is not what the law is. if it was the law, it would be in your instructions. they were in it together. this is rj reynolds on the right here too. 1972. we already did this one on the left. realistically, if our company is to survive, we must prosper -- prosper, profits -- over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market, provide sufficient motivation during the learning period to keep the learner going. who are they talking about? a 30-year-old, a 40-year-old? who is the learner they are talking about? provide sufficient motivation, during the learning period, to keep the learner going, despite physical unpleasantness and awkwardness of the period. they are talking about teenagers, getting through the awkward years. what qualities and new image -- image a new brand aimed at the youth market should have. moderate level of nicotine delivered at a ph to ensure slow absorption. they do not want to offend them. they do not want to physically push them away from their product. they are talking about engineering it so they do not discourage kids from doing it. we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try it. instead, we must somehow convince him, with wholly irrational reasons, that he should try smoking, in the hope that he will then for himself discover the real satisfactions attainable. there is zero question that this is a company that deserves punishment. i have to -- i want to -- video technician: did you want this one video? mr. mcpharlin: yes. 13 14 follows:) voice: -- special, peter jennings reports. voice: good evening and welcome. this hour is about cigarettes and the people who make them, which means it is about the only product that you can buy virtually anywhere which, when used as directed, kills more than 400,000 americans every year. voice: when reynolds pushed the joe camel image in the marketplace, they focused on convenience stores, the place most underaged smokers get their cigarettes. voice: if you could push r.j. reynolds cigarettes to 18-year-olds, would you do it? would you be expected to do it? voice: yes. voice: 16-year-olds? voice: yes. voice: 15? voice: i would say teenagers, 13 and up. (video clip concluded.) mr. mcpharlin: they are not interested in kids? their burden is the statute of limitations. they have to put the evidence on. they cannot give you speculation, well, we do not have all the medical records. what was in those medical records? that is not evidence. that is pure speculation. and you know what? it is their case, it is their claim, right? they have the burden of proof. they have to bring in evidence and witnesses to support it. did they bring in a single witness who knew her in that time period and said hey, you know what? i saw her. she could not get up a flight of stairs. absolutely not. did they bring in one person who knew her for her entire life that said she was having respiratory problems, she was having shortness of breath? no. the evidence is completely to the contrary. you heard from dr. weiner, dr. doben. dr. doben was a doctor, a medical -- practicing medicine. he treated her for years and never once diagnosed her with copd. and remember, it is not a cough. the instruction that you have, a disease manifests when it becomes diagnoseable through evaluation of the patient's symptoms. diagnoseable through the evaluation of the patient's symptoms. dr. doben treated her for years and never once diagnosed her with copd. he did not know what was wrong with her. he finally sent her to a specialist, dr. weiner, because at some point she started having respiratory problems. so at some point, he started treating her for it. but it was not before she got here. it was not in new york. it was after 1991. and it was 1994 when he sent her to dr. weiner. dr. weiner told you it is very common for people not to know -- first of all, they have not even proven to you that she had copd before then. that is their burden. they have to prove to you that she has it. then they have to prove to you that she knew or should have known. and it is a very common way for us to make the diagnosis of copd; either in the office or maybe the first time they ever get sick is the first time they are hospitalized with their breathing issues. we make the diagnosis that way. that was dr. weiner. dr. keller talking about dr. doben: well, look, they are not specialists. i mean, dr. doben could be a very fine general practitioner, but he is not a specialist. and many times, they do not have that level of awareness about certain diseases, and we see that infrequently -- we see that frequently in copd. and as i said before, patients with copd many times go undiagnosed for many years. even after they have been seeing their primary doctor on a regular basis. so this is something that we see in our daily practice. dr. doben does not have the level of awareness after treating her for years, but lillian kaplan is supposed to have that level of awareness. she is supposed to know, despite the fact that her doctor does not know. it cannot be based on speculation. it cannot be based on a cough. lillian kaplan knowing she had a cough from smoking is not copd. lillian kaplan knowing she has a cough because smoking might irritate her throat is not copd. that is not the standard. that is not the proof. dr. keller: no evidence that anybody noticed shortness of breath before 1990. correct. she did not have dyspnea on exertion based on your review of the records prior to 1990. remember, they read a lot of depositions, they looked at a lot of medical records. and you have seen no evidence of chronic shortness of breath prior to 1990, true? right. dr. kaplan: so in your opinion, she did not know she had a medical condition prior to that time? talking about up until 1994. correct. that was caused by smoking. correct. not just the known risks, but the person believes they have a medical or psychological problem as a consequence of the substance. and the first time she believed that was when she saw dr. weiner. he tells her, she stopped. so she would not fulfill that. from lillian: did you ever experience any difficulty breathing during the time you lived in new york? no. no competent evidence to suggest otherwise, except a cough. from dr. keller: and it is not unusual at all for somebody to have copd and be unaware of it, right? yes, they can have it -- in fact, they can have copd for many years without being aware of it. and it does not matter what anybody else knew, does not matter what anybody else thought or believed. it is what lillian -- what is the evidence that lillian kaplan knew that she had copd? and again, she cannot be held to a higher standard than her own physician who did not know; who dr. keller says is not skilled enough to know, but lillian kaplan is supposed to be skilled enough to know. dr. kaplan, he takes some extreme positions. and by his standard, nobody is addicted. by his standard, addiction does not influence anyone's smoking. those are extreme positions. that is what they brought you to rebut the fact that she was addicted. they talked about common sense. i embrace that. use your common sense, of course. common sense will tell you lillian kaplan was addicted. she was heavily addicted. the evidence is, without anything to rebut it, that she tried to quit. you know, all you have is dr. kaplan's subjective opinion. his opinion about whether she tried hard or not does not mean a thing. he was not there with her, he was not there with her kids. her kids testified to how hard it was on her. she was sick in bed sometimes when she would try to quit. that is how sick she felt. that is what people go through. all right? to suggest that lillian kaplan was not addicted, not even one day, not for one second, not for one minute, not for the 50 years that she smoked shows you his opinion is not credible. and the evidence is that it was hard on her, very hard on her. where is the evidence otherwise? where are the people that were involved in her life over the course of all those years? you know what, i knew her, i did not see that. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: her lung cancer was not caused by smoking. their own expert says it was, dr. bishopric. there is no evidence to the contrary. there is no expert that they produced, except dr. keller, who does not -- is not an oncologist or a pathologist. dr. villa -- there is just no evidence to suggest otherwise. oh, yeah. even dr. keller admitted she had two risk factors. two risk factors, age and smoking. he does not know what caused her lung cancer. but the only two risk factors that he was aware of were age and smoking. and just by the way, age is the same risk factor that a group of people that dr. villa talked about, that .04 that never smoked, age would be in that group too, along with genetics, along with all the other things that raise a nonsmoker's risk for lung cancer. remember, this is what r.j. reynolds said. mr. kaczynski brought up 1982. what was r.j. reynolds saying in 1982, on the right here? most of those who have smoked for any significant time would like to stop. that is lillian kaplan. many, but not most of those who would like to stop are able to do so. that was lillian kaplan. that is what r.j. reynolds knew about their customers. they can come in today and say anything they want. but this is what they knew. this is what they said privately when they thought nobody else was looking, that nobody else would hear or listen to, ever. however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. that was their only concern. business. everything was a business decision for them. what to do in 1953 when the science started coming out. what to do in 1964 when the surgeon general report came out. what to do in response to the surgeon general getting the report ready. that was a business decision for them. you saw the documents. we cannot give them what we know. we are not giving them this. we are not giving them that. it was a business decision to withhold what they knew. it was a business decision in 1964 when the report came out. it was a business decision in 1988 when the surgeon general came out and said it was addictive. and they came out with guns blazing that he was reckless, crazy. smoking's not addictive. nicotine's not a drug. they would been saying it for decades before that, in their private conversations, obviously. in the conversations they thought nobody was listening to, when they would send their memos to each other talking about how we can get more of these kids or what we can do to boost our image with these people. the court: ten minutes, counsel. mr. mcpharlin: i'm sorry? the court: ten minutes. mr. mcpharlin: you know, it is one thing to make a product that you know is addictive. sell it to children, get -- let them get hooked, let them ingrain it into their life, and then to judge them and judge how they struggle trying to stop using that. okay? why would sharon beat up on her mom? why would she beat up on her when she was trying to quit smoking? do you think lillian wanted -- of course she did. we know what she felt. she hated herself. so they say: oh, she said, leave me alone. well, who wants to be constantly reminded that you are failing at something? there is no evidence to contradict that she tried quitting over decades. and so if that bothered her, which it obviously did, from her testimony, would we expect anything less than for it to bother her? for her not to want to fight with her kids about it? her daughter wanted her to quit smoking. lillian wanted to quit smoking. her son wanted her to quit smoking. even he struggled at quitting. this is not a case where somebody ran a stop sign. somebody was playing with their radio and blew a red light and made a mistake. this was not a mistake. nothing r.j. reynolds did was by accident. the strategy that r.j. reynolds and philip morris and lorillard and american tobacco and brown & williamson and liggett, when they got together and they decided how they were going to handle this situation, how they were going to respond to the science, that was not a mistake. it was deliberate, it was intentional. it was a litigation strategy designed to protect their profits. not to protect health, not to protect the public, not to protect people like lillian kaplan. and, you know, they did it knowing what the result would be. they did it knowing that people were going to die. and they watched hundreds of thousands of people die every year, every decade. and i think i heard the words: you cannot just put your head in the sand. they did not just put their heads in the sand. they stuck their head out loud and clear. they denied it, they refuted it. they went on national television, they went on ted koppel, nightline. they swore before congress. they were the manufacturer of the product. they were telling the public: we know our product better than anybody else. the science is not there, the government is wrong. they are just trying to get into your business. they are just trying to interfere with you doing what you want to do in life. there is no proof that it causes any harm. when a corporation behaves that way, when a corporation acts and causes harm, they are responsible for the harms, all of the harms. all of them. and they do not get a pass because they make a lot of money and they can pay the master settlement agreement. they do not get a pass for their conduct. they do not get a pass for the lives that they have taken, the lives who are going to continue to be taken. you know, you watched the video of lillian kaplan, and you watched her struggling to breathe. it was not just her stroke, it was not just her voice. you watched what she was going through. you watched how hard it was for her. she had been -- cancer had been killing her for a while and obviously nobody knew it. she had been losing weight for a while. they want you to think that everything was just fine. but even if we just captured that one year, the torment that she went through for that one year, that r.j. reynolds caused, that r.j. reynolds could have avoided. they are the ones who decided to go down the path that they went down, right? they are the ones who decided to try to convince people to keep smoking. it was not like they stood off on the sidelines and let everybody make their own decisions. they actively got out there and said there is nothing wrong with our product. if a car company comes out and says, you know what, there is nothing wrong with our tires. there is nothing wrong with our seat belts. the government test data, the crash data is just not accurate. if they were lying, if they were withholding information, they would be responsible for all the harms that they caused, right? there is no difference. but the difference is, you know what? they did it for decades. the difference is they tricked as many people in the public health as they could. they tricked doctors, they tricked scientists. it was an elaborate, elaborate plan for which they spent hundreds of millions into the billions of dollars. to do what? so they could continue to make billions and billions of dollars. dr. kaplan said one thing that i agree with. that lillian kaplan was a nice, decent, caring, dedicated, committed lady who did not deserve what she got from r.j. reynolds or lorillard or brown & williamson or american tobacco. thank you.