12 ms. baker: thank you, your honor, and may it please the court; counsel. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good morning. ms. baker: it is hard to believe that we have been here together for nearly three weeks. i know it seems a little bit longer to me, and it -- perhaps it does for you, as well. while you got to hear me speak to several witnesses, i have not yet had the opportunity to talk to you directly, like mr. kaczynski did both during jury selection and during opening statement. and so i'm grateful. i'm grateful for this opportunity to talk to you directly now about some of the issues that you will be asked to decide on the verdict form. and on behalf of myself and mr. kaczynski and mr. gordon and our team, who you saw helping us out throughout the trial, i want to thank you. i want to thank you for your service. while we were not able to interact with you directly during this trial, we noticed -- we noticed how remarkably close attention you were paying to the evidence, the witnesses. i know it was not always interesting, and i know some mornings and some afternoons were longer than others, but you paid close attention, you took notes, you asked good follow-up questions, and, most importantly, you took time away from your jobs and your family and your loved ones to serve broward county as jurors. and so, for that, we thank you. now, this is my opportunity -- and after i'm done and after you have some lunch, you will hear mr. kaczynski, as well. this is our opportunity to summarize for you the evidence that you have heard over these last two-and-a-half weeks. and i'm going to talk to you about the class membership issues -- you just heard from mr. mcpharlin on that -- i'm going to talk to you about the class membership issues and the medical issues that you may be asked to answer on the verdict form. and i'm going to explain to you why we believe that plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proving that mrs. kaplan was a class member, or that smoking was the cause of her lung cancer, and why -- this is a very important thing, and i'm going to spend some time on it during my portion of the closing argument -- why ms. block's copd claims are barred by the statute of limitations. i'm going to walk through the issues, i'm going to talk to you about the evidence, i'm going to show you the questions on the verdict form that that evidence pertains to. and after i'm finished, as you heard, you will get a break for lunch, and then mr. kaczynski will speak with you about some of the other issues on the verdict form. now, you may remember that when mr. kaczynski spoke to you during opening statement, he told you that plaintiff would spend a lot of time -- and, as it turned out, it was nearly three full days -- they would spend a lot of time talking about statements and ideas from reynolds and other tobacco companies, most of which were made 30, 40, 50, and sometimes more, 50 or more years ago. but if that was all this case was about, if that is all this case was about, that some cigarette company executive said and did some things that neither you nor i would say or think today, if that was all this was about, we would not be here. we would not have spent the last two-and-a-half weeks together. but we did. and we did that because this case is not about all cigarette smokers. it is not about whether we believe people should smoke. it is not about whether smoking can cause disease or whether it can be addictive. it can cause disease and it can be addictive. and maybe you were surprised to hear mr. kaczynski say that during opening statement. it can cause disease and it can be addictive. but, despite these things, cigarettes are still legal. they are. they are legal to make, they are legal to sell. and contrary to what you might have thought after hearing dr. cummings, they are legal to advertise. that is not just me saying that. that is not just me saying that. judge murphy told you that in the instructions that you heard before mr. mcpharlin stood up. this was the instruction that judge murphy read to you. this is instruction number 20. and you will have these instructions to take back with you to the jury room. the manufacture, advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities. the defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. now, by now, you know this case is about lillian kaplan and only mrs. kaplan. it is not about that class action that you heard so much about, it is not about all smokers, and it is not about tobacco companies in general. this is not a referendum, this is not a legislative hearing. this is a court of law. and during the past several weeks, you heard a lot of testimony about things that did not have much to do with mrs. kaplan. you heard about organizations that mrs. kaplan and ms. block had never heard of. you saw documents from companies that are not here in this courtroom. and you heard about things that people wrote and said that never reached mrs. kaplan's ears. why did you hear that? and why did you hear a lot of that again when mr. mcpharlin stood up for his closing argument? you heard that -- make no mistake, you heard that to make you angry, to get you mad, and to distract you from the facts of mrs. kaplan's life. you, ladies and gentlemen, you are the only jury that has heard the story of mrs. kaplan, and you get to decide the issues in this case. now, before i get to the verdict form, i want to spend just a moment, because the -- you heard from judge murphy about the findings, and mr. mcpharlin mentioned those to you during his closing argument. i want to spend just a moment on those findings. those findings from an earlier class action that you heard about, there is no debate, none, that those findings do not tell you anything about how to answer any of the specific questions you will need to answer on the verdict form about mrs. kaplan. with your verdict -- with your verdict -- you will decide whether you believe that those -- whether you believe that those findings even apply to mrs. kaplan and her decisions to smoke and keep smoking. so, with that, let us turn to the first question on the verdict form. this is the class membership question. and as with nearly every issue in this case, except for statute of limitations -- which we will talk about shortly -- plaintiff bears the burden of proof on this issue. and this question really has two parts. it has two parts. part one: was lillian kaplan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? so let us talk about that. now, having heard the judge's instructions, you know -- you know that you will not be provided with a definition or a set of medical criteria in those instructions of what it means to be addicted. there is no specific definition in the instructions, there is not a set of criteria in the judge's instructions. and you heard from dr. kaplan -- and mr. mcpharlin mentioned this in his closing argument -- you heard that there is no consensus definition of "addiction." so what have you heard on this issue? plaintiff brought you dr. cummings. plaintiff brought you dr. cummings. and even though the vast majority of his testimony had nothing to do with mrs. kaplan, you learned that he uses a very specific term. he uses the term "assessment," and he uses that for a specific reason. and that is because he is not trained or licensed to diagnose addiction. he cannot diagnose addiction. now, think about that, ladies and gentlemen. the one expert, the one witness that plaintiff brought to you, to tell you that mrs. kaplan was addicted, cannot diagnose addiction. now, you might have thought otherwise when you heard him testify on direct examination, but he is not a medical doctor. he is not a licensed psychologist. he is not board certified in anything. he is not trained or licensed to diagnose addiction, and he cannot do it. he cannot treat addicted smokers. now, yesterday you heard mrs. kaplan's testimony, and we had to bring you all of mrs. kaplan's testimony. you saw the video last week. we brought you the rest of mrs. kaplan's testimony yesterday. and you heard her testimony that no medical doctor has ever diagnosed her or had ever diagnosed her as being addicted. and that is still true to this day. that is still true after dr. cummings' testimony. now, dr. cummings reached his conclusion that mrs. kaplan was addicted using two simplistic tests: the heaviness of smoking index and the fagerstrom test. neither of which -- neither of those tests were designed to diagnose addiction, and certainly not in someone like mrs. kaplan, who, at the time those tests were administered, had quit 18 years prior. and you saw that when mr. kaczynski stood up to cross-examine dr. cummings on their use, you saw that neither test has a category that says a smoker is not addicted. so a smoker can literally score zero on those tests and still be found addicted. a zero and still be found addicted. now, addiction diagnoses are a big deal. and that is why, when you heard from dr. kaplan, they are done by a trained medical professional, by trained healthcare providers. you do not diagnose somebody as addicted based upon simple answers to simple questions like you might find in a buzzfeed quiz or a facebook post. you use validated criteria like the dsm. now, dr. cummings talked about the dsm. he attempted to apply the dsm criteria, but we know he is not qualified to do that. we know that because you actually have to be trained to use the criteria, like doctors or nurses or licensed psychologists or social workers. dr. cummings is none of these things. he is not board certified, he is not licensed, and he was not trained in the use of that criteria. so ask yourselves, is how dr. cummings, in his word, is how he assessed mrs. kaplan to be addicted, is that how we actually diagnose people in this country with addictions and serious substance use disorders? of course not. of course it is not. now, we brought you dr. kaplan. dr. kaplan is a board-certified clinical psychiatrist. he diagnoses and treats patients with addictions. that is his practice. he can prescribe medication to help people with their addictions, including an addiction to nicotine, and he conducted a two-hour psychiatric examination of mrs. kaplan. unlike dr. cummings, he can diagnose addiction. he is trained, he is board certified, he is a medical doctor. and he has, unlike what you heard from mr. mcpharlin just a few moments ago, he has diagnosed many smokers as addicted. unlike dr. cummings, he can prescribe medications to help smokers. and you heard that he does that regularly in his practice. and unlike dr. cummings, he has been trained and he has trained other healthcare professionals in how to use the dsm criteria. and, finally, unlike dr. cummings, he reviewed all of the medical records in this case, all of the deposition testimony. and he, as i said, conducted a two-hour psychiatric examination of mrs. kaplan, and filled out a very detailed report. he explained in careful detail how, after all of that, after all of that, he concluded that mrs. kaplan was not addicted. so, at the end of the day, you have to ask yourself, is the plaintiff's evidence from dr. cummings, who cannot diagnose or treat patients -- and he admitted that on the stand -- is that sufficient in a court of law, or should something more be required? based upon the evidence that you heard, your answer to the question of whether mrs. kaplan was addicted should be "no." it should be "no." now, even if you believe that plaintiff has met her burden to prove that mrs. kaplan was addicted, your work is really just beginning, because that still leaves the second part of the question. let us go ahead and take a look at that. if lillian kaplan was addicted, was her addiction to nicotine a legal cause of her copd? was her addiction, not her smoking, was her addiction to nicotine, was that what caused her copd? and mrs. kaplan's own actions demonstrate that addiction cannot be the legal cause of her copd. we know that she did not want to quit smoking before 1994. now, mr. mcpharlin said this -- well, this question, this part of this question is not about choice, but we know that it is, because when mrs. kaplan was motivated, truly motivated in 1994, she quit for good and she never smoked again. now, you saw legal cause, judge murphy instructed you on the legal cause instruction, and mr. mcpharlin talked about that, as well, and let us take a look at that. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause if it directly and in natural sequence produces or contributes substantially -- substantially -- to producing such copd, such that, but for an addiction, the copd would not have occurred. it must directly and substantially contribute to producing her copd. now, mr. mcpharlin talked to you about it did not have to be the legal cause, it only had to be a legal cause. but whether it has to be the legal cause or a legal cause, it must be the direct and substantial cause. so this part of the class membership question really boils down to the issue of quitting. was mrs. kaplan's addiction so strong, so substantial, that it stood in the way of a motivated, committed effort to quit? if you conclude, as i think you should, that mrs. kaplan was capable of quitting whenever she was motivated to do so, then addiction is not and cannot be the legal cause of her copd. instead, it is her choice to smoke cigarettes for many years, and her choice not to quit for good until it was too late. now, mr. mcpharlin is right, "choice" is not a word that you will see on the verdict form. and it is not in the instructions that the judge just read you or the legal cause instruction that i just showed you. but it is a word that is embedded -- it is a concept that is embedded in our common sense. one of the many strengths of the civil jury system is that we put ordinary citizens in the box, and we tell them, use your common sense, apply your common sense. you do not have to check that common sense at the metal detectors downstairs when you come up here. judge murphy just explained to you that you can and you should use your common sense to evaluate the evidence in this case. this is instruction number 2: your job is to determine what the facts are. you may use reason and common sense to reach those conclusions. so when we talk about mrs. kaplan's choices, use your common sense, apply your reason to this part of the class membership question. and when we talk about her choices, make no mistake, we are not second-guessing her decisions, we are not second-guessing her choices. we are asking you to respect her choices. mrs. kaplan had the right to make whatever choices she wanted to make in her life, to live her life in the way that she saw fit, to forge her own path. but with those rights come responsibility. those decisions, these choices, and these decisions always stood in between mrs. kaplan, in between her claimed addiction and her copd. once she started smoking, she was not on a never-ending path to copd. there were lots of places along the way where she made decisions and she made choices. she made the choice to become a regular smoker; she made the choice to continue smoking despite warnings from the most credible sources of all, her family. she made the choice to continue smoking despite other warnings all around her, including on every pack of cigarettes that she bought and smoked from 1966 forward. and, ultimately, she made the choice to stop smoking. those choices, those decisions, stood in between her claimed addiction and her copd. now, the truth is -- and you heard this from virtually ever witness who testified -- the truth is, lillian kaplan was intelligent and independent, stubborn at times, and for many years she did not listen to the warnings all around her, from tv and newspapers, on every single pack of cigarettes from 1966 forward. and, again, from the most credible sources in her life, her parents, her sister hilda, her husband and her daughter, ms. block. now, there is no evidence that mrs. kaplan tried to quit when her sister hilda told her to do so. you remember that story. when hilda found out that mrs. kaplan was smoking, she wanted her to stop, she wanted her to quit, she told her she should not be smoking. and when her sister hilda was diagnosed with lung cancer, you did not see any evidence that she tried to quit then, either. and you did not see any evidence that she tried to quit when her husband died from copd. and you heard yesterday, when we brought you mrs. kaplan's testimony, you heard that she could have tried harder to quit before 1994, when, as it turned out, it was too late. now, let me spend just a moment on ms. block's testimony. you heard from mr. mcpharlin about the quit attempts, ms. kaplan's efforts to quit smoking, and i want to spend just a moment on ms. block's testimony about her mother's attempts to quit. now, you heard, when i got up to ask ms. block questions, that -- before trial, before this trial, under oath, ms. block told us that she could not quantify, she could not tell us how many times her mother had tried to quit smoking. and you know that is an important issue, you know that is a critical issue with respect to this part of the class membership question. but on the stand here, in this courtroom, ms. block was sure that it was five or six times. she was sure, despite her earlier testimony where she told us she could not tell us how many times she tried to quit. now, you heard judge murphy's instruction that you have the power to decide whether you find a witness to be believable or whether some of the things they said were influenced in their interest in the outcome of the case. but even if you take ms. block's trial testimony, testimony here as true, that mrs. kaplan tried to quit five or six times total, you should ask yourself, does trying to quit only five or six times over 50 years -- five or six times over 50 years, that is about once a decade -- does that sound like the efforts of someone who was always trying to quit, someone who was a tortured smoker, desperate to quit, someone who would try and do anything to quit? and the answer is, no, it does not sound like someone who was always trying to quit. the fact is, we know that mrs. kaplan took none of the standard no-brainer steps that a smoker could take if they were truly motivated and committed to quit. this is something that dr. cummings and dr. kaplan actually agreed on. mrs. kaplan never used the nicotine patch, she never used the gum, never went to a smoking-cessation clinic. she never tried hypnosis, she never threw out her ashtrays, her lighters, her matches. she never changed that behavior. she never asked family members for help. she never asked doctors for help in quitting smoking. she never asked any of her doctors for a prescription. and that includes dr. doben. and she never asked her doctors for any stop-smoking guides or any pamphlets on smoking and health, any information on smoking and health. now, ms. block also told us something else. and, again, this is something that she quibbled with me a little bit about, but i -- i had to show her her prior sworn testimony. she told us that when she talked to mrs. kaplan, there were times when she talked to mrs. kaplan about her smoking, and ms. kaplan would say -- and this is very telling -- this is very telling -- she would say, leave me alone. leave me alone. she did not say, i do not need to quit, or i do not understand that smoking has health risks, or i do not understand that smoking can cause health problems; she said, leave me alone. let me be, let me live my life the way i want to live it. and ms. block did just that. now, dr. cummings tried to tell you that nicotine somehow prevents smokers from making the choice to quit, that nicotine addiction means a constrained choice, that nicotine somehow changes the brain in a way that smokers simply cannot overcome. but dr. cummings candidly -- he candidly acknowledged that he is rooting for the plaintiff to win in this case, that he helps plaintiffs' lawyers in closed seminars, that he has testified in 77 tobacco trials, and that he has earned over $1 million for testifying in these cases. he told you that half of his annual income since 2011 had come from testifying against tobacco companies. and he told you that he is a general -- a general -- in the war on tobacco, and he has been engaged in that war for many years. he told you he carries that war right into this courtroom. and you saw what he does in that war. he shows you snippets of documents, without telling you the whole story, and he applies criteria like the dsm that he is neither trained or licensed to apply. but when he is not in the courtroom, what does he do? when he is not in the courtroom, he tells smokers that the success rate for quitting is one hundred percent. one hundred percent for people who really want to quit and stick with it. and he publishes things like the brochure "smart move." mr. kaczynski showed dr. cummings this brochure. this was dr. cummings' brochure. this is what dr. cummings tells people about cigarette smoking when he is not in the courtroom. he says: do you have what it takes to stop smoking? do you have what it takes to stop smoking? there is no magic cure that can help you stop. take this short quiz to find out if you have what it takes. number 1: do you want to stop smoking? that is the threshold issue: do you want to stop smoking? now, you remember mr. kaczynski asking dr. cummings about this during cross-examination. he asked him -- he said: if mrs. kaplan said she did not really want to quit until 1994, she would not have been able to check this box at any point prior to that time. and dr. cummings agreed, as he must. and you heard dr. kaplan tell you that when he examined mrs. kaplan, when dr. kaplan examined mrs. kaplan, she told him in that setting that she did not really want to quit until 1994. those were not mr. kaczynski's words and those are not my words, either. those were mrs. kaplan's words. those were her words. she did not want to quit, she was not motivated to quit until 1994. number 2: are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine, like throwing out your ashtrays, throwing out your matches, throwing out your lighters, asking your friends and family for help? we know mrs. kaplan did not do that. and are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? if you can answer "yes" to all three questions, you can stop smoking. that is what dr. cummings tells people when he is not in the courtroom. and we know that mrs. kaplan could not answer "yes" to all three of these questions until 1994. now, you also heard from dr. cummings that 60 million americans have quit smoking in this country. he told us that many of those people were addicted, even heavily addicted. all had the temporary brain changes that he discussed during direct examination, but the nicotine in those cigarettes, the nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent these 60 million former smokers from understanding that smoking had health risks and from choosing to quit. and it ultimately did not prevent mrs. kaplan from quitting, either. the evidence shows that mrs. kaplan was always in control of her smoking decisions. she made those choices, not the nicotine in cigarettes, and not r.j. reynolds. lillian kaplan's choices, her decisions, they are the legal cause of her copd. your answer to question 1 on the verdict form should be "no." was lillian kaplan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause? the answer is "no." if you answer this question "no," your verdict is for reynolds and you have fulfilled your jury service. now, if you do not -- if you do not answer "no" -- we believe you do, but if you do not answer "no," you will go on to question 2. did mrs. kaplan know or by the use of reasonable care -- the use of reasonable care -- should she have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd, and that there was a reasonable possibility that the copd was caused by smoking cigarettes? now, again, we do not think you should get to this question, but i told you earlier that this is an important question, that i was going to spend some time on it. so let me talk about some of the evidence you heard. you heard a lot of evidence on this issue at trial. and you might remember that mr. kaczynski talked to you about this issue during jury selection. he specifically talked to you about statute of limitations. this is the law in the state of florida. it is not a technicality. this is the law. and it is one that is fundamentally rooted in fairness. the reason why it is so important to have this defense in the law, why this is the law, and as we see particularly in this case, is that, as time goes by, memories can and do fade. medical records are not maintained forever. healthcare providers and hospitals only maintain records for a limited period of time. and what the statute of limitations -- what that law ensures is that you do not get to put your head in the sand. you do not get to put your head in the sand and come to court and ask for money and say, mrs. kaplan had a hacking cough -- and we will talk about ms. block's testimony on that in a moment -- but you do not get to say ms. kaplan had a hacking cough, it got progressively worse over time, it was so bad at times that she had trouble catching her breath, and she knew it was caused by her smoking, and she had all of this before may 5th, 1990, while she was still living in new york. and may 5th, 1990, that is the cutoff, that is the statute of limitations in this case. you do not get to say all of that is true, but there is no record, or she was not diagnosed until 1994, so, therefore, you cannot prove that she reasonably should have known she had copd and it was caused by smoking before may 5th, 1990. now, due to the passage of time, we know in this case that we do not have all the medical records. we know that. we have no records from when mrs. kaplan lived in new york; and the earliest reference we have in a medical record -- and you heard some about this at trial -- that is from dr. doben -- and this is from 1991. you see that right there. we do not know what mrs. kaplan told dr. doben about her smoking history. we do not have any records that show that. and we do not know what she told him about her medical history before moving to florida. but that is not the end of the story. that is not the end of the story. when we look at what we do have before 1994, when she was ultimately diagnosed, it, essentially, boils down to a one-page medical record. that is that medical record from dr. doben. a one-page medical record. it is a medication list. it shows what dr. doben was prescribing for mrs. kaplan. and you will have that back in the jury room with you. now, based on some of the testimony that you heard here in this courtroom, you might have thought that there was a stack of records from dr. doben prior to 1994. there is not. there is, essentially, a one-page medication list that has some entries that show what dr. doben was prescribing for mrs. kaplan before 1994. this very little information that we have, however, from dr. doben, is telling. the entries pre-dating mrs. kaplan's visit to dr. weiner in 1994 demonstrate that she was being prescribed antibiotics for respiratory infections, inhalers to help her breathe, and cough suppressants. now, when thinking about what was going on during this time period, again, you need to use your common sense, ladies and gentlemen. there is probably no issue in this case that requires you to apply your common sense more than this one. we may not know what dr. doben knew when he was treating mrs. kaplan in the early 1990s. and you heard that when he testified by deposition, he could not precisely remember what was going on during that time period. he could not even really remember when mrs. kaplan was diagnosed with copd. we may not know -- we may not know what dr. doben knew, but we certainly know what mrs. kaplan knew or should have known at that time. just one month after the earliest entry on that one-page medication list, just one month, september 1991, julius kaplan dies of copd, after a year's long battle with respiratory problems. now, because we do not have all of the records, because over time some of those records have been lost, we need to piece the information we do have together. now, the testimony and evidence put on by plaintiff at trial, and most of what you heard from mr. mcpharlin, focused on the fact that mrs. kaplan was not diagnosed until 1994, when she went to see dr. weiner. but, again, that is not the end of your inquiry. the date of diagnosis is not the end of the story here. and you just heard this instruction from the judge, and we will take a look at it. for purposes of this defense, the critical event -- the critical event -- is not when her copd was actually diagnosed by a physician, but when her copd first manifested itself. and the instruction goes on. let us take a look at the next slide, katie. in making that determination, you may properly consider what mrs. kaplan knew prior to may 5th, 1990, concerning the health risks of cigarettes. now, mr. mcpharlin already mentioned this, and it is true, we bear the burden on this issue. this is the one issue for which we bear the burden of proof. so let us walk through the literal mountain of evidence -- mountain of evidence -- you heard in this courtroom that mrs. kaplan should have known that she had copd before may 5th, 1990. and in order to do that, i want you to recall dr. weiner's testimony. he came by deposition, too. dr. weiner was mrs. kaplan's treating pulmonologist. and when he was asked -- or he described putting all of these pieces that i've talked to you about, putting these pieces together, mrs. kaplan's cough and her smoking history, he said it is like putting -- i would have put one plus one equals two. one, her coughing, her history of a chronic progressive cough, and one, her smoking history, and that should have reasonably led to a diagnosis of copd. but here, in this case and in this courtroom, there is more than just one plus one. let us take a look at that. 1964, the surgeon general's report, this is above-the-fold, front-page coverage, in the sunday times. mrs. kaplan read that times. and around this time, ms. block is in high school, and she told you that she talked to her parents about the health risks of smoking. she was talking to her parents about the health risks at this time. 1966: surgeon general's warning. you heard from mrs. kaplan, herself, yesterday, when we brought you that testimony. she told you that she remembered that warning and she remembers seeing it on packs. there is no evidence at this time that mrs. kaplan tries to quit smoking. 1970, another surgeon general's warning goes on every pack of cigarettes that mrs. kaplan smokes or buys. and ms. block told you that she talked to her parents about this, quote, serious warning. there is no evidence that mrs. kaplan tries to quit at this time. early 1970s, mr. kaplan has a deep, hacking cough. hacking, deep from the gut. and sometimes -- and you heard this from arthur kaplan yesterday -- and, again, that was testimony that we brought to you -- you heard that sometimes mr. kaplan would expectorate. now, what that means is that sometimes his cough was productive. you heard that the cough was chronic. and, again, you heard from arthur that mrs. kaplan's cough was just like mr. kaplan's. it was just like mr. kaplan's cough. now, in describing the cough, you might remember that ms. block disagreed with me on this point, when i asked her about it when she was testifying, and i had to show her her prior sworn testimony. and i want to take a look at that. (thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) q. was your mother's cough a hacking cough? a. no. q. all right. let us go ahead and take a look at your deposition. mr. mcpharlin: judge, can we -- q. question: okay -- (video clip paused.) the court: i'm sorry? mr. mcpharlin: can we approach, please? the court: sure. [#deleted sidebar#] ms. baker: all right. katie, if we can start that again. 7 8 follows:) q. was your mother's cough a hacking cough? a. no. q. all right. let us go ahead and take a look at your deposition. question: okay. i know you told us it was when you were a teenager. was your mother's cough a hacking cough? answer: yes. that was the answer you provided on this date, correct? a. yes. q. all right. and is your testimony now, in this courtroom, that your mother's cough was not a hacking cough? a. yes. (video clip concluded.) ms. baker: all right. you remember that testimony, ladies and gentlemen. and you have to ask yourself, ms. block is the one who is now bringing this lawsuit. she is now the plaintiff in this case. she is the one who is asking for millions of dollars. when was she telling the truth? was she telling the truth in a deposition when she was not the plaintiff in this lawsuit, not the one seeking money damages, or was she telling the truth in this courtroom, in 2015? you have to ask yourself why she would so clearly change her testimony on a critical issue now at this trial. let us go back to our timeline. all right. this is in the 1970s. mrs. kaplan's husband, julius, starts experiencing lung problems. and among his other health problems -- and you heard this from mrs. kaplan yesterday -- among his other health problems, he was hospitalized due to these lung problems many times, starting in the 1970s. and you also heard mrs. kaplan yesterday. she said that she and her husband linked these lung problems to his smoking. and he ultimately quit because of those health problems. now, ms. block, when she testified, also told us that mrs. kaplan knew -- she knew that smoking was bad for her health. now, mr. mcpharlin would have you believe, based on his closing argument, that all of these serious warnings, all of these health messages, including those from her family, they were all being drowned out by ads, but ms. block told us otherwise. she told us that mrs. kaplan knew smoking was bad for her. now, let us go back to the timeline. early 1970s, peter block, mrs. kaplan's son-in-law at the time, someone she was close to at the time, he quits smoking and he quit smoking because ms. block gets on his case and she tells him he needs to quit. and you also heard that ms. block would say to her mother -- when she heard her coughing, she would say, what is with your cough? and when she would say things like this, as we have already heard, mrs. kaplan would say, leave me alone. now, you cannot have it both ways, ladies and gentlemen. you cannot say that more information about the risks would have influenced your decisions, but then ignore the additional information that you are getting about the risks, and tell people to leave you alone when it is given to you. now, mr. kaplan quits. we know he quits in the 1980s, we know he quits because he is having health problems. and at this time -- and you heard this from ms. block -- at this time, he is literally preaching to mrs. kaplan to quit. late 1980s, he is preaching to mrs. kaplan to quit. around the same time period -- you heard this during arthur kaplan's testimony yesterday -- he would hear his mother coughing and he would hear his mother say, i've got to try to stop smoking. 1985, the surgeon general puts on rotating warnings. this is on -- these go on every pack of cigarettes. one of those warnings says: smoking causes emphysema. smoking causes emphysema. in the '80s, hilda is diagnosed with lung cancer. she is a smoker, she is diagnosed with lung cancer, and then hilda's death due to lung cancer, mrs. kaplan connects her death to her smoking. and ultimately, as we know, in 1991, mr. kaplan dies, and on his death certificate, it says: copd. now, this alone -- this alone, mr. kaplan's death in 1991, demonstrates that mrs. kaplan knew about copd long before she goes to see dr. weiner in 1994. so when you look at the totality of the evidence, when you put all of these pieces together, you do not just have one plus one, like dr. weiner told you, and as he suggested would be enough; you have one plus one plus one plus one, and so on. when you look at the mountain of evidence that mrs. kaplan had the classic hallmark symptoms of copd prior to may 5th, 1990, that she believed were caused by smoking, a cough like her husband, a cough like her husband who had lung problems, put him in the hospital, and whose death certificate said copd, a cough that was hacking, progressive and chronic, when you put all of these pieces together, her symptoms, what she knew and when she knew it in new york, long before she ever moved to florida, and when you add to this the most personal and serious of all warnings, symptoms like those experienced by your spouse who was also a smoker, who was sick for years, who was sick for years with and hospitalized for respiratory problems, and someone who eventually died of copd, when you put all of these pieces together and apply your common sense, it is clear that mrs. kaplan should have known, through the use of reasonable care, prior to may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and there was a reasonable possibility it was caused by smoking. on this second question on the verdict form, you should check "yes." you should check "yes." and if you do, again, your verdict is for reynolds and you have fulfilled your jury service. now, i told you at the beginning that my job was to talk to you about the class membership issues and statute of limitations. the court: ten minutes, counsel. ms. baker: thank you, your honor. but i'm also going to talk to you just very briefly about two other medical issues. now, if you move on, if you do not answer -- if you do not answer "yes" to statute of limitations, you move on down the verdict form, so let me spend just a moment on mrs. kaplan's lung cancer. and you have to go all the way down the verdict form to question 6. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds a legal cause of mrs. kaplan's lung cancer? this is really a two-part question again. the first question: did lung cancer cause -- let me read that again. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds a legal cause of lillian kaplan's lung cancer? again, this is a two-part question. did lung cancer cause her death? there is no dispute about that. no question that mrs. kaplan died of lung cancer. we have not disputed that throughout this trial. the second part asks if smoking caused mrs. kaplan's lung cancer. and the answer to that must be "no," because the plaintiff did not meet her burden. now, let me talk about what dr. villa and dr. keller -- what the experts on these issues had to say. you heard over and over that mrs. kaplan had not smoked a single cigarette in 18 years at the time she was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2012. she also had adenocarcinoma, and you heard dr. villa say that is the most common type of cancer among female nonsmokers. both dr. villa and dr. keller agreed that the risk of lung cancer, the risk of disease caused by smoking, declines when someone quits smoking. and dr. villa said the risk has plummeted 70 to eighty percent, 18 years after a smoker like mrs. kaplan quits. both dr. villa and dr. keller agreed that age can be a risk factor for all kinds of cancer, including lung cancer. and that means, the longer you live, the more likely you are to get lung cancer. and, as we know, and as we have discussed many times, mrs. kaplan was 83 when she was diagnosed. and both doctors -- both agreed that age was a risk factor for her. and you also heard something very important from dr. villa. you heard from dr. villa that genetics play a critical role in determining one's risk for lung cancer. and here is what we know about mrs. kaplan's family history of cancer: in just her immediate family, alone, her father died of multiple myeloma. that is a blood cancer. her sister, pearl, died of bladder cancer. and hilda, as we know, died of lung cancer. at the time of her diagnosis, mrs. kaplan had outlived all of her siblings by decades. plaintiffs simply cannot show that at age 83, 18 years after she quit smoking, that smoking was a substantial contributing factor to mrs. kaplan's lung cancer. plaintiff cannot meet her burden on this issue. so if you get this far on the verdict form, you should check "no." you should check "no" to this question. now, let me spend just a moment on stroke. you did not hear mr. mcpharlin talk about mrs. kaplan's stroke at all, so let me -- let me very briefly address this issue so that i can say that i've covered all the medical issues that you heard about at this trial. and this will be the last issue that i address before i turn the reins -- before your lunch break, and certainly before i turn the reins over to mr. kaczynski to cover the remaining issues. now, you heard a good bit about mrs. kaplan's stroke in february of 2012. and, again, she was 83 years old when she had that stroke. you also heard that, prior to her stroke, her copd was stable. she was living independently, she was taking care of her own home, she was driving, she was running her own errands, and she was taking out-of-state trips to arizona to visit family and with a friend to las vegas. shortly after her stroke, she was diagnosed with lung cancer. we know that. and she died in september of that same year. now, if you find that mrs. kaplan's lung cancer was caused by smoking, you will not consider her stroke, if you determine that plaintiff is entitled to damages -- mr. mcpharlin: judge, that is improper. that is not the law. the court: sustained. rephrase, counsel. ms. baker: to the extent you get this far on the verdict form, let me explain to you -- let me talk some to you about why her stroke -- why plaintiff did not show that mrs. kaplan's stroke was caused by smoking or her lung cancer. now, we brought you dr. bishopric. you heard from dr. bishopric last friday by video. she is a specialist in cardiovascular diseases. she is a cardiologist. she has treated thousands of stroke patients at the university of miami; and before she came to the university of miami, out in california. she is a distinguished researcher, teacher and clinician at the university of miami. and, at the outset, both dr. bishopric and dr. villa agree that, once you quit smoking, once a smoker quits, within only a few years after they quit, their risk for getting a stroke due to smoking has returned to that of a never-smoker. that means your risk is no greater than someone who never smoked a day in their life. according to dr. villa, by 1996 or 1997, mrs. kaplan's risk for stroke due to smoking had returned to that of a never-smoker. that is what dr. villa told you. now, dr. bishopric also told us that, after mrs. kaplan quits smoking, she developed other significant health conditions, including hypertension, high blood pressure, hyperlipidemia -- that is high cholesterol and high triglycerides -- and diabetes. these conditions were not related to her smoking, but they were significant and they were significant independent risk factors for mrs. kaplan's stroke. dr. villa agreed with that. in fact, dr. bishopric showed you the medical records which said that at the time of mrs. kaplan's stroke in february of 2012, mrs. kaplan's hypertension and her diabetes were uncontrolled. they were uncontrolled at that time. dr. villa agreed with that, too. but dr. villa said that mrs. kaplan's lung cancer might have also contributed to her stroke. it might have made her blood more likely to clot. but dr. bishopric explained that the kinds of clots that are caused by malignancies or cancer like mrs. kaplan had, they happen on the venous side of the circulatory system, not the arterial side. you remember her description of those two sides of the circulatory system? mrs. kaplan's stroke happened on the arterial side, not the venous side, where strokes or clots due to lung cancer or malignancies can occur. and just as importantly, there was a question from one of you. after dr. villa testified, there was a question from one of you, asking dr. villa if he could quantify the contribution of mrs. kaplan's lung cancer to her stroke. and he told you he could not do that. he could not do that. you did not hear it during direct examination, but when you put that question to him, he told you he could not say that the lung cancer was a substantial contributing cause of her stroke. so if you get to this point -- and mr. kaczynski is going to talk to you more about these issues when he stands up to speak -- but if you get to this point and you decide that ms. block is entitled to money, you should not base that award on ms. kaplan's stroke. now, i have reached the end of my time and it is just a few moments before your -- before your lunch break, and i appreciate your patience throughout my time up here and throughout this trial. i have explained these issues in the best way that i know how. that mrs. kaplan was not a class member, that ms. block's claim is barred by the statute of limitations, and that plaintiff has not met her burden to show that mrs. kaplan's lung cancer or stroke was caused by smoking. i ask that you apply your common sense to the evidence that you heard in this courtroom, i ask that you focus on that evidence and the law as judge murphy has instructed you, and return a verdict in favor of reynolds. it is been an honor and a privilege to present this case to you, and i thank you for your time. thank you, your honor. mr. kaczynski: thank you, your honor. ms. block, counsel. good afternoon. jurors: good afternoon. mr. kaczynski: seems like an eternity since we spoke in jury selection, but slowly and surely, we are getting there. i think in jury selection i told you folks that i did not think people ever got tired of being thanked. so this is the third time today you are being thanked, maybe the fourth. and we do thank you for your service. everything that everyone said before goes for me, too. we know you had a lot of sacrifices, took a hunk out of your lives. we all make great sacrifices to make this great country of ours work. and you answered the call of broward county, and i thank you for it. as i said many times, the system could not work without you. it is true by showing up for jury duty every day, you have helped our judicial system work, and we appreciate it. i'm going to talk to you about that part of the verdict form that we do not think you should reach. but if you get to the point where you find that mrs. kaplan was an engle class member, then the first thing i'm going to talk to you about is the concept called "comparative responsibility." that is the part of the verdict form where you have to decide by percentages who was responsible for mrs. kaplan's choices, mrs. kaplan or somebody else. and as i think you heard from ms. baker already, we are not asking you to blame mrs. kaplan for her choices. we are asking you -- we are not asking you to put her at fault. we are, rather, asking you to respect her choices. and we have been up front with you from the beginning in jury selection, i do not know if you recall. but our position is, has been and is today, that it is mrs. kaplan and only mrs. kaplan who was responsible for her choices regarding her smoking decisions. it was only mrs. kaplan that could have chosen to begun to smoke. it was only mrs. kaplan that has chosen to continue to smoke, and it was only mrs. kaplan who could make the choice whether to quit or not. and if she made that choice, to seriously follow through on it. now, when she was on the stand, ms. block made her position perfectly clear too. she told you she did not think her mother bore any responsibilities for her choices, none, zero. it is all somebody else's fault. somebody else's fault she started. somebody else's fault she continued, somebody else's fault she could not quit until 1994. we got personal choice, we got personal responsibility. it is all somebody else's fault. now, this morning you heard them budge a little bit on that position. well, maybe 5 percent. maybe it is 5 percent mrs. kaplan's responsibility. well, we are going to walk through in a bit all the information that was available to mrs. kaplan when she made her choices: the newspapers, the magazines, the tv, the warning labels, the public service announcements. and it was in the face of all this that mrs. kaplan decided to smoke and to continue to smoke until 1994. and she told dr. kaplan she really did not want to quit before 1994. is that somebody else's fault? she told dr. kaplan she really thinks she could have tried harder to quit before 1994. was that somebody else's fault? she chose not to quit in an era when 60 million americans chose to quit. was that somebody else's fault? and many of those 60 million who chose to quit during this period were addicted. was prior to 1994 mrs. kaplan somehow different than those 60 million people? and we know from the testimony we heard that things would have been difficult for her had they made a different decision, a decision to quit. dr. villa told us that if mrs. kaplan quit smoking as late as 1982, her risk of lung cancer would have gone down 90 to 95 percent. again, whose fault is it that mrs. kaplan decided otherwise? ladies and gentlemen, mrs. kaplan and nobody else made those choices. not 5 percent, not ten percent, not fifty percent. but it was one hundred percent her choice. and mrs. kaplan and nobody else -- nobody else -- is responsible for those choices. it is not somebody else's fault. so very simply, we are asking you to respect her choices when you get the verdict form. and when you get this line on the verdict form, we are asking you to fill in one hundred percent on the line for mrs. kaplan. now, the next subject you are going to have to address is the subject of reasonable reliance. the part that deals with whether mrs. kaplan reasonably relied on anything reynolds said or did. and these are the very specific questions that you are going to be asked to answer. and they are small print, so out come the glasses: did lillian kaplan reasonably rely to her detriment on any statement of material fact made by the defendant that concealed or omitted -- here are the keywords -- material information not otherwise known or available to her concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of any of lillian kaplan's injuries and/or death? question number 5: did lillian kaplan reasonably rely to her detriment on any statements and/or acts made in furtherance of defendant's agreement to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available to her concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of lillian kaplan's injuries and/or death? i'm going to admit to you that in that video deposition you saw, the one that was taken after her stroke, the one that was taken a month before mrs. kaplan passed away, the one in which she was answering suggestive questions from her lawyer -- mr. mcpharlin: objection, judge, improper. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. this is argument. proceed, counsel. mr. kaczynski: thank you, your honor. mrs. kaplan, in that deposition, said she did rely on some unspecified statement from somebody that said smoking was safe. we do not know who, we do not know when, we do not know what was said. but if you look back at the three volumes of deposition testimony that they did not show you, they did not show you to this day. we had to do that. we showed you those three volumes of depositions, testimony taken four years before her stroke, testimony taken when her memory was unimpaired. and what do we find there? well, for starters, we find out that they wasted your time showing you all those statements from the tobacco institute and ctr, all those videos, a complete waste of your time. why? because in her three-volume deposition that you were not shown by plaintiff four years before the stroke, mrs. kaplan told us she never heard of ctr, she never heard of the tobacco institute, she never heard any statements made by ctr, and she never heard any statements made by the tobacco institute. and you know, truth be told, nobody has, really. i think it is fair to say that the things that ti or ctr said or did got a whole lot more air time in courtrooms like this than they ever did in real life. in dr. cummings' world, these organizations were goliaths. in the real world, the real world of people like mrs. kaplan, these organizations were invisible, and she never heard of them. and, quite frankly, very few people probably did. so let us say, did she rely on anything reynolds said or did to start smoke something. now, once again, plaintiff never told you why she started to smoke up to and including today. we had to do that. i did it when cross-examining dr. cummings. and you heard it in the deposition testimony of those three volumes of mrs. kaplan's testimony that plaintiffs did not show you. she was baby-sitting, she was offered a cigarette, and she took it. she did not feel pressured to take it. she did not feel curious about smoking when she took it, and she did not become a regular smoker until -- well, when she became a regular smoker she did not yet start to see cigarette advertisements, not yet. let us compare and contrast a few things about the deposition she took, she gave us before her stroke and after her stroke. compare and contrast. let us take a look. before her stroke, when her memory was good, she said: was there anything about the ads for kent with filters you can recall? no. it is fair to say that you cannot recall seeing a particular kent advertisement, right? after her stroke when her memory is impaired: i'm going to show you some ads for kent, right? are these advertisements that you saw when you were smoking? yeah, when i was smoking. in her deposition before her stroke, she told us: carltons, do you recall any specific advertisements for carltons? no. after her stroke, she starts describing a carlton ad. in a deposition before her stroke, she said -- she did not believe every word she read in ads. she did not believe one is better than the other. after her stroke, she says: did you ever hear the tobacco company say smoking was safe? always. did you believe them when they said that? yes. in her deposition before the stroke, most importantly she said: did you ever see an advertisement for cigarettes that said any brand of cigarettes was safe to smoke? answer: i did not see anything that said safe or unsafe. in her deposition after her stroke, mrs. kaplan told us that her memory was impaired. yet miraculously, sometime in the time of the deposition, after her stroke, she managed to remember ads that she could not remember four years earlier before her stroke. i mean, it is pretty clear what went on here. maybe -- mr. mcpharlin: judge, that is improper, move to strike. the court: jurors, disregard the last comment. mr. kaczynski: somehow she managed to improve her memory after the stroke as regards to issues in this lawsuit. now, whether or not mrs. kaplan relied on anything reynolds said or did is a question of fact for you. we have been telling you from the start, you are the judges of the facts. you know there are true facts and there are litigation-generated facts. and what you heard in that video, that video deposition -- first of all, was sad. i think we would all agree to that. but what you heard from this 84-year-old ailing woman who could not remember her son's name, but somehow could remember ads from 60 years ago under suggestive questioning from her lawyer? these are litigation-generated facts. because if you go back to her 2008 deposition before her stroke, before her memory was impaired, she gave lengthy and detailed depositions that the plaintiff chose not to show you. you have the true facts from those depositions. the true facts, not the litigation facts. or that she never heard of ti or ctr. she never relied on anything reynolds said or did in advertising or otherwise. and even if you were to give credence to that stroke-impaired deposition and somehow believe her, took her at her word that there was reliance, the reliance still has to be reasonable. it is got to be reasonable. and the concealed material has got to be, as that instruction said, material information not otherwise known or available to her. and this is where plaintiff has a problem. on the one hand, they want you to believe that mrs. kaplan was unaware of the risks of smoking. on the other hand, they want you to believe that she was looking for reassurance in advertising and that she was constantly trying to quit. well, you cannot have it both ways. why would somebody be seeking reassurance if she did not think there was some danger to be reassured about? why would somebody be constantly trying to quit, unless they knew that smoking was harmful to them in some way? you heard this morning the definition of "addiction" being persistent use, despite knowledge that it is harmful. and you heard this morning that that fits lillian kaplan to a t. well, you cannot have it both ways. either she acknowledges it is harmful, she knows it is harmful, or she does not. ladies and gentlemen, the facts of this case show that lillian kaplan was surrounded by information about the dangers of smoking all her life. she subscribed to reader's digest. you saw some of those articles, including this one, beware that cigarette cough. and it tells you if you have a cigarette cough, a hacking cough -- where did you hear that word before? a hacking cough -- get to a doctor for a complete respiratory examination, including chest x-rays and lung function diagnosis. now, before it is too late. because smoker's cough may herald advancing emphysema, copd, and the end can be strangulation, drowning in trapped mucous. this was material known and available to her. these articles are in evidence. you can read them. she subscribed to life magazine. and you have seen this article, this graphic story and others. this was material known or available to her, this and others are in evidence. you can read them. she grew up in the media capital of the world, and she took advantage of the media outlets. she read the new york post. and you saw some of the articles. this is material known and available to her, there in evidence. you can read them. now, ms. block suggested mrs. kaplan only read page 6 of the post. page 6 is the gossip page. but in the next breath, she said that mrs. kaplan kept up on current events and read the general news stories. you do not find either of that on page 6. she read the new york times. you have seen some of these articles. this was material known and available to her. these are in evidence. you can read them. and especially this one, 1964 surgeon general's report. sunday times. exactly what she said. front page, above the fold. known and available to her. here in florida, she read the sun-sentinel. you heard she watched 60 minutes. well, the 60 minutes of the 1950s was a show, as you heard, called "see it now," and it was beamed into houses all across the united states. and it beamed in there a two-part series on smoking and health. and the bottom-line message of that program was provided by dr. hammond, the famous cancer researcher, in 1955. let us see what he said. 17 18 follows:) voice: it is now established in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip concluded.) mr. kaczynski: now, the fact that people were being warned in the 1950s did not just come from dr. hammond. we heard that it came from these folks, the surgeon general of the united states and the director of the national cancer institute. excellent coverage informing the public. bear in mind, these are people from the 1950s, in the 1950s, interested in the public health of the 1950s. these are not people in the year 2015, looking backwards in hindsight and reinventing history -- rewriting history. this is what happened on the ground at the time. people were being warned. and you heard it on the night of january 11, 1964, all three networks had special news reports on the release of the surgeon general's report. you could not avoid the story. here, too, the bottom line was: you have the information. the choice is yours. harry reasoner. (the video clip was played and taken down 3 follows:) voice: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip concluded.) mr. kaczynski: this was material known and available to her. there were warning labels. this was material known and available to her. there are public service announcements. these are four that were played for you during the course of this trial. this was material known and available to her. and we all know she also got the message in a very personal way. she saw her sister, a smoker, die of lung cancer. she saw her husband, a smoker, repeatedly hospitalized with lung problems. then she saw her son smoking and warned him: if you keep smoking, you are going to wind up getting a cough like i have. everybody says mrs. kaplan was an intelligent woman. to suggest this intelligent woman ignored all this information that was known and available to her, to suggest that she ignored it and instead relied on lucy and desi or johnny roventini or fred flintstone for her health information, that defies belief. but in any event, even if she did, it would not be reasonable reliance. so when you get to this line on the verdict form, these two lines, we are asking you to check "no." and there is one other instruction you are going to hear that is relevant to this that i want to call to your attention. it is this. if, despite our argument that mrs. kaplan should bear full responsibility for her actions, you think that responsibility ought to be apportioned, then you have got to check "no" to these two questions. why? because judge murphy will instruct you -- already has instructed you -- that if you check "yes," there will be no apportionment of damages between mrs. kaplan and reynolds. mr. mcpharlin: judge, that is not the law. object to that improper reference of the law. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, you have the instructions, the instruction i gave you. this is counsel's take on those instructions. proceed, counsel. mr. kaczynski: thank you. this is the instruction: please note that if you find for plaintiff on either or both of her claims for fraudulent concealment and/or agreement to conceal, the court will not reduce the amount of plaintiff's damages by the percentage of fault you assign to mrs. kaplan. what that means is, if you check "yes" on either of those claims, ms. block will have gotten her wish, and ms. kaplan will be held zero percent responsible. obviously you render your verdict based on the evidence and the instructions you have. but we wanted to let you know about these two questions. and still, this is how we can do it for now. now, if we march down the form and we get to the point where you think money damages are appropriate, then you have to come up with an amount. there will be any number of lines on the verdict form for you to do that. apart from mr. mcpharlin's request for millions, 4 million or 8 million, for the passing of this 84-year-old woman, you do not have a lot of guidance on how to come up with a number. it is tough. but consider these factors. mrs. kaplan lived a full and successful life. she was married for 40 years. she ran and operated a business with her husband. she raised two children. she was fortunate to escape the new york winters and come down here to florida. and in passing away at the age of 84, she had outlived all her siblings by decades. think about it. mrs. kaplan was born during the presidency of calvin coolidge and passed away during the presidency of barack obama. that is a long, long time. as an amount, nobody can hand you a yardstick. let me offer you a few suggestions. you heard mrs. block testify from that witness stand that during her mother's life, she was carrying out her mother's wishes. and you heard that her mother actually filed this lawsuit to start it off. and when she did that, she told us under oath, mrs. kaplan did, what damages she wanted. here it is -- mr. mcpharlin: judge, can we approach for a second? the court: yes, sir. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. mcpharlin: this is exactly what they told you they were not going to do when we argued about whether this interrogatory could be read. ms. baker told you -- i said, judge, they are going to get up and argue that because the interrogatory reads this way, they are not looking for any damages other than medical. ms. baker said, you know what, judge, we are not going to do that. that is about exactly what they are about to do. mr. kaczynski: your honor, what was represented was plaintiff was not seeking that. clearly, they are seeking it. i'm entitled to suggest a measure of damages. he already did. this is the measure of damages i'm suggesting. mr. mcpharlin: judge, it is completely inconsistent and disingenuous for them to tell you they are not going to argue that we are not seeking damages for that. and now to use it and say they were not seeking damages to that, that is how they got it in. that is how they argued it to you. the court: that is not how they got it in, counsel. there was an interrogatory that was asked, sworn to and -- mr. mcpharlin: but that is not what they told you. the court: i specifically asked what they are going to use and how they are going to use it. my understanding was not to say that there was damages, but there is a purpose to -- there is a purpose for interrogatories, counsel. in the answer -- if you did not like the answer given, you could come back in and changed it. that was the answer given. overruled. let us go. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. kaczynski: so during her lifetime, mrs. block testified she was carrying out her mother's wishes. and her mother -- put it up, katie. this was her mother's wish for damages in her lawsuit. medical expenses. medical expenses. now, you heard that number, and i'm going to guess it is in your notes, hundreds of thousands. mrs. kaplan's wishes were a few hundred thousand dollars. ms. block's wishes are, as mr. mcpharlin told you, 4 million or 8 million. we are going to ask you to honor mrs. kaplan's wishes if you decide to award damages and award her what she asked for. now, if you decide that is not sufficient, then i'm going to ask you to think of this. mrs. kaplan's copd was not debilitating. you heard a description by the lawyer this morning about her lifestyle. but do not take lawyer's word for it. let us take the doctor's word for it. what did her doctors say? patient was ambulating independently and performing all activities of daily living independently without any assistive devices. this is up to her stroke. so problems began with her stroke in 2012, february 2012, and ended with her passing in september of that same year. you know, it is hard to put a value on a human life. unfortunately, if you get to damages, you are going to have to do that. if you are looking for a yardstick, i would suggest that you think of this lawsuit much like you think of a life insurance policy. and if you do, the numbers come out in the same range. the numbers come out in the range of hundreds of thousands, not the windfall millions plaintiff is asking for. now, if we have been unsuccessful in persuading you up to this point, you will have to decide whether punitive damages are appropriate. and if you find that they are, as mr. mcpharlin said, we will all come back, we will have another session, both sides will put on evidence, both sides will argue again, and you will arrive at a figure. but bear in mind, if you get to -- once you get to that box on punitive damages, if you have awarded money, you will by then have fully compensated ms. block for her loss. punitive damages are designed to punish past misconduct or to deter future misconduct. and the plaintiff must proven entitlement to punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence, and you have in your instructions the definition of that. first of all, let us be clear. punitive damages are simply more money for ms. block. they do not go to the american cancer society, they do not go to a stop smoking program. they do not go to the state of florida. they do not go anywhere other than ms. block. so what were you shown in this trial to get you to award punitive damages? well, a lot of what you were shown by the plaintiffs had nothing to do with ms. kaplan. you saw ads for brands she never smoked, marketing documents from before her birth, marketing documents talking about 18-year-olds at a time she was in her 40s, 50s, and 60s. you heard about ctr and ti, which she had never heard of. nothing to do with her. and a lot of what you heard just was not so or was half the story. when i gave my opening statement, i asked you to keep an open mind until all the evidence was in, and i think you saw some of the reasons for that. so let us go through a handful of those half stories. and let us start with the flintstones. you saw a winston ad on the flintstones, and you were probably shocked. only the video clip, no context, half the story. on cross-examination, we gave you the rest of the story. the flintstones were an adult cartoon based on the honeymooners. it debuted in prime time, not saturday morning. the other sponsor was alka-seltzer, which is an adult product. and when it did go to saturday morning, reynolds pulled its advertising. dr. cummings who told you about this, he knew the context, he knew better, but he concealed that from you. and we had to fill in the rest of the story. you have already had an instruction on credibility of witnesses, and one of the factors is the frankness of the witness. was dr. cummings frank when he did not tell the rest of the story? you saw jed clampett on the beverly hillbillies, and you heard there was a large younger readership. half the story. on cross-examination, we told you the rest of the story. when reynolds found this out, they pulled its sponsorship. you also heard there was a voluntary cigarette advertising code that set the standards by which they pulled their sponsorship. and from the deposition of christie leung, you learned more about that code. you learned the models must be and look under 25. you learned there should be no ads in magazines with 15 or more percent underage readership. no athletes, no celebrities, limits on sampling practices. when you tie all this together, it does not look like an effort to attract kids. looks like an effort to avoid kids. dr. cummings knew this context, he knew it all, but he did not tell you. he concealed that. frankness. dr. cummings talked about the idea that reynolds needed to attract young kids to be profitable. well, one of the very marketing documents they showed you belies that argument. now, this document right here was supposedly a focus of underage smokers. but guess what? go to page 3. and what page 3 tells us, that marlboro, the largest cigarette brand in the world, loses almost half its smokers between the ages of 18 and 24. that is a huge target market. and it is a huge target market among people who have already chosen to use the product. a much easier target than trying to get a nonsmoker to smoke. dr. cummings knew this was there. but he concealed that from you. we had to fill in the rest of the story. frankness. dr. cummings told you about the chain of events that he initiated that produced this letter to the principal of willow ridge school. it was his idea that the students write to all the cigarette companies, and they did. and he told them to write and ask: why do you companies allow your logo to be used on candy cigarettes and toy cars? and there is two points here. first, reynolds was the only company courteous enough to reply. but they replied to the principal, not the students. the principal did not give it to the students. she gave it to dr. cummings. now it is used as a trial exhibit all around the country. but here is the ironic part. you know who showed it to the students? you heard it on the witness stand. dr. cummings. he uses it as a trial exhibit, again, all around the country. second point is, the letter says: why do you guys allow your logo to be used on toy cars and candy cigarettes? fact is, they do not, they never have, and dr. cummings knows it. i showed dr. cummings a number of letters, a number of letters where reynolds threatened legal action against those who used their logo on such products. again, dr. cummings knew the context. dr. cummings knew better. he concealed it from you, and we had to show you. frankness. dr. cummings talked about product placement and suggested that cigarettes were placed in tv shows and movies or events with a high youth viewership. and this was one of the memos they showed you that is supposed to make that point. well, look at where they are placing their products, right? the lucille ball backgammon tournament. is that something 14-year-olds flock to? or how about trying to have zsa zsa gabor smoke cigarettes on tv? do 14-year-old boys have posters of zsa zsa gabor in their rooms? i do not think so. appeals to youth? not exactly. dr. cummings showed you an interview of the incoming head of r&d at reynolds, dr. robert dimarco, in 1982. and in that memo, the lawyers were telling dr. dimarco that he could not pursue a less mutagenic cigarette, a cigarette that did not cause cancer in the laboratory. and they left it there. they left it there. half the story. on cross-examination, we told the true and full story. and the true and full story was, beginning a year earlier, in 1981, reynolds was already developing premier. what. was premier? one of the design goals of premier, which they met, was to produce a less mutagenic cigarette. and that is proven by any battery of tests that you heard that reynolds conducted, inside and outside the company. dr. cummings did not tell you that dr. dimarco won and the lawyers lost. he knew the context. he knew better. but he concealed that from you. we had to fill in the rest of the story. another example of dr. cummings' frankness. speaking of frank, let us talk about the frank statement. dr. cummings said that the frank statement, which only ran one single day in 1954, this was not a recurrent campaign, one single day, somehow this reassured smokers and created confusion among them about the risks of smoking. what dr. cummings did not show you is this. this was a survey of 400 smokers that said -- did not reassure people; it scared people. it scared people into cutting down, and in some cases, stopping. dr. cummings knew about this. he did not show you. we did. now, the word "lying" has been used fairly promiscuously in this courtroom. let us take a look at a few of the so-called lies. one of them is that the company's claim the case against cigarettes had not been scientifically proven. first of all, we showed you these epidemiological studies from 1950. none of them, none of them, concluded smoking caused lung cancer. mr. mcpharlin: judge, counsel is not permitted to argue against the findings. the court: sustained. you are not allowed to argue against the findings. sustained. come sidebar. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. kaczynski: i'm just arguing what the company said. i'm not saying what they said was wrong -- was right. mr. mcpharlin: no. he said, let us talk about the lies that were supposed to have been made, then he started -- the court: that is the way i took it. rephrase. thank you. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. mcpharlin: move to strike, your honor? the court: counsel, i've already instructed the jury, disregard. mr. kaczynski: let us talk about what the companies thought, what evidence you saw about what the companies thought. in 1953, claude teague did not say smoking caused lung cancer. this is what he said in his memo. it is still unknown. at a meeting of hill & knowlton, the company had stated their belief that the national cancer institute had refuted such claim. and we showed you the national cancer institute study that they were referring to. throughout the 1950s and 1960s, prominent doctors held the same view. and these are just some of them. you have heard what they had to say. and dr. spears from lorillard, in his deposition, explained why the companies held to that position. to them, the classic scientific definition of cause required two things. it required inhalation experiments that produced human-type lung tumors in animals and identifying the mechanism by which lung cancer developed. and he told you that as of the date of his deposition, the first never happened, and the second had only begun to be understood. dr. figlar told you that in 1964, the definition of cause had changed. it was relaxed. and under that relaxed definition, the surgeon general's committee found that smoking caused lung cancer. and yes, the industry refused to accept that. but did they sincerely believe what they were saying? mr. mcpharlin: judge, he is doing exactly what the findings -- the court: counsel, i do not want to argue sidebar. all right? i mean, argue in front of the jury. just come sidebar. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: yes, sir. mr. mcpharlin: he is arguing that the companies did not do anything wrong, they did not conceal anything, and they did not mislead the public. they just simply had an honest belief that was different than the surgeon general. that is the argument he is making. that is completely against the findings, and he is not allowed to do it. mr. kaczynski: your honor, the findings do not specifically say what it was that was concealed and what was misrepresented. i'm entitled to talk about those things. this is what the companies thought internally. it has nothing to do with the findings. it is completely independent of the findings. the court: counsel, the way it is being displayed to the jury is that it sounds to me like it is arguing against the findings. that is not acceptable. i'm going to sustain the objection. talk about what is in evidence. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. kaczynski: so what is in evidence, you see some memos from the head of one tobacco company to the head of another tobacco company where they express some doubt about the state of the science. not press releases. they are not designed for the general public. it is one person to another person expressing their personal views. you have seen some documents in evidence in this case, one scientist to another, confidential to the company, not for the purpose of the public, where one writes another expressing their personal views. but regardless of what public position they took, what did the companies do internally? well, what they did is, as you heard from dr. robinson, dr. spears, and dr. figlar by deposition, they took the charges seriously, and they worked to modify the product. first, they worked to identify the chemicals in cigarette smoke. you heard that dr. rodgman from reynolds was a leader in this. he published on the subject. and we showed you a speech that he gave on that subject in 1969. then they tried to eliminate some of those compounds they found that were suspect. you saw one of those documents. this is one that talks about 120 experiments using half a million cigarettes to lower or reduce a harmful substance in tobacco smoke. you heard that lorillard worked with dr. hoffmann to reduce or eliminate phenols thought to be a cancer cause. various design changes were formulated, and they were tested internally and with the tobacco working group. the public health community called for filters, and the companies responded. the public health community called for low tar, and the companies responded. the public health community called for low tar, medium nicotine, and the companies responded. and years later, reynolds developed the heat-but-not-burn technology that created premier and eclipse, and now e-cigarettes. so even as they stood by their position for the classic definition of causation, they worked to modify the product to make it less hazardous. but even as they maintained this position, they developed premier, and they spent billions doing it, and they developed eclipse, which even dr. cummings thought was a responsible thing to do, eclipse and premier, which he thought were safer alternatives to conventional cigarettes. and eclipse is on the market today. so let us clear the air on filters. no question that prominent scientists like dr. wynder encouraged the companies to manufacture filters and advocated for smokers who would not quit to use them. and there is no question that epidemiological studies conducted by people like dr. wynder and dr. hoffmann concluded that smokers of filter and low tar had lower cancer rates than smokers of non-filters. remember dr. russell in britain? filters save lives. so how does dr. cummings then come in here and say filters may, in fact, be more dangerous than non-filters? well, he had two reasons. one was he said that new epidemiology after mrs. kaplan had quit smoking called the earlier epidemiology into question. second, though, he said the companies knew that filters were useless and promoted them anyway. what is his proof of that? mr. mcpharlin: judge, same argument. the court: overruled. mr. kaczynski: the proof of that is one philip morris document that uses the phrase "illusion of filtration." what we have shown about r.j. reynolds. well, they showed you a document from 1956 about winston. it said that filtered winston had higher levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons than unfiltered camels. what is the rest of the story? this is 1956. at this point, winston had been on the market about two years. what dr. cummings in his document did not show you was this. this was an alarming result to reynolds, and they launched a reinvestigation of the winston blend. and you were not shown another document of reynolds that this ever happened again with winston. what about lorillard? you saw ads touting lorillard's kent filter. you heard it was rated as the most effective filter by an outside rating organization. you heard that was reported in reader's digest. you heard that the reader's digest report spiked kent's sales and that lorillard exploited the story. what you were not shown by dr. cummings was any evidence that lorillard did not believe everything it said in those kent filter ads. mr. mcpharlin: judge, same argument. mr. kaczynski: there is no finding about filters, your honor. the court: excuse me, guys. i told you before, we are not going to argue this in front of the jury. come sidebar, please. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: counsel, let us get this straight. a couple things. one is, the findings are the findings. you cannot challenge those findings. mr. kaczynski: right. the court: excuse me. the documents that are in evidence are in evidence, and the witness talked about them. so what the findings basically talk about, that cannot be questioned by you, carried the same weight. concealed or omitted information. he is talking about documents now that are in evidence. he is allowed to talk about those documents in evidence, what was said in there. what i do not want to have happen is the argument counsel is saying; these findings are challenged. that is what i heard before and that is what i sustained before. be careful now. i do not want you interrupting his closing all the time. if he is challenging the documents, and you have a good faith reason to believe he is, raise the objection. otherwise, move on. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. kaczynski: after the spike, based on the reader's digest article, sales steadily declined. now, is it a surprise that lorillard exploited that story? think about it. if volvo gets an award for highway safety, you think you will not see it in volvo ads? if chevy is named car of the year, you think you will not see that in chevy ads? it happens every day. at the end of the day, the facts are these: throughout mrs. kaplan's lifetime, there was scientific evidence that filters and low tar produced lower cancer rates than non-filters. during her lifetime, the public health community advocated filters and low tar. during her lifetime, the cancer society advocated filters and low tar, and the companies responded. dr. cummings told you that the ftc smoking method, the machine, was inaccurate. what he did not tell you was the companies told the ftc exactly that, back in 1967, when they were considering adopting them. but the ftc adopted it anyway. and it later took a step further and required the companies to put those readings in its ads. you did not hear from dr. cummings on direct, but you did on cross, that once upon a time, lorillard wanted to put higher numbers in its ads. and the ftc told them no; you have got to put our numbers in, because to do otherwise would be misleading. you saw the congressional hearings back from 1994. in fact, they ended dr. cummings' direct examination by playing those for you. that was when congressman wyden went down the line of ceos, asking them if nicotine was addictive. one ceo, however, wanted to say more than yes or no, and that was jim johnston, the ceo of reynolds. he started to say nicotine did not meet the classical definition of addiction, there is no intoxication. but mr. johnston was ruining congressman wyden's sound bite, so he got cut off. we played for you mr. johnston's prepared statement to the committee, where he did get to explain himself. and in his prepared statement, he talked about the classical definition, which included intoxication. he said smoking could be difficult for some to quit. he did not simply want to put his customers in the same category as heroin users or alcoholics. yes, he would not buy into the word "addiction," but he had reasons for it. call him stubborn. but you cannot call him anything beyond that. now, some of the biggest whoppers you were told in this trial dealt with nicotine. fact: reynolds did nicotine research in the '70s and '80s. is this a surprise? and coffee manufacturers, no doubt, do studies into caffeine. according to dr. cummings, this research was done to find the minimum level of nicotine to keep smokers hooked. he showed you some memos with some stupid language from dr. teague to this point. but we showed you what was really going on. we showed you calls by the public health community to develop a low-tar, medium-nicotine cigarette in the 1970s and '80s. who made those calls? these are names you have seen before: dr. russell, sir richard doll, dr. jarvik, the co-inventor of the nicotine patch, and in the 1981 surgeon general's report. the idea was to lower tar, but to maintain nicotine. the idea is tar is the cancer-causing agent in cigarettes. get it down as far as you can; but if you want people to smoke, keep nicotine at a higher level. the theory is smokers would then smoke potentially less-hazardous cigarette. that is what "how low can you go" was all about. they were calling for those cigarettes at about the same time dr. teague was writing his memos. and that is no coincidence, because we showed you in reynolds documents that reynolds was following this research. they were following dr. russell. so they researched ways to lower the tar while maintaining the nicotine. and they did it in conjunction with the tobacco working group. you saw those minutes. they researched ways to break the tar/nicotine ratio. they tried ammonia, they tried levulinic acid, they tried altering ph. and this was discussed in the tobacco working group, sponsored by the national cancer institute. and you heard testimony of dr. robinson that lorillard did the same thing. in following the recommendations of the tobacco working group to research nicotine levels and develop a less hazardous cigarette, is that punishable conduct? is that reprehensible conduct? that is your call on the issue of punitive damages. and it is true that reynolds researched the effect of nicotine on the brain in the 1980s and 1990s. dr. cummings suggested to you this was for some nefarious purpose. but again, what is the rest of the story? well, on cross-examination, dr. cummings told us about targacept. that is a company that reynolds spun off in the 1990s, that was headed by one of its r&d scientists, dr. don debethizy, who dr. cummings knew. the whole goal was to use reynolds' nicotine research to find treatments for alzheimer's, for parkinson's, for add, and they are awaiting fda approval for some of their treatments. reynolds put out a book about nicotine that i showed dr. cummings. he claims he never saw it. think about that. this is the man who claims he knows everything about everything about everything about what the tobacco companies were doing and, in particular, what r.j. reynolds was doing. but here's a book reynolds put out in 1992, summarizing research of nicotine on the brain, and he claims he never saw it. really? i went through with him, you may recall, all 13 chapters of this book, many of them authored by reynolds scientists. and he admitted that all 13 dealt with the effect of nicotine on the brain. all 13 were disclosed in this book to the scientific community. on the issue of punitive damages, is doing research that is spun off to a company to treat alzheimer's, add and parkinson's, and then publishing your research in a book punishable? is that reprehensible conduct? that is your call. dr. cummings faulted reynolds for inventing the modern cigarette, because he says it became inhalable, and therefore more addictive. well, first of all, it is historically wrong. camel was introduced in 1913. we heard that. and this is a slide that was used during dr. cummings' direct examination. this was florida health notes in 1906, before camel. and what does it say? addictive and inhalable before the modern cigarette was invented. and this is where the state of florida concluded, way back in 1906, cigarette smoking is looked upon by all smokers as the worst form of tobacco addiction, and it is inhaled. the court: ten minutes, counsel. mr. kaczynski: thank you, your honor. think about it, uninhalable cigarettes, really? what is next? to prevent cirrhosis, undrinkable booze? to car accidents, undriveable cars? there are, there have been for hundreds of years a form of tobacco use that you cannot inhale. it is called a cigar. it is called a cigar. smokers expect cigarettes to be inhalable. and if they do not, they could smoke a cigar. now, i do not want to suggest to you that reynolds has engaged in good and proper conduct for the 65 or so years we are talking about here, but they did some. the companies that now comprise reynolds did cooperate with the public health community. lorillard cooperated with dr. wynder in skin painting. lorillard sponsored research at ohio state university to identify and reduce the constituents of smoke. all companies made submissions to the surgeon general's advisory commit, page upon page upon page of disclosure there of components of cigarette smoke. the companies provided the green monster to the surgeon general's committee, used by the committee. lorillard worked with dr. hoffmann on phenols. dr. rodgman published and gave speeches on constituents. rjr and lorillard participated in the tobacco working group. lorillard worked with the institute of medicine on lower-exposure products. reynolds published its book on nicotine, and reynolds hosted scientific conferences on eclipse. should the companies have accepted the consensus that smoking caused disease sooner than they did? probably. should they have not criticized the surgeon general every time a report came out? clearly not. were they too stubborn accepting the surgeon general's changed definition of addiction? maybe. but to the extent you think there is a need for reynolds to be punished, that has already happened; such that there is no reason to give additional money to ms. block to achieve that goal. and you heard from dr. cummings in relationship to the master settlement agreement and the florida settlement agreement. mr. mcpharlin: judge, that is improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. kaczynski: under these agreements, 1997 for florida and a few other states, and 1998 for the rest, the tobacco institute was shut down, ctr was shut down, documents were disclosed, billboards are gone. reynolds pays millions of dollars every year to every state in perpetuity, forever. and now, on account of its mergers, reynolds pays the share of brown & williamson and lorillard as well. punishment has happened, and will happen forever. there is no need for additional punishment in this case by giving additional money to ms. block. and the other purpose of punitive damages is deterrence; to deter reynolds and others from engaging in future misconduct. let us see whether there is a need to award ms. block more money for the purposes of deterrence. where does reynolds find itself in the 21st century? well, you heard from dr. cummings, they are regulated by the fda. this is new. they developed premier and eclipse. dr. cummings thinks these are great, and safer than conventional cigarettes. a sister company of reynolds manufactures zonnic. zonnic is in the marketplace, fda-approved, a nicotine gum, a stop smoking aid. sold in convenience stores alongside cigarettes, in packs like cigarettes. dr. cummings thinks this is a great business model. reynolds manufactures vuse, an e-cigarette. dr. cummings says e-cigarettes is a good things. it is a way for a smoker to obtain nicotine without -- and this is his word, not mine -- all the crap. you heard that reynolds refitted tobacco barns, to use a different kind of heat for curing, heat exchange instead of propane. and it reduced carcinogens in tobacco by 95 percent. reynolds published about this development, and it paid for 1,200 tobacco barns to be refitted with the new technology. reynolds has a website. this website says there is no safe tobacco products. it says quitting reduces the risk. it advises smokers concerned about their smoking to quit. did you ever think you would see a tobacco company advising people to quit? well, reynolds does. instead of criticizing the surgeon general, it directs people to the surgeon general and public health organizations for advice, and gives them links on how to get there. and it lists the ingredients for any brands or any style of cigarettes. and it maintains a document website. it contains reynolds documents produced in litigation so that, after this trial is over, when the judge clears you of your obligation not to do your own research, you can do your own research on these websites to find documents just like you saw in this trial. this is the environment the companies are in in the 21st century. if you feel they were not sufficiently regulated in the past, they are now. if you think they were not making safer cigarettes in the past, they are now. if you think they were not doing anything to help people quit in the past, they are now. if you are concerned about transparency, you can go to the document databases. and if you take all these factors, together with the punishment forever in the master settlement agreement, millions of dollars per year per state, there is no need for punitive damages, there is no need for more money for ms. block, there is no need to come back for yet another session and more witnesses and more argument. so we are asking you to check "no" on this part of the verdict form. time to wrap up. this is the only chance i get to talk to you. plaintiff has the burden of proof. i sit down, they get a rebuttal. in this case, a fairly lengthy one. i do not know what is going to be said. we do not get to respond. that is the way it works. he may say something that i could have responded to in this argument; he may have said something that could have been responded to earlier. but if any of that happens, what i would ask you to do, think about how we would have responded. think about how we would have answered them during the course of your deliberations. i want to thank you for your service and for your attention. and bottom line once again is, we could not have done this without you. thank you very much. thank you, your honor.