17 mr. hammer: thank you, judge. may it please the court, counsel. trial by jury, the best of safeguards for the person and property of every individual. thomas jefferson said that in 1823, and it stands true today. and tomorrow being veterans day, where our men and women are honored for fighting for our freedoms, one of those freedoms is the trial by jury. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 and i want to thank you all for staying with us and coming back this week to hear our final arguments and make a decision in this case. take it down. it is been over 20 years since richard found out he had copd. it is been over 20 years since richard found out he had the lungs of an 88-year-old man. it is been over 20 years since richard found out if he does not stop smoking, he will die. that is why we are here today. back in 1992, he was told that. he was told that these things, these cigarettes, is what caused his disease. he was told that by dr. tabb. and for the next 18 years of his life, after being told that, he struggled with addiction. for the next 18 years, he knew this is what caused his disease, and he knew it then in 1992. no doubt about it. now, nearly every doctor that saw richard talked about his addiction. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 keith, go to slide 2, please. he tried all sorts of things. he tried medications that were prescribed to him, but he also tried at the first just quitting. remember, he talked about how -- he said: i thought i could always put them down and never look back. could not do that. could not quit cold turkey. he tried cutting back. he tried throwing away ashtrays. he tried hypnosis. he tried chinese cupping therapy. he tried the patches, he tried the gum, when they were still prescription. he tried zyban and wellbutrin. look at all the times he was prescribed those things by his doctors. he tried very hard to quit. but he could not quit. slide 3, keith. slide 4. nearly every single doctor that saw him made a reference to this man's addiction. called it a bunch of different things: tobacco abuse, persistent tobacco abuse, tobacco addiction, chronic cigarette abuse, tobacco use disorder, smoking dependence, tobaccoism. they all said he was addicted. they all united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 said it. and richard knew it. that is why he was fighting so hard to quit. throughout the years, he quit for brief periods of time. but every time that hook brought him back in. he tried to quit. he really did. now, it took him ten years of constant effort to finally quit. and in 2003, he did. you can take that down, keith. he did, with the help of what? being in the hospital, getting wellbutrin and tranxene. tranxene is a powerful benzodiazepine. like xanax or valium. but it is actually more powerful than that. it is used to help people kick withdrawals, the dts. it finally worked. that is what it took for this man to finally be able to quit. of course, one of the things we must prove to you is richard was addicted. i think it is pretty clear that he was. based upon what every doctor said, based upon what he told us. we have to prove that his addiction caused him to smoke these cigarettes, the marlboro cigarettes, made by philip morris. that is what he smoked pretty much all his united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 life. it caused him to get the copd that ultimately resulted in replacing his lungs. and that copd absolutely manifested itself on or before november 21, 1996, because dr. tabb found it in 1992. slide number 6. dr. tabb, in his report -- number 6. thank you -- wrote: chronic bronchitis secondary to tobacco abuse. chronic bronchitis, copd. as a result of smoking these things. that is what dr. tabb wrote in his record in '92. and then in november, slide number 7, please. dr. catz, in his own report, he wrote: flow volume loop is compatible with copd. he is got an estimated lung age of 88 years. and he told richard: you have got emphysema, you have got to quit. richard knew it. slide number 8. he told us. when did you know you had it? i knew i had copd caused by cigarette united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 smoke in 1992. and lungs. lungs of an 88-year-old man. i was 39 years old at the time. that is what he testified to. and debbie knew it. next slide. number 9. at that point, did you know exactly -- what did they explain to you and richard what the copd was from. they explained to me at that time, in 1992, it was from smoking. and danielle, who was just an infant at the time. can you describe for us your earliest recollections of your dad? probably when i was 4 or 5, growing up, he always smelled like smoke. it was always known that my dad had copd. ever since i remember. being 4 or 5 years old. she was born in 1989. '93, '94, she was 4 or 5 years old. that is what she knew all her life. and now richard sits here before you, as directed by the supreme court. he was hoping he would be around long enough to present this case to you, and fortunately he is, as a result united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 of these double lung transplants. it is a miracle that he is here, and we will talk about that a lot. but he sits here now, and we are -- scott and i, brittany, we are proud to represent richard and debbie and be able to present their case, and we thank you for that opportunity from the bottom of our hearts, and debbie and richard thank you. they really do. because what you are doing here is tremendous, and we appreciate it. we are asking you to determine that richard is a member of the class. slide number 14. the issue that you first have to decide is, was richard boatright addicted to philip morris cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd, that manifested on or before november 21, 1996? that is the issue, that is the first issue. the question is whether he smoked enough cigarettes to develop a disease because of his addiction. that is what this case is about. it united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 should be very simple, that first question. and then once you answer yes, which we hope you will, we move on to the engle findings, the issue of compensation, the issue of percentage of fault and the issue of whether or not these companies, both of these companies, liggett and philip morris, should be punished for their actions and their conduct over those years. now, the defense says no, it is not that simple. mr. reilly, ms. st. peter-griffith, they are going to stand up here and say no, it is not that simple. because we are going to tell you, mr. boatright, he did not have copd in the '90s, he did not have emphysema in the '90s. they are going to tell you, his addiction, that did not cause disease. his choice to smoke caused his disease. he could have quit any day. that is what they will tell you. but we all know the truth. the truth is richard tried to quit, and it took a combination of wellbutrin and tranxene, a very powerful drug, to make this man quit. it united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 was not until that, all those years, ten years of trying, and he really did try. but that is how addictive. that is how addictive these things are. it is a drug. now, the defense also will tell you, hey, you know what? he did not have the copd. dr. tabb, was wrong, dr. catz was wrong. when richard told the doctors at the er in '94 that i have emphysema, no, he was wrong. those doctors are wrong. listening to dr. schroeder, who came in and told you no, this man only had asthma, he did not have copd. and despite the fact that the mayo clinic, one of the top institutes in the world, best hospitals in the world, they took out this man's lungs because of what, because of emphysema. and we brought forth dr. illei from one of the other top hospitals in the world, johns hopkins. he told you those lungs, when i looked at the slides, not pictures, when i looked at slides of the actual tissue that they took out of this man, it showed emphysema. mayo clinic did not give richard boatright united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 a transplant for asthma. slide number 13. when they took out his lungs, dr. khoor from the mayo clinic, what did she say? dr. khoor: emphysema and chronic bronchitis. looking at the same slides that dr. illei looked at. not some picture that dr. schroeder looked at and said, oh, i see emphysema at the apex, there is very mild ... but this man had asthma. come on. that is absurd. and i'm sure mr. schlesinger will talk more about dr. schroeder and how absurd his opinion is. but you as the jury have every right to discount his testimony. the judge read you that instruction. you can take that down, keith. thank you. so after 18 years, from first hearing from his doctors that he had copd, he ends up on an operating table at mayo clinic. and they remove his lungs. and they put in a set of lungs from a 17-year-old boy who just happened to die shortly before that, who fortunately was united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 an organ donor. and unfortunately, just weeks after the surgery, richard's body started to reject the lungs. went into rejection. that happens from lung transplant. that is a major risk. for the next 18 months, he struggled every day with breathing. he struggled every day with the fear that he may not get a second set of lungs. he struggled every day with the anxiety that i'm going to be facing another surgery. he described how painful that first one was. he described how they basically cut him open like a can opener, scars here and here, scars, angel wings in the back. that is what he is got. he is scarred for the rest of his life. but you know what? he is got new lungs in his body and now he is breathing. he is very, very fortunate. very rare, very uncommon. second lung transplant. and he lives every day with the fear that the slightest sniffle, the slightest infection, can kill him. that is a fear he lives with every day, and that is a fear that united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 debbie lives with every day. that is a tremendous burden. that is why we are asking you for compensation. because this company, these cigarettes, that is what did it to him. nobody chooses -- nobody chooses that. slide number -- actually, do not need a slide yet. the defense will try to convince you otherwise. mr. reilly will get up here. he will speak to you. he is a great lawyer. great lawyer, very persuasive. do not let him confuse you with his argument, because the evidence, the evidence speaks volumes. we put together -- i mean, you saw a dozen or so boxes of medical records. for brevity, we put together some of the key medical records. it is all tabbed by year. it is tabbed also by the records that were used with dr. alvarez, by dr. mannino, dr. illei, and mr. boatright. so easy access to the medical records for you. we do not expect you to go through 40,000 records to find one that you might be united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 interested in. and they are all chronological. as i said, they are all tabbed with dates. now, he will get up here, mr. reilly will get up here and say, hey, as i said, this was not addiction, it was his choice. but we all know. slide number 15. their own documents say we cannot defend continued smoking as "free choice" if the person was addicted. they knew that back in 1980. their own documents said that. but really, what person ever chooses addiction? richard smoked these things for 38 years. not because he liked them, not because he enjoyed them, but because he was addicted to them. he was dependent on the nicotine. that is what these things do to you. they hook you. and again, there is been a lot of talk about choice, and mr. reilly will probably talk about it, it was his choice, he could have quit any day. but really, could he have? he certainly did try. and that goes to comparative fault. it does not go to whether or not his addiction united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 caused his disease. because we all know it did. slide number 12. this. how addiction causes disease, 8 puffs a cigarette. 5 million lifetime exposures to chemicals to cause disease. that is how these things cause disease. does not matter about his ability to quit -- you can take that down. does not matter if he did quit, does not matter when he did quit. what matters is he smoked these things enough to give him disease. that is what question 1 is all about. i'm going to talk to you a little bit and then scott is going to talk to you about their conduct. i'm going to try not to be repetitive. hopefully we will not be. you heard a lot of things throughout this day -- throughout the past few weeks, rather, and sometimes we were repetitive. we apologize for that, but we do not know what you want to hear. we try to put forward the evidence that is necessary to convince you. hopefully we did that. but i apologize to you up front if we united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 took too much time, and i apologize to you if you think scott and i covered the same topics. we are going to try not to do that. as i said, we all know people smoke -- some people do smoke for enjoyment. they will smoke a cigarette or two a day, not smoke for a while, because they like the taste. but, you know, people that smoke a pack, two, three, they are not smoking for the taste anymore. they are not smoking because they enjoy it. they smoke because they need these things. they need the nicotine that is inside. that is what this is. it is a nicotine delivery device. you saw the documents. that is all it is. delivers the dose of nicotine to keep somebody addicted. the choice of a child, 12 years old, to pick one of these things up to be cool, along with his friends. that is a choice richard boatright made. stupid, yeah. but he is a kid. kids do stupid things. the choice to keep on smoking to be cool, to fit in. by the time -- shortly after starting, he was smoking a pack a day. riding his bike, collecting bottles, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 picking up bottles a nickel at a time, crates at a time for a quarter. turning them in to buy one of these packs. back in those days, you could get them for just 25 cents. pretty good deal. five bottles, i get my cigarettes. and it was cool back then. and it was cool all through the '60s and '70s, and into the '80s, people were still smoking without a thought. that is what people did back then. and even when donna hernandez, his wife, who was a nurse tells him, hey, look, i'm dealing with patients all the time that get sick from this stuff, you have got to quit. he is in his 20s. the guy is dancing 15 hours a day. he is in great shape. these things are never going to hurt me. i'm not worried about it. and what happens? he goes to the hospital to pick her up, and the doctors are walking out, smoking away. in the hospital. so come on. is he really going to believe that? is he really going to think i'm going to end up having to wear a mask every day so i do not get infection because i could die with my next breath if an infection gets inside united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 me? is he thinking that when he is 20 years old? of course not. now, richard started smoking -- slide number 16 -- with these ads, okay. these ads -- these ads took him down that path. he became cowboy, rode that trail with the marlboro man, just like they wanted him to. now, i want to talk about -- go back to the verdict form, keith. the first slide, the first question. was he addicted? of course he was. so i want you to check off yes so we can move on to the findings, and scott will talk to you about the findings. the judge read to you the findings, and the judge explained to you legal cause. listen carefully to that. were these cigarettes a legal cause? was it a reason that richard smoked cigarettes? of course. i want to talk to you about -- skipping ahead a little bit. i want to talk to you about the damages in the case. richard, he loved dancing. he loved life. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 show the next picture. look at this. this is what the guy looked like. do you think he ever thought cigarettes were going to hurt him when he was 20 years old? he was bulletproof. that is what kids think. that is what young men think. never going to get sick. imagine -- imagine this. you heard that richard saw joe cullman. he saw joe cullman on "face the nation." imagine if joe cullman had said: listen, folks, our cigarettes, they are going to kill you. i represent philip morris, and i know there is a lot of smokers out there. but listen, i want to tell you the truth right now, our cigarettes will kill you. so we are going to set up smoking clinics. we are going to cooperate with dow chemical, and we are going to make nicorette gum available to everybody so you can quit before this stuff kills you. in 1971, when richard watched joe cullman, he said this instead. play it real quick, keith. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 voice: we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous, we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. (video clip concluded.) mr. hammer: for that reason alone -- go to the verdict form, keith, on concealment. if they told the truth, if they did not agree back in 1954, we would not be here. it would be a different world that richard grew up in. so, of course, yes, he relied on those statements. he relied on them because if they would have said something else, things would have been different. and richard told you that in his own testimony. so check off. and liggett, they are just as responsible for that conspiracy, because they were involved with all those other corporations. they were responsible. go to the percentage. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 now, you are going to be asked, well, what percentage of fault? well, philip morris as compared to richard. richard, a 12-year-old kid started smoking, philip morris a big corporation that knew better. i would suggest 5 or ten percent for richard. ninety percent, at least ninety percent for philip morris. they need to take responsibility for their actions. you are going to be asked, well, how much money should we give? how do you determine? first of all, we heard from oscar padron the different options. you heard the life tables, he is expected to live about 20 years if he is a normal white male of this age, so we figured out the 20-year period. and we also figured out a five-year period. because you heard after a lung transplant, possible five years. but we think, you know what? in today's world. advances in science, advances in medicine, who knows. so i would ask you to united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 consider -- next form, keith. -- option 2. which we said the 1.7 million. i think that is reasonable under the circumstances. we are going to ask you to compensate richard for his pain, for his suffering, for what he went through. you are -- you heard what he went through, cut open like a can opener. pain every day, the fear of dying every day. what is that worth? all the pain and suffering he went through. skip ahead, keith. i would ask you to consider awarding $10 million in this case to richard boatright. i think that is fair and reasonable. now, you may think it is too much. you may think it is too little. but we think that is fair and reasonable under the circumstances. two lung transplants. the pain this man went through. that is reasonable under the circumstances. it is a miracle he is alive united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 today. and he thanks his lucky stars every day. debbie, the pain and suffering that debbie goes through. she is been there every step of the way with richard. we would ask you to consider 2.5 million. we think that is fair and reasonable. again, you may think that is too little; that is too much. it is your decision. those are suggestions we have for you. and then when it comes to punitive damages. are punitive damages warranted against each of these companies? of course they are. scott is going to talk to you a lot about that. we would ask you to check off yes to both of those companies. because if you are going to be a company in this country, you are going to make a product. you are going to make a product, then make a safe one, not one that kills half its users. that is just wrong, and they should be punished for that. i want to thank you very much for your time. scott is going to talk to you for a united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 little while. please give him the same attention. and, again, the boatrights thank you. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court. judgment day. a day of reckoning. a reckoning is an accounting for past wrongdoing. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 i'm going to take you back to the days before we had medical testimony, and i'm going to talk about conduct testimony and the conduct of the tobacco industry insofar as what it is done in the united states. and when we talk about a day of reckoning, it is because i want to talk to you about the punitive damages count. and i want to explain to you why this is a case that calls for punitive damages because of what is gone on with regard to reprehensible conduct of an industry that placed profit over human lives and did so with knowledge, aforethought, did so intentionally, did so on purpose. and one of the ways to say it is that the tobacco industry and the choice between the physical health of consumers and the financial well-being of business. concealment is chosen over disclosure. sales over safety and money over morality. who are these persons who knowingly and secretly decide to put the buying public at risk solely for the purpose of making profits and who believe that illness and death of united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 consumers is an appropriate cost of their own prosperity? so when i say to you today we stand on the precipice of something that is great, that is larger than ourselves, that is an opportunity to use the american justice system to bring to bear equivalent playing field between an enormous powerful corporation and -- mr. reilly: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- regular folks in the community -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: and dr. proctor testified about the power of the corporation. you all are entitled to take into consideration what they have done, what it is done not only to the folks here in the courtroom, to mr. boatright, who is a living example of a smoker who has made it to face the tobacco companies alive, and we will talk about that. here is the most important thing. right out of the box, you must know that as of -- and this is in evidence. this document is in evidence. this is going to be -- you can get these united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 for free from the government. they pay the postage. it has enormous amounts of information and shows you that even today, even now, we are still learning and identifying and understanding just the scope of the devastation the tobacco industry has caused. the findings in the surgeon general 2014 that i wanted to reflect on with you so quickly are that all these years, folks have talked about stop quitting. yul brynner, do not smoke, do not smoke. you remember that public service announcement. you may ask, well, if he was making that public service announcement, where were the tobacco executives watching this public service announcement. why did not they do something about it. why did not they get together and say, you know what, we are killing all these people. let us stop making an effective and dangerous product. let us taken addictiveness out. take the inhalability out. let us sell tobacco in its natural state. they would still have the business, they would be 1/10th of the business. but would not united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 be an epidemic of disease. that is what we have here. we have an industrial driven epidemic of disease, literally an infectious disease that sickens and kills more americans and more people worldwide, but for this case americans than any other thing in the country. we say it is an irrational madness that hides in plain sight. kurt vonnegut said to an insane society, a sane man must appear insane. and it is almost like a deprogramming opportunity for us here. we all live in a culture they created, for you to see something that a lot of folks have not seen. it hides in plain sight. one of the things i thought of that comes from an old song is, when you came into this courtroom at the beginning of the case, i thought i knew, i thought i knew, but now i know. the song has a line, i thought i knew, but now i know. it is elton john, mona lisas and mad hatters. it is a great song. but the idea is, we went in a roomful of 150, 160 people, folks had preconceived united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 notions. and we filtered y'all out, and you all said, i'll be open-minded. but even -- everybody has some idea about it. you said: i thought i knew. but now you know. now you have been exposed to what they have done internally, what -- a secret business plan, an enterprise of death that traded lives for money all these years. and what is interesting is, the focus is on the smoker. you cannot say you are going to lie to a smoker and then blame it on him. you cannot say i'm going to take a 12-year-old, a child of tender ages, the target of my business activity, hook him as a replacement smoker for my customers that i know are dying and then say, it is all your fault. all richard's fault. you cannot do that. that is not reasonable. this is something that is bigger. it transcends this courtroom. it is about richard. it is about compensation for richard, which is restorative in nature. but the point to make here is to say we here in bartow have seen something. our eyes united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 have been opened to something that is current. it is relevant. it is news. 2014, the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry which has deliberately misled the public on risks of smoking cigarettes. this is the first time in 50 years of surgeon general's reports -- and all the surgeon general cares about is helping people. the first time in 50 years the surgeon general's report specifically changes its focus from you should quit. if you are addicted, you should quit, even though addiction is a fundamental -- it is a brain disease. it causes a permanent change. this case, without a doubt and more so than ever has got -- is replete with records about this man being addicted. it is not an issue in dispute. as a matter of fact, they presented not a single shred of evidence to deny addiction, not one shred of evidence. as a matter of fact, the document they put on, he pled ignorance. i do not know, i united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 do not know. i cannot tell you about addiction. it is part of his practice. he should have been able to say something about it, but he did not. and so this is an important point, because it is current. it is the first time the surgeon general is focusing not on the smoker, the illness, the disease, but on who it is that is sustaining this epidemic, who initiated the epidemic, the aggressive strategy of the tobacco industry deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking, and it worked. it worked. then we go to punishment damages, because you will work your way through class membership. i say you can make it easy, you can make it hard. we talked about the burden of proof, and this is the scales of justice. and remember, it is not a criminal case where it is all to the exclusion of any reasonable doubt. it is not like you have got to get the scales to go all the way one way or the other. it is on balance. the preponderance of the evidence. what is most likely. what is persuasive. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 an organic medical record from soup to nuts that you saw lays out a case of a man who is clearly sick, with documentation. it is very precise on that point. and we brought heavyweights in the form of dr. mannino from -- with unbelievable credentials. he wrote the chapter on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in the surgeon general's report. dr. illei, johns hopkins, pulmonary pathologist, and dr. alvarez, the treating doctor from mayo who all laid out the case indisputably, and they dignified the proceedings because they have the gravitas, and they have the experience, the credentials to bring them to you so we can honor this process with men of great scientific background and dedicated lives to helping people. they are heavyweights, and they have tried to counterbalance it on one single occasion with a lightweight. and you will not let that happen, because that is how you determine the greater weight of the evidence. they may raise a doubt. and you know they say in their own documents, doubt is our united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 product. doubt is our product. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. motion. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: however -- however, in a case of the burden of proof being the greater weight of evidence, the more convincing force and effect of all the evidence in the case, as his honor read to you, as you will have in the back of the room if you use his instructions, that greater weight of the evidence is, what is more likely than not? was there a doubt? sure. does that doubt carry the day? no, because doubts are resolved -- any small doubts are resolved in the favor of the plaintiff. if more likely than not, you believe the case -- mr. reilly: objection -- mr. schlesinger: -- a doubt is resolved in our favor. the reporter: wait, one at a time. mr. reilly: -- the instructions that doubts are not resolved in favor of a party. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: so anyway, you must united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 decide if punitive damages are warranted, and it is in addition to compensatory damages. and punitive damages are warranted as punishment to one or more defendants as a deterrent to others. the case is about richard boatright and much more. it is about the harms to 20 million smokers who have died since the 1964 surgeon general's report -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- has come out. mr. reilly: it is not about -- the court: just a second. mr. reilly: this is not about 20 million people. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: if i may. this is the instruction that is being read to you. when considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm defendants' conduct caused richard boatright. you may also consider similar harms suffered by other parties not to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongness of the defendants' acts in -- as proven in this case. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 that is why you can consider harms to others. when you get to punishment damages, it is -- in order to determine was what they did indecent; was it reprehensible? is killing 20 [sic] people for profit as a business plan and disregarding the health of the american people while lying to them since the '50s saying, we want to be frank, we want to be honest. we will stop making it if it is bad for you. we want to be straight with you. we would never make a bad product. we will fix it. here is a filter, even though it is fake. defrauding the american public, the resulting harm that dr. proctor himself said caused millions of unnecessary deaths. this goes to what you decide, more than richard boatright, was the conduct reprehensible. so you have this, you have this -- this entry as a jury instruction, because you have great power. this is -- you may have more power today than in any situation you have ever held in your life. you get to decide about enormous, great historical wrong, a tragedy of monumental human proportions, right here in bartow, right now. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 and when you think about it -- i have a picture here of mount everest. you have mount everest. the fact that richard boatright is in this courtroom at this time before you, a living smoker getting his day in court to face philip morris. and mr. reilly is -- as he said, he is a nice guy, but he is not philip morris. you are not making a decision about is mr. reilly a fine fellow or a decent man. he is doing a job for his client. he is not a corporate representative. he is not an executive of philip morris. they could have brought anybody they want to come here and talk to you about it. they could have brought down mark barrington-- (phonetic) mr. reilly: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: however, you are not judging mr. reilly. you are judging the conduct of the company he represents. that is more important to remember. more people have climbed to the top of mount everest. and this is the northern view of mount everest from the rongbuk monastery in united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 tibet. the biggest mountain on earth. there are more people that have stood on the top of that mountain than have made it alive into a courtroom to face philip morris as a sick smoker in a case in the united states. that is how rare. that is how special. that is how amazing it is that we are here with this case. mr. reilly: objection. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: can i go back to my original numbers? just put me back to where i was, please. so in addition, the major conclusions in these surgeon general's reports -- and delve through them, look through them. this is the current thinking, cutting edge. this is still a current topic. the major conclusions in the surgeon general 10, the blue one, is about how tobacco causes disease. it is got a chapter on copd and addiction on page 105. nicotine, the fundamental reason people smoke. that is why these diseases get caused. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 surgeon general 12, the red book, is all about the children. it is all about hooking children. that is the basis of the business, and they want to say cigarettes are legal. well, they are legal. but it is not legal to sell them to kids. and when the basis of the business is children, is youth, that is something that does not meet with the bounds of human decency. his honor read an instruction to you. the corporations are entitled to be treated like people. great. i like that instruction. they have the ability to be treated as a person. the idea being, do not come in there and say, well, they are just a big corporation, so we are going to slam them. that is not fair. let us treat them as a person. i embrace that. because i say with the rights of human personhood come the obligations and responsibilities of being a person. and i say, if you want to be treated like a person, act like a person. be decent to people. robert fulghum wrote the book on everything i ever needed to united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 learn about life, i learned in kindergarten. remember ten points, a simple book. be nice to people. do not hurt people. if you hurt someone, try to make it right. it is a simple thing. and when you are indecent, when a corporate business practice says we are going to lie to our customers, we are going to give them a drug that addicts them and kills them fifty percent of the time, one-fifth of all deaths in america occur from cigarette-related diseases. i've been running down that fort fraser trail. you go by the oak hill cemetery. imagine if you visited that oak hill cemetery, that one in every five tombstones had a little no-smoking sign on it, because that is how many people are dying from the scourge of tobacco. you are here seeing an amazingly monumental human wrong. and you have amazing power to do something about it today in this courtroom. mr. reilly: objection, your honor, conscious of the community. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: the major conclusions of the report. i read you number 2. another one says: the century long epidemic of cigarette smoking has caused an enormous public health tragedy. since the first surgeon general's report in 1964, more than 20 million premature deaths can be attributed to cigarette smoking. let us think about that. can i have the map of florida. think about that for a second. what does that mean? despite 1964 coming out and saying it caused cancer, 20 million people are dead. what does that mean? okay. that means that every single man, woman and child that populate this state would be gone. 20 million people is the population of the state of florida, 19.55 -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor, this is inappropriate. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: to give you a sense of scale. and you put up my numbers board. i do not united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 know which one that is. the numbers board. video technician: yes. mr. schlesinger: the numbers numb. in other words, you talk about 20 million. sometimes they say if one or two or three people die, it is an incomprehensible tragedy. 1200 people are dying every single day. more than 1200 people in the united states. that is like the equivalent of three jumbo jets going down. that would be front page news. but when 480,000 people are dying a year, adds up to $20 million, it is almost like, it is a statistic. it is hard to wrap your minds around it. but these are people and families and loved ones and moms and dads and uncles and aunties and grandparents. and people -- not only the people involved, but other people are suffering. so you are witnessing something, it is tobacco 101 -- mr. reilly: objection. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: exposed to something united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 really bad. so i thought of this, the numbers numb. the numbers numb. it is almost numbing, the amount. that is why i put up the state of florida, which is 19.55 million people. imagine the entire -- go from bartow in every single direction to key west and pensacola and not see a single soul. they are all gone. that is what we have lost preventably and prematurely because of the scourge of tobacco epidemic. can you go back to where i was in the punies, please. so you have to decide if punishment is warranted. to me, it is the most important thing in this case. it clearly is. you have got to get through the preliminary questions and address restorative damages to mr. boatright and his wife. mr. hammer suggested a number. it is only a suggestion. if that number is too high to you, if you say, you know, you are grubbing for money, you are losing credibility with me, i do not like that, you can order any amount you united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 want. if it is 500,000. if it is 2 million. if it is 3 million. whatever it is. but when it comes to medical bills and economics, a million and a half, $2 million in economics, earnings, lost earnings, medical bills. when folks are laying in the hospital -- and richard is there fighting for his life to get a lung transplant. his loved ones and family members are not going to the hospital and saying, oh, my god, how much are your medicals going to be. they are like, when are you going to get back out there and smell the roses? are you going to make it? so the human concepts of mental anguish are so enormous. and in this case they are so substantial, they are worth considering. punitive damages are warranted. you may consider the engle findings which are very clear. the engle findings say fraud, conspiracy, defective product. and you own these engle findings. they are binding on you. and i say that in a way that both captures you, but also recognizing folks do not united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 like to be said this is what you have to do. they are binding. and his honor read, you may not disregard them. mr. reilly may not disregard them. they are binding. but what is more, i say embrace them and use them, because it also says it is as if you found them yourself. these findings are valid as if you found them yourself. engle is not over. engle lives on. this is a generational fight. going back to 1960 when i read to you that new england journal of medicine article saying the behavior of the tobacco industry has been deplorable and has not changed, and dr. proctor said it has not changed. it is been a generation since engle was started. and now these are the engle progeny cases, and they go on. and they go into the future. and you are a point in time that can help with that. so these are the things that can give rise to reprehensible behavior. we did not do a year-long trial with a united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 million documents like engle. we gave you a smattering to give you a sense of just how incredibly wrongful, intentionally wrongful, how -- the losing of the moral compass, losing the direction that decent humans should treat each other. reckless disregard for human life, or a lack of care. so it is conscious indifference to the consequences. or wanton and recklessly disregarding the safety and welfare of the product or reckless indifference to the rights of others to be equivalent to intentional violation of those rights. all those things are applicable here, and the engle findings lay them all out. liggett is only in because they were part of a conspiracy to commit fraud. so there is one question on engle was, is this the kind of thing that contributed to what happened? so i say, what should a responsible manufacturer do? think about all the scientists, think about the brilliant men, the cleverness, the ingenious way they formed this conspiracy. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 what if that energy had been directed to good. to helping people. where would we be medically. how many fewer deaths. there would have been millions fewer deaths would we have seen had they done that. and they did not. so that is why you can say to them, we reject this conduct, in the strongest possible terms. we do not want this behavior. so i say you should protect children, you should not addict them. that is what we should do. we should not be preying on children. there should not be predation on youngsters, the only basis of the business. if you do not start smoking before 18, you do not start smoking. the business goes down to ninety percent. put those cigarettes behind the counter of the pharmacy, require id for 21 years of age. and then, instead of having a multibillion dollar business, they have got a hundreds of millions of dollar business. it is still a business, but it is more responsible. but this is -- another thing. cure, do not cause. could not they have directed their united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 energies, their scientists, their medical people to curing and not causing this? yes, they could. but here is what they are really interested in. who ain't for more money? and they know back in the '60s, they cannot count it as a drug, because there are dangerous fda implications going behind those walls. forty years later, the fda gets ahold of them. what does dr. proctor say. they are just as dangerous. not a single change has been made. they wield too much power and influence, and they block any attempts by the fda. in a sense, you hold more power than the fda today. you can do something. you can make an expression of moral condemnation -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: you can say something to the defendant. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: that we do not accept this behavior. i showed you this one. you consider wrongfulness to others. it is bigger than just united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 richard. and richard presents an opportunity. he is a generic smoker. like he said to you, i was the perfect customer. he did everything they wanted to do. he started smoking at 12 years old. he smoked them up silly. he smoked cigarettes, he was terribly addicted to them. and that is the whole business model. the center of their universe is addiction. he bought their gear, and he did what they wanted him to do. so i told you it is about richard, but much more, because it presents an opportunity going forward to enact deterrence, not just to the tobacco companies, but other companies that might not put the safety of their customers ahead of their corporate profits. so the numbers numb, i've told you that, and it is about truth and consequences. when you engineer for addiction, there will be consequences. when you lie to the american public, there will be consequences. when you offer up solutions, such as united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 filters which do nothing, there will be consequences. so when you are tricking folks with fake filters that are nothing more than a fraud for a health reassurance concept, there will be consequences. and they knew it. and they knew it. back in the '60s. the position we are taking is going to be subject to a finding. we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sales of cigarettes. they knew it. and, of course, punishment damages is a higher burden of proof. remember i said on balance, the greater weight of the evidence? you must find that it is clear and convincing evidence. it is a higher burden of proof, meaning you must be able to say it is precise. it is explicit. and it does not confuse me. i know what they did now, those records, those internal documents. we have got the goods on them. those internal documents lay it all out, and you have seen them. you were exposed to united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 tobacco 101. a lot of people have not seen it, even though they were available. six jurors at a time, we are learning about this. and it should be lacking in confusion and form a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue. here is the thing. lacking confusion. there ain't no illusion about the confusion. there is no doubt about the doubt. they offered the illusion of filtration. they said so. that is how you know. they offered a doubt campaign that they celebrated as a brilliant holding strategy that enabled them to win many, many, many victories in litigation and other fronts, because that was a big part of the arm of the conspiracy, as dr. proctor testified. so, he meets those standards. he smoked almost always marlboros, one of the most popular brands, the most popular brand in the world. what did dr. proctor say about it? this is the greatest branded cause of death in the history of human civilization. you know, i thought i knew. but now i united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 know. class membership is not about fault. please pay attention to that carefully. because there is a tendency to conflate, to mix, to confuse the idea that in class membership, which is a simple question, okay, dr. tabb's note, chronic bronchitis secondary to tobacco abuse, which was defined by mannino and alvarez as tobacco addiction, like drug abuse, that note alone is everything you need to know about class membership. did he have a manifestation, the appearance of the signs and symptoms of suffering of a disease, chronic bronchitis, which is part of copd. did he have it before 1996 in november? yes, this is 1992. was it caused by drug addiction? yes, it was secondary to tobacco abuse, which is tobacco addiction. there is no way to get around it. and, quite frankly, they hook teenagers and children and those guys become lifelong customers. fishermen use hooks. fish never see the hook. that is the whole idea. and when they united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 hook them, like dr. tamol said in the document: keep a minimum amount of nicotine required to keep the normal smoker hooked. they know, they have got them hooked. that is just the way it is. class membership is not about fault. class membership is only, was he a sick smoker? there was 700,000 of them during the period of years of the engle class period between 1990 and '96, and -- i mean, it would be a heck of a waste of time and resources to pick the wrong one. and i do not think we did. he has clear and convincing organic, meaning legitimate. it appeared in the chart, unrelated to anything, that the man was seeking medical care in the '90s. so when you get to class membership, it is not about fault. later, there is a question on fault and you can compare the fault. you can say richard should have started -- tried harder to quit. but the records are so clear that he was tormented. he tried so hard to quit. especially in '01, '02, '03. on cigarettes, off cigarettes. going to counseling, getting united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 medicines. addiction is a scourge. it is so powerful, so overwhelming. it destroys free choice. he was powerfully addicted. no doubt. so fault is after class membership. do not get hung up on the concept that he might have been at fault for not trying harder to quit. they want to shine a floodlight. they want to shine a floodlight -- excuse me, a spotlight on richard. look at richard. look at richard. what did richard do? it is like anything else. if you do not have a leg to stand on, on your conduct, one of attack approaches is break the other guy's leg. if you do not have a leg to stand on on what you did 50 years over, hence, break the other guy's leg. and why does it work? it works. if you watched any of the campaign news, was all that advertising for elections negative. even though we hate it, we hate it, it must work. because at some level psychologically, it gets to us. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 focus on richard. i say turn on the floodlights and look at richard and then look at what is on either side of richard. liggett and philip morris leading him down the aisle, encouraging addiction all the way along, denying the harms of smoking, saying it is an open question. creating doubt. operation stumbling block, a de-motivation campaign for drug addicted cigarette smokers in denial to keep smoking. that is what happened. that is the truth of it. that is the dirty little secret that hides in plain sight. catching those kids. the engle class period. this is the trampoline case, as the fellow they brought, dr. schroeder, said. strict no landing zone. i thought about it. because i used to have shelties. they would run around. the birds would come out in the yard. they would never let the birds land. they would chase the birds, and they would fly. and i said my shelties enforced a strict no landing policy in the backyard. and that is what i thought of that idea. here it is, this is the trampoline. they are united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 using the technical class period. no matter what tries to get in there, boing, everything bounces out. ain't nobody going to be in the class period if the tobacco defense approach has anything to do it with it. that is not the reality of what these records show. dr. tabb saw this gentleman on four consecutive occasions, over an entire year and always kept the same diagnosis, chronic bronchitis, going throughout the record. he saw him. kept the same treatment in july. keep the same treatment in august. keep the same treatment in october. the only guy they are talking about, dr. catz, he only saw him one time. and what dr. schroeder got hung by his own petard was he had just come from the taylor case two days earlier up in jacksonville where my friend jimmy gustafson is trying the case, and he said -- mr. reilly: objection. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: -- well, can you make the diagnosis or distinguish between copd and united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 asthma if you have not had continuity of care and multiple visits? is that important? it is extremely important. all of a sudden, the fact that dr. catz only saw him one time was not extremely important. and dr. catz said he is got copd on the testing. and dr. mannino, a world's expert, explained this is copd. so, you know, you have to look at the case in terms of what is reality. what is obvious. and what do they say? business is selling nicotine. nicotine is the drug. they describe their customers as a rat in a cage. an essential commodity, a habitual act. put a hungry rat in a cage -- i mean, you know, this is their business. nicotine is the center of the universe. no one has ever smoked without nicotine. the product is nicotine. the cigarette is a package. the cigarette pack is a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine. very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine and its addictive nature united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 and that nicotine is a poison. remember this? we tabbed motives of incentives and showed the book. because he had never seen one of those. it is amazing what you can find nowadays. this is the book. and it says: no doubt about it. it is the nicotine. william dunn, the nicotine kid from philip morris. no doubt about it. it is the nicotine. way back in the '70s, they celebrated this. this was their business. smoking is not a free choice. when you start smoking as a teenager and become addicted, you cannot quit. very few people can quit. and the prevalence of nicotine dependence is the highest addiction in the world. alvarez says it is one of the most addictive substances there is, more addictive than heroin because of the relapse. you try, you fall back. and it is a normal consumer product. how do you tell somebody it is not normal? you have -- it looks like this. a kid comes up and picks up a pack of united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 cigarettes with the pretty colors on it and says: daddy, what is this? you say: son, it is bad. he says: does not look bad. well, it does not look bad. it looks like everything else. it looks like everything else. it can be the same colored patterns as the toys he is playing with. so how are you supposed to teach the kids that it is bad in an environment where when our client was smoking in the early '60s, more than half the kids his age were smoking. when claude teague who said on the youth market at 18, what is immoral? my client had -- you are going to judge his responsibility in combination with theirs in terms of starting to smoke at 12. and what could a future -- what long-range future plans could a 12-year-old have? very few. and here it is. manifestation. manifestation you will see. the judge did not say manifestation means it has to be diagnosed. it emerges, it manifests. the simple meaning of the term. he was suffering from the disease. the united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 manifestation is clear. here it is. this is class membership right here. bar none, sine qua non, unless they can convince you there is something wrong with this note and there is not. this note, as alvarez said, leads to dr. alvarez's treatment in 2010. and he said it was one continuous process, the emphysema, the result of this man losing his lungs, started and was demonstrated in 1992. same process. that is a treating doctor, dr. alvarez. not hired by anybody, not paid any kind of expert witness fees, to -- he is just a guy that does not testify, like mannino does not come into court and testify. illei does not come into court and testify to tell you -- to honor the system with expertise where we are honored to bring you world class experts. i wish there was a classroom of people here to be able to see what they have to say because of what they were teaching. compatible with copd. and mannino explained extensively, that sure looked like united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 copd. and what was helping this man, atrovent, a copd drug. we learned a lot about this in this trial. i did not even really know that much about it. 45,000 pages. i got an in. i did not read them. somebody said they did. think about whether it was physically possible to go through 45,000 records. it was not. history of asthma and emphysema. this is what the patient said to a doctor in an er visit as to what he thought he had. and by the way, dr. keeler did not diagnose asthma. she diagnosed an acute reaction to an adrenaline drug. that is what he was there for. he did not go to the er for a special evaluation of his well-being, his lung conditions. he said emphysema, and he told you, i learned from these guys that i was sick with a smoking-related disease. the proof is in the pudding. actions speak louder than words. in '94, in the doctor's office, the man is saying, what have you got? united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 i got asthma and emphysema. he never said he did not have asthma. but he is got both. and then in '99 at the watkins clinic. there is a look-back note where someone says his spirometry did show a moderate obstructive ventilatory defect in '92. in 2004. how organic, how much the ring of truth does this note have. what year did you know you had a lung disease? 1996. he knew he had a lung disease. and then the lung pathology, of course, said chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema and chronic bronchitis. that is when we actually looked at the slides of the lungs, that is what the man had. but you know it was not asthma in '96. and it is approximately what year, and it is going back in time to the period between '90 and '96. 1. 2. 3. 4. references that period. it is easy. and then every single thing about the disease being caused by tobacco abuse. chronic bronchitis secondary tobacco abuse. tobacco united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 abuse of two and a half per day times 30 years resulting in emphysema. severe obstructive airway disease secondary to many years of tobacco abuse. tobacco addiction all throughout the board. we should not be fighting about this. okay? and donna hernandez. she did not get a couple things right. i'm not going to spend a lot of time on her right now. millions are caught in the web of deceit. so was richard. there is 40 million americans. this is 2014. 40 million americans caught in the web of tobacco dependence. every day, kids under 18 are smoking, and a bunch of them -- ms. st. peter-griffith: your honor, i would object to this demonstrative. it has the wrong -- mr. schlesinger: this is. ms. st. peter-griffith: wrong defendant. mr. schlesinger: i'll move on. so anyway, let me read another major conclusion from the report. dr. proctor started out. dr. proctor, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 you know -- you know, dr. proctor looks to help people. he dedicated his life to researching the truth of the history of the tobacco misconduct. and he is a true scholar, and he did a great job coming into this courtroom, i think, to really show you things that you could not even imagine. and he said something about, i think they are too dangerous to be marketed. i think these drugs are just too dangerous to be marketed. it is funny, because in the surgeon general 2014, hot off the press, focusing on the role the tobacco industry played in creating this epidemic. major conclusion number 9: the burden of death and disease from tobacco use in the united states is overwhelmingly caused by cigarettes and other combusted tobacco products. rapid elimination of their use will dramatically reduce this burden. if you took cigarette smoking out of this country, it is like finding a vaccine. it stops a third of all cancers. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 so proctor is in alignment with the surgeon general. he is actually a senior scientific reviewer of the surgeon general. remember, i said build a better mousetrap. you can go back to the other picture. build a better mousetrap, and the world will beat a path to your door. do not let them create a false equivalency in the defense of the case by saying, okay, we were able to get schroeder up to about a million dollars of earnings. and dr. proctor, he is probably earned about $2 million. well, did he earn $2 million because he invented the better mousetrap and the world beat a path to his door. what is the way in which you get an expert witness? you go to the literature, you go to the science, you research, you study, you look who has committed themselves on paper to scholarly articles, books, learning, teaching, through a lifetime dedicated to becoming an expert. building that better mousetrap. he built that better mousetrap. and united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 because he was an expert, the world beat a path to his door. here in florida, the only state where these engle progeny cases are going on, his expertise has been sought out because he is earned it. he deserved it. he built a better mousetrap, and the world beat a path to his door. there was no world beating any path to dr. schroeder's door. he was a random pickup in kansas city, the home base of one of the major firms for the defendants, and they brought the guy in. and i submit to you, yeah, he may be good at doing some things. we will talk about it a little bit more. i'm trying not to go off on schroeder, because i feel that enough was demonstrated to discount him. but i have a few choice words for him in rebuttal. because i get another 15, 20 minutes. the court: you have 30 minutes left. mr. schlesinger: thank you, judge. i'm going to be taking a little bit from my back end, but we will keep going. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 so heimann said, philip morris, we want people to rely. that is why you can check off those boxes. did their lies -- lies cost lives? did their lies lead to my client and many, many others like him getting sick? they clearly did. tons of advertising spent to convince folks to keep smoking and make it glamorous. you know about what they said about the marlboro adventure team, the great success of their brands, their marketings. one of the things very interesting. the tobacco industry tries to disappear in this courtroom. cigarettes fall out of trees, we do not grow them. they are a crop. we just harvest them. i thought of that children's story, cloudy with a chance of meatballs. how about cloudy with a chance of cigarettes. they do not just fall out of the sky. they are the manufacturer. and yet we are the ones bringing you the gear and the advertisements and showing you the boxes. this is their beloved, most proud logo, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 the most successful logo in the history of the world, and you never saw one time that they ever showed you anything from their proud logo. you can see the sign on the gas station down at the racetrack down the way, if you are driving down 98. but you did not see any of it in here. because just like dr. proctor says, they want to disappear. here is my replacement smoker, 12 years old. he was older than that here. but he was 12 years old. the strategic research report from diane burrows, we must capture the youth market, we must get the share of young smokers. they are the only source of replacement smokers. that is patently offensive. it is reprehensible. it is not the kind of conduct that decent people can accept or should accept in this country. in any event, marlboro red and its rapid growth and success. as teenagers, there is a great bonanza getting to kids. younger adults with critical factor. this is where it all comes from. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 replacement smokers. getting the 14-year-olds, getting the 12-year-olds. all these are critical. if we are going to prosper, we must get the youth market. and they know that kids do not smoke because they are addicted to nicotine. they do not know what to expect from nicotine. they smoke to be cool or -- look at the cowboy. how about this. these folks are coming along, doing what they are doing, and they are not understanding this central truth. here is what they -- i'm not a drug addict. i'm a cowboy. that is not the truth. that is not reality in this case. so diane burrows worked it all out. they were competing internally for kids, but they were not admitting that publicly. publicly, they were denying it. it was such an incendiary word they had to change the code language in their papers. hey, you know what, do not say youth anymore. call the 12-year-olds young adults. because they knew if these documents get united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 out, folks would be offended. how did you feel the first time you started seeing these documents? how did it make you feel when you saw the words behind the general idea, folks generally may think tobacco did something bad? but everyone knows it is bad for you. so it is all on them. it is not like that. there is something driving this. anyway, marlboro is going for the 13-year-olds, they are going for the 12-year-olds. the nicotine response is absent in the pre-smoker, and it is overwhelmingly important in the smoker who is lost the freedom to choose. plus plus plus, it is all about the nicotine. and here, my client is -- he wrote about my client. on january 6, 1965, when he was 12 years old, he was born on january 1, '53. he was 12 years old. and at 12 years old, they knew that report, the surgeon general's report, was going to cause a slowdown in sales for a little bit, because the surgeon general came out and said, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 hey, it causes lung cancer. but when it came to the young kids, they recognized there is been a backlog of youth who have refrained from taking up smoking in the face of the report, and a substantial number of these can be expected to join this year's crop of prospects. richard boatright. they were right about him. he was that year's crop of prospects. he began smoking in 1965, and there is the crop. the orange tree right down the fraser trail. right down the fraser trail, down this way. you can run or bicycle. a bunch of oranges, a crop. they are dehumanizing, because they are not thinking about these people. it is like when the ranchers on the farms are looking at the cows, there is baby cows, all the little guys laying around. they walk down and they are like, little hundred dollar bills. all those calves, or literally those little veals are $100 bills. they are looking at them as money. cash crop. they are smokers, those kids. that is the cash crop. that just ain't right. and it is not united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 right in a way that is so astonishingly, powerfully wrong that y'all can reject it. you can say i cannot accept it. that is why when you speak as one voice to this company today, you are expressing something on behalf of a lot of people. but it is a powerful message you can send. it is a powerful message. this is what claude teague said. and i -- we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try it. instead, we must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking, in the hope that he will for himself then discover the real "satisfactions" obtainable. we scramble. we stay up all night. we work really hard to try to come up with a presentation to you. and this document, i call the chiller. because the more i read it -- and i hope the more you read it, and it is in evidence and you can read it, it is chilling. look what he is saying. we are going to united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 convince them with wholly irrational reasons they should try smoking. you will be cool. you are not going to be a drug addict. you are a cowboy. in the hope that he would then discover -- and remember how proctor and jon talked about what it means when they put the quotations around things. the real "satisfactions" obtainable. the code word for satisfactions is addiction. that is what they are doing. bait-and-switch. trick them and hook them, you know. so all about nicotine -- yeah, i know, i'm watching. all about nicotine. you know, the warnings are not effective. what do you do when you have a little kid and -- you see a kid and he is getting ready to get on the diving board, and the diving board goes into an empty pool, and it says no diving. and they want to say, well, the warnings -- you have been warned. richard, you have been warned. okay, the fine print on the side of the united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 package. richard, you have been warned. if a responsible, decent human being sees a kid getting ready to jump into an empty pool, going past the sign on the diving board that says no diving, does he say, it is okay. he is been warned. go ahead, go ahead, go ahead. is that what they do, they encourage him? or do they do everything in their power to stop him. they scream, they run to try to grab him and stop him. what do they do? what do responsible, decent people -- and if you are going to be treated like a person, act like a person. what do decent, responsible people do. everything they can to stop that kid from jumping in that pool. because he is going to get hurt. something is going to happen to him. that is what should be done in this case. nobody can stop. we all know that. it is all about who ain't for more money? it is all about they will go out of business if they lose the nicotine. we are suffering from the externally repressed fear that we are devoting our business lives to the propagation of lung united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 cancer. when you know that and you continue that and you go forward with that, there is got to be a day of reckoning. there is got to be the truth and the consequences. the truth matters. there is got to be a day of reckoning. that is why punishment, as st. augustine said, is justice for the unjust. and it is a fervent prayer we bring to you that you see this already, that i'm able to stitch this together for you after this lengthy trial. where you have taken and been so responsible, as a six-man jury without an alternate, to go over the time, to spend the time with us and learn this. i come up here and i say i want -- can i think of something that is true and beautiful and american and meaningful to get you to see that it is not that richard is here grubbing for money, that there is something bigger than that, and it is a chance to do what is right and see things as they are in a world and a culture that has deceived everybody. so, you know, there is an unattractive side effect. it causes cancer. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 they always knew it caused cancer. they did not care. they got together in the '50s, we showed you that frank statement. they lied to the public. we are going to find out and get to the bottom of it. it was a doubt campaign. they said: do not worry about it, let the scientists do the worrying. but really, they knew it was a habit they could not break. they knew what was going on. they all worked together. it was amazing they could keep that conspiracy together for so long. it was amazing to think of the idea, do not just deny it. just keep doubt open. just keep it an open question. we are not really sure. it went on for decades. and all those psas and all those executives on television, denying the harms or keeping the doubt open. those are national news stories, and they wanted richard to see them, just like they wanted millions of americans to see them. and he did see them. that was their goal. they celebrated the success of this. they belittled and attacked the surgeon united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 general. and then the frank statement. you know about that. you knew they would go out of business if they would stop making it. they knew it was a brilliant and successful strategy that worked. on all the major fronts. litigation. it was always a holding strategy. doubt the health charge without denying it. it was set up as an industry shield and a front. it was never a legitimate scientific operation. the key word was confusion. doubt is our product. doubt is our product. the cigarette industry, doubt is our product. give those smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to keep smoking. why does it connect? why does lies, why does conspiracy, why does all that cause my client as a cause, as a contributing cause, along with any other causes, his human weaknesses in not trying harder to quit. which i do not know how these records could reveal anybody that did not try harder to quit than richard boatright. tormented smoker united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 for decades. and young. he did not have as much time as the average person, in his late 30s, early 40s. that is when a lot of people start really thinking seriously about quitting. he was already getting sick. you do not expect that. lies cost lives. that is what dr. proctor testified to, and that is why on those questions of did the conspiracy contribute to what happened to mr. boatright, the answer is yes. did the fraud and the concealment and the suppression contribute to what happened to mr. boatright? the answer is yes. and proctor said -- he blamed millions of deaths on this conspiracy. they kept cigarette sales going, they bought themselves a lot of time. imagine how many lives would have been saved if this had been stopped 20, 30 years ago, if they had come clean. if you come up with an antagonist in nicotine, we are going to put ourselves out of business. if we do that, we are in the process of digging our own grave. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 no problem digging the graves of 480,000 americans every year, but they anthropomorphize themselves, they are concerned about their health, they have a survival instinct, they do not want to dig their own grave. they avoid any subjects on study that relates human disease to smoke. what are they going to do if they get results with regard to the addiction of nicotine? they bury it. bury results. and he talked about not burying it. they are in the pharmaceutical industry. they knew this in the '70s, and they claimed we do not know, nobody knows, they did not know -- if they did not know, if executives did not know, if the tobacco institute did not know, and they kept putting this message out, how is my client supposed to know? if they had it over the surgeon general, what chance did my client have? he was a young kid. he smoked in the era of marlboro. he grew up in the culture they created. he grew up in the conspiracy. he was born in 1953, the year they had the conspiracy. they controlled the nicotine, they used united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 diammonium phosphate, they made additives to precisely control the nicotine, to freebase the molecule to make it so powerful. they could control it, optimum specificity. all these things that are designed. this is a highly sophisticated nicotine delivery disease. deliberating free nicotine. that is what made the sales take off in marlboro. it was the soul of marlboro was this ammoniation. made sales go up. they had many, many opportunities to come clean, tell the truth. take a different tact. get back on a moral compass, go the right way, and they did not. and when it comes to witnesses, you may say to yourself, how could a guy like that -- i was listening to dr. schroeder. maybe you were not believing him. maybe you were doubting him. maybe you were saying, this is so outrageous, it is so off topic. i do not know how it could be allowed to be said. it is because his honor gives you the power to -- these are the believability of witnesses, but down here you have a special united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 instruction, special power for witnesses. when it comes to a guy that wants to call himself an expert, you can consider what kind of credentials he has, and you can reject what he has to say. i submit to you, you should reject what he has to say. is that too much? but that is -- that is where it is. okay? you know, this is the record that shows he had immunosuppression that led to the colostomy. it is embarrassing. that is just the truth of it. these are the engle jury findings. fraud, conspiracy, negligence. i'm going to save a few minutes. i'm going to say thank you very much. i know i talk fast. i always tell myself i'll slow down. but i try to get a lot in. mr. reilly is going to have a chance to talk to you, and i ask you to give him the same kind of attention you have given me. i'll have about 15 minutes to address you on the back end to comment on what he had to say. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 thank you. mr. schlesinger: let me make sure this is working. is it working? let us take a look at this. may 22, 1992. allergic rhinitis and asthma, chronic bronchitis secondary to tobacco abuse. that is class membership in a nutshell from dr. tabb. see it? that is class membership from dr. tabb. nicoderm, all of this, all of these records, when he is constantly having bronchitis and asthma, they are always trying to get him to stop smoking. he is constantly taking smoking cessation aids. he is deeply addicted, according to mannino, who is unrebutted in that regard. there is no doubt. how about this. ooh, what about that? let us just make pretend for a second that instead of may 22, 1992, it said may 22, 1982. what do you think mr. reilly would do with that record if he had that chart to work with? do you think he would be supporting it and saying trampoline defense, he is out, he is before 1990. he is too soon. do you want to know what the importance of that record is? turn it around and ask yourself what would they be doing if they had that record and it said 1982. every single thing else in the case, exactly the same. what do you think they would be doing? because that is a critically important record. it is contemporaneous, and it should not be missed. now look at this. dr. waller tabb. he saw this man four different occasions. may 21st of '92. may 21. he talked about bronchitis, attacks asthma. he made the diagnosis, chronic bronchitis secondary to tobacco abuse. all by itself, that is class membership. secondary to tobacco addiction. that is class membership. but then he saw him in june. continue everything as is. those records are in there. you have not seen them. you will see them. then he saw him in august. continue everything as is. you will see them. but then he saw him in october. continue everything as is. chronic bronchitis, secondary to tobacco abuse was the ongoing situation all the way through. he did not rewrite on the chart. he did not rewrite his diagnosis. but the fact is, he did not change anything. he said continue everything as is. so this gentleman saw him for months and months and months. and then a year later, in may 25 of '93, he okayed six months for refills of atrovent, because that is what helped my client. a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease medicine, and that is what he used. so then the next one here -- now, let me show you this. super important. okay? this is the document in the record, the olden days of a medical record, the clinic, the watson clinic. you open it up, and you look in the record. and what do you see in the record? no one has seen this until right now. can we blow this up, keith? video technician: go ahead. mr. schlesinger: "keep in front of chart." the page in front of the chart said, may 22, '92, allergic rhinitis and asthma, and chronic bronchitis secondary to tobacco use. that record continued to exist in the chart in '92, '93, '94, '95, '96, '97, and '98. how do we know? it is reviewed down here as part of the chart as late as february 4, 1998. and even when there was an asthma exacerbation, which you heard about in the context of he is having asthma and he is having bronchitis, which all the records that he pointed to that they said asthma also have bronchitis. he carried a diagnosis on this critically important document that you have not seen until now of allergic rhinitis and asthma and in chronic bronchitis secondary to tobacco abuse from '92 all the way through till 1998. it was always there. it was never removed. it is always part of the chart. again, as late as '93, a year later, dr. tabb, who saw him four times, was still saying, i'm going to give you atrovent for copd. dr. catz saw him one time. one time. mr. reilly -- let me show you this. this was the first picture i showed you of my client. remember, first picture. i did it for a reason, because i wanted you to see what made up this man's family. you know, mr. reilly is an interesting cat, because he kind of subtly takes shots at my client. he does it nice. but he hit him with this alcohol business. you look through the medical records. mr. reilly: objection, your honor, to excuse me of taking shots is inappropriate. the court: he also called you a nice guy. overruled. mr. schlesinger: there are subtle ways to dig into the character of a man to try to prejudice you. sympathy and prejudice should not make up your decision. the point is this. the records are clear. there is a bunch of records in there. if you find them, you are better people than us, because we obviously did not find them all. but they are in the records, a lot of places. he has not drunk in a year. he does not drink. he is not a drinker. he is not a drinker. he was dancing and going to discos when they had the hustle. he was having a party and partying. that is what life is all about. we should be able to go out and have a party, and that does not mean we are disqualified for being worthy of the justification of a claim when our lungs have been ripped out from emphysema from chronic smoking and the powerful addiction. the point is, there is no evidence of this man being a drinker. he is not a drinker in this case. most of the records are very clear -- and what did he tell you? i was scared of heroin. they scared me. i never would have become a drug addict on nicotine if i knew what it was. that had the ring of truth. that was a spontaneous moment. had they, instead of being seductionists, lowering the threat level, promising you that everything is okay, go ahead, you are a cowboy, it would have been a different set of circumstances. what about this picture right here? we have the true family. 1989, birth of his daughter. he is a happy man. young guy. oh, these old hair with the blue and the hair from the '80s. but who is the important member of the family that we did not point out in the beginning of this case? who was the important member of the family? right there. right next to his lungs. right next to his chest. where it is going to be. a pack of marlboro reds. now that completes the family, and that is the family this man belonged to. he was an integral part of the family. there was a part of him in every step of the way. and it ended up costing him an amount that when you ask yourself, this is the price we pay for pleasure, for satisfaction, for the marketing terms that they like to use. those insipid and absurd things about drug addiction to try to say it is pleasure. okay? you know who takes pleasure? tobacco industry executives take pleasure. they take pleasure from making money. they enjoy making money. they get satisfaction from making money. but they do it on top of a mountain of graves that they disregard the human element. that is why these cases right here in bartow are so important. so this is a road to nowhere. these are the miles, okay, the marlboro miles that they collect. and where do they go? where do these miles take you? they take you nowhere. are they frequent flier miles? or are they frequent "dier" miles? what are these for? that cat stevens song has been going through my head this whole trial, miles from nowhere. where do these get you? they get you nowhere. they end up in the closets of the people that are dead, because by the time there is enough of them saved, the luggage -- you cannot go anywhere because you have got emphysema. it is a terrible thing, but it keeps people smoking, at all times. it is a road to nowhere. what do they say? "our medical and scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say." clearly implying that if not stating they lack credibility -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- credibility and integrity. the court: just a second. mr. reilly: putting an affront of this on the defense. mr. schlesinger: this is in evidence. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: thanks, judge. it is an internal document back during the time of the conspiracy. when dr. proctor explained one of the arms of the conspiracy was the importance of defending the cases: we intend to play hardball with the victims of cigarette smoking when they press their claims in the courtroom. this is the industry's ultimate public relations sham. and our position continues to mislead the public with a wink. okay? that right there is internal. they had a heavy motivation to not being exposed to some of the problems from litigation, and this is one of the ways they did it. our medical witnesses will say whatever we want them to say. okay? doubt is our product. we talked about that. the industry would have been in a deplorable position. that is how good this worked. the key word is confusion. they are giving addicted smokers, poor, pathetic drug addicts, a psychological crutch to keep smoking. they are telling you, here is a filter, and it is incapable of removing whatever constituents. and by the way, deliver a nice jolt of nicotine. what did the smoker of the filtered cigarettes do? he was born into the filtered smoking generation. he relied on them and he smoked them. you are getting just as much tar and nicotine as you would from a regular cigarette, but you abandoned the regular cigarette on the grounds of reduced risk to health. you lose your filtration. the surgeon general's reports say that these filters and lights were used as a tool by the tobacco institute to undermine prevention and cessation efforts. so dr. schroeder had said it is extremely important for there to be continuity of care. that was in taylor. it did not fit when he came into this courtroom, because nobody -- like catz, he did not have continuity of care. "you have to have multiple visits and continuity of care before one can distinguish between copd and asthma. that is extremely important." that worked up the street a couple days ago, but did not work in this courtroom when you are trying to elevate what catz had to say and think about it. catz, he was a little bit of an outlier. harman was an outlier. ultimately, every note that harman wrote, in subsequent notes dr. forman said, he is got copd from smoking. dr. forman was never thrown off course when he was getting letters from dr. harman at u of f. that is why you go for a second opinion. no big deal. you go for a second opinion. that is what they did. the court: five minutes. mr. schlesinger: yes, sir. thank you. so, this is mr. reilly's board. quite frankly, there is a lot of errors in it. let us talk about donna hernandez for a second, disgruntled ex-wife. for a moment, i thought we were making a little bit of peace. i almost thought they would maybe get together and hug it out, because she admitted there was some old wounds. she did not feel great about him. she talked about some things she might have told her ex-husband in his 20s. and i had that cute picture of them. but the point was, she thought she offered to take him to see the picture of john wayne, dead on the wall. he was not dead until '79, so that might have been a mistake. she said she thought she mentioned it. but she also said john wayne was dead. he was not dead in 1979. and she was talking about the mid-'70s. so that is a little bit of a mistake. mr. reilly said: oh, she said she wanted to take him down to the lab where she was cutting up some black lungs from lung cancer. but the fact is, when i asked her about that, she said that was years ago. i could not have taken him down to the lab. i had nothing to do with black lungs. so did she say to him smoking could make you sick -- and you heard she was a crusader. yeah. sure, she did. but what did she also say about richard? he did not absorb this. it did not register with him. of course not. he is not a drug addict. he is a cowboy. so here's what his note says, and there is a problem. it is not 26 times by 12 physicians in the '90s. these people are in the 2000s. keeler did not make a diagnosis of asthma. she made a diagnosis of epinephrine reaction and documented that he told them, "i have emphysema." where else could he have gotten that from, but a doctor? so -- and waller tabb, who saw him four times, was carrying the chronic bronchitis note all the way along. so when you start subtracting it from the '90s, you end up with a number that is like 12. every one of those people that said asthma, look how many saw him one time. randall, one time. keeler, one time. bavinger, one time. when they said asthma, they also said bronchitis. what did his expert say? you had to have multiple visits. and we hooked him with that. when he was on the witness stand, as soon as i asked him, he tried to dodge it, because he knew it was coming. they were trying to get ready for it, because they knew he had testified inconsistently up the road just a few minutes earlier. this was very important. i want to go over this with you for a minute. it is very sad, because doctors do not know this. doctors do not know this. take a look at this -- oh, by the way, when we get to punitive damages, it only takes the morning to put on a minor amount of information, and you guys would never shirk your duty. if we deserve punitive damages, you guys, i trust, will be here to hear the rest of the evidence, even if it takes another half a day. and you are not going to say, well, i would have given punies, but i want to get out of here, so i'm not going to give them. so we are not worried about that. but when you give punitive damages, when you punish for wrongful acts, here is what you are going to say. you are going to speak to them in the only language they understand, the language of dollars. their business plan is to make money, at the expense of human lives. and we are going to ask you to speak to them in the only language they understand. and what do they know here? they are encouraging all the time. they are sending him catalogs. he is responding on january 9th, when two days later, he is in the watkins clinic with tobacco addiction and tobacco dependence being treated. so he is buying jackets and all this other stuff as an addict, and the doctors are trying to treat him, and these guys are encouraging him all along the way. hey, keep on smoking. here are some jackets. here is a lunchbox that is got a cooler in it. yeah, this is a great cooler. you know what you can do with this cooler? when you have your lung transplant, you can transport your lungs to the operating room in this cooler. i mean, when you look at these things for what they are, when you see things for what they are, it is outrageous. okay? so every time within days of the database giving them -- keeping track of what he is up to, he is fighting his addiction. he is desperately fighting his addiction, and they are encouraging him to keep smoking all the way. here is three bucks off on a carton. here he is quitting, but he is noticing cravings. they are congratulating him on his tobacco efforts. three days later, he is getting coupons to take money off cartons. look at this. he is got the components of cigarette smoking fixed obstruction. forman's notes in order are brilliant. he is recognizing, look, i think this smoking has something to do with it. and then each subsequent note, he shows how much more he learns about it. you read those notes. you will see how well forman understood this case. then in his planner, he quits smoking. then he calls philip morris. do not contact me. do not mail. leave me alone. i'm trying to quit. does that happen? no, it does not happen. you know why? because philip morris knows this condition is merely conversion reversible. what does that mean? conversion, i've quit. reversible, we will get him back. we will get him back. he will relapse. the court: time's up. mr. schlesinger: may i finish this one piece, judge? one minute? in any event, it says right here, the bond clinic, he is got the tobacco abuse for 30 years with resulting emphysema, and it talks about his attempts to quit. and it keeps on going. he is telling them he does not want to see that anymore. they are calling him conversion reversible. he still has tobacco addiction. he is still part of their program. in any event, dow chemical, they blocked nicorette gum. they did not want people to learn to quit. this was the first product coming out on the market, and they boycotted dow chemical so they would not put nicotine gum out there. and mannino and the surgeon general's report all say chronic bronchitis and the other are all parts of emphysema. and this is also on the fraser trail: "we will be known by the tracks we leave," a seminole quote. i ran by that the past few weeks. that is an opportunity you have, and i will tell you i wish you really good luck in coming to a just result in this case. and there is only -- there is one thing i just want to read them, if the judge will just let me. one thing i saved here. i put it in the front, i bet. yes, i did. this is one thing i want to read you. i read this in every single case. this is about the book 1984. the movie was richard hurt -- john hurt and richard burton, and 1984, george orwell. he was about to torture him. he is got him on the table. leaning over and whispering. and he says to him, "and above all, we do not allow the dead to rise up against us. you must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, winston. "posterity will never hear of you. you will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. we shall turn you into a gas and pour you into the stratosphere. nothing will remain of you. not a name in a register. not a memory in a living brain. you will have been annihilated in the past, as well as in the future. you will never have existed." my client exists. your verdict will be known by the tracks we leave. it will make an important statement. it will have an effect of deterrence. i thank you so, so much for taking the time and being such a cohesive and good group. and i look forward to turning this case over to you now. it is all in your hands. thank you.