16 mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. good morning, everybody. jurors: good morning. mr. reilly: i want to start my closing argument where i began my opening statement, and that is by thanking you guys for your service. this is the beginning of our, what, fourth week together, but who is counting, right? it is a tremendous service that you do, no question about it. i have an hour and 20 minutes. so let me just be brief and say thank you very much on behalf of myself, philip morris, and frankly on behalf of everybody involved. okay. now, when i stood before you in my opening statement, i said that i was confident that what i was telling you in my opening statement was going to be the evidence would, in fact, be the evidence. and i told you that you would see -- you can see i've got -- i do not have a computer system that puts a hat on somebody's head. what i've got are some old-fashioned boards. but i told you in my opening statement that i believed what i was telling you then would be the evidence. i was confident enough about it that i expected to use many of the very same boards when i stood before you in my closing argument. that is exactly what i'm going to do. that same timeline i showed you in my opening statement, i'm going to show you that. i'm going to go through more quickly than i did in my opening statement. but i've added a few things to it. and remember the board i showed you of the wall of doctors' names. plaintiff's counsel indicated that this was so easy, it is falling off a log, no issue here about what mr. boatright had in the '90s, what was his disease. remember i showed you the board of a dozen doctors who all diagnosed mr. boatright with the very same lung problem. and what was it? and we went through -- during the course of this trial, we went through medical record after medical record after medical record in the '90s. and what was the disease? it was asthma. so i'm going to show you that same list, and i'm going to walk you through some of the medical records, not all of them. but -- i mean, that took us a long time. right? but i started with this board. that very same board. and i said, you know what? not the medical issue. not the issue of what did mr. boatright have, what disease was he manifesting in the '90s. but i said: what is the rest of this case going to be about? i said it was all going to be about, two words: control and responsibility. because i said in spite of what has been, my goodness, an hour and 15 minutes of closing argument. how much did you hear about mr. boatright in that hour and 15 minutes? and whose lawsuit is this? this is not a class action, ladies and gentlemen. it is not. this is a lawsuit brought by one smoker about one smoker's decisions. one smoker's smoking history. and who is that? it is mr. boatright. it always has been. so the question of control, who is in control of the decisions that mr. boatright made in the course of his life regarding his lifestyle? because as we talked about and as you saw in this jury room -- in this courtroom, we do not live our lives in a silo. we do not just smoke. we do not just drink alcohol. we do not -- we live in an environment. so who is in control of mr. boatright's lifestyle decisions regarding how he was going to live his life? who was in control of his decision to begin and continue smoking? did you even hear the story of him beginning smoking during his closing argument? who controlled his decisions to become a regular smoker? what information did mr. boatright have when he decided to smoke his first cigarette, his second cigarette, and all the rest of them, based on his own body and his own life? have you heard that in this closing argument? who controlled his decisions to use smoking as -- did you even hear why he smoked? did you hear what his pleasure from smoking was in this closing argument? and did anything that philip morris ever said or did, or for that matter liggett, have any substantial impact on mr. boatright's decisions regarding whether he began smoking or not? you would have had to have been reminded how he began to smoke to know the answer to that, right? you would have to know that. but you did not even hear it in his closing argument. and what else did i say? i said when you knew the answers to these questions about control, then you could address the question of responsibility. judge radabaugh has already read to you the acknowledgment on the part of the plaintiff. he knows that he was in control of his decisions about smoking, because he is acknowledged that he has responsibility for whether he did or he did not quit. it is in the instructions that the judge just read to you. the instructions that each one of you will have a copy of. each one. and then you will get to determine to what extent, if any, philip morris -- sure, philip morris made the cigarettes that he chose to smoke. he liked their brand better than any other one, and he said that. all right. and i said, well -- in my opening statement, i said in order for you guys to know the answer to these questions -- oh, you know what, i should back up a step and say i told you that those words "control" and "responsibility" would not be in the court's instructions. i was half right. "control" is not in the instructions, but "responsibility" is. it is in the instructions over and over and over again. and i said that judge radabaugh was going to read you pages of instructions filled with legal terms, and he has. and he was going to read you a verdict form, pages filled with legal terms. and he has. but they still all boil down to these two words really, with the exception of the class membership question. and that is the medical question. and i said -- you know, i spent the time in my opening statement to walk you through what was the personal history of mr. boatright? and that has not been done. and why not? because when you do walk through that personal history, then you know the answers to these two questions. so as i said, i want to spend the bulk of my time going through this closing argument just reviewing with you what that story was. and i want to go back to the '50s. you know, mr. schlesinger said, oh, this was big news about nicotine. i can take you all the way back. remember reader's digest? i put them in evidence. they are in evidence. there is reader's digests going all the way back to the '20s, talking about why do people smoke? for nicotine. was this some secret? there was no secret. if you want to, i've put in evidence the examples of reader's digest articles, examples of the newspaper articles that were occurring in the '50s, magazine articles occurring in the '50s, like this life magazine article, communicating to the american public the avalanche of information that was coming out, telling the american public about the medical advances that were occurring in the '50s, connecting smoking with lung cancer. you know -- and i'm not going to spend hardly any time on the '50s, because you know mr. boatright was born into a family of smokers. he was born january 1, 1953. his mom smoked, his dad smoked. they were not together very long. his mom took off. his stepmom shows up. what was it, 1955 or thereabouts. she smoked. his older brothers smoked. ultimately, his younger brother's going to smoke. the uncles that lived with him smoked. and you have heard from dr. proctor, their witness, when i cross-examined him, you know, you live in an environment like that, who influences you to either begin or not begin smoking? and he said these people around you, your environment. and you know that is true. and, in fact, who else contributes to that environment are your peers. and when we get to mr. boatright's first cigarette, we are going to see the influence of his peers. is he sitting there thinking about a marlboro ad with a middle-aged man riding a horse? or is he being influenced by his best friends? his best friends. all right. you know that they smoked. you know -- you know what? we showed you the news programs. of course he is a child. he is a baby here. but this is the atmosphere in which -- this is what is going on in the united states. you know that in 1957, when he was 5 years old, he had -- maybe it was not his first serious episode of asthma, but you know he had such a serious episode of asthma that he had a doctor come stay at his house overnight just to make sure he could breathe through the night. this is a story -- did you hear about asthma in that closing argument? did you hear the word "asthma" in that closing argument? no, you did not. but you know that mr. boatright had severe asthma throughout his life. and you know that he had restrictions put on him as a child, restrictions on what he could and could not do. the physical restrictions, because he had such severe asthma. and you know that by the time the '50s had ended, what is going on in the united states? there are 13 million americans who have quit smoking and millions more who did not start. why? because of all the information that is out about the health risks of smoking. by the time mr. boatright gets out of his childhood, he is been hospitalized twice for severe asthma. mr. boatright, at age 10 was tested for allergies. he was so allergic to everything, his allergies were very serious. very severe. you know that in 1964, the surgeon general's report came out. you know that mr. boatright -- you saw the coverage. you saw the news coverage. there is a cbs -- i'm not going to play it for you, but there is the cbs special news report. you know how harry reasoner ends it. he says: you know what? now it is up to you folks. filters are not going to save you, smoking causes lung cancer. now it is up to you to decide whether or not you are going to start smoking or continue to smoke or quit. that is what is going on in the american public. and there is no question about it. you saw the newscasts. and it was on every station. and mr. boatright, even though he was only 11 years old at the time, the media coverage was so vast and so powerful that mr. boatright said he remembered it. when he got on the stand, he acknowledged that he could actually remember that newscast. that news coverage. did that prevent mr. boatright from beginning smoking? no. you know that his stepmother who he said was physically -- would use physical punishment had said no smoking. you heard that his dad said that because of his asthma, he said my dad would have been very concerned about me being a smoker because of my asthma. that is his testimony. with that knowledge, knowing that if he gets caught by doris smoking, he is going to get physically punished, he still does what? when his buddies come over -- his two friends came over when he was -- how old was he? was he 12? was he 13? was he 14? in the answers to interrogatories, he said: the first time i began smoking marlboros was when i was 14 years old. i do not know what the real age is, but is it 12? is it 13? is it 14? the only variable there is, was the warning already on the packs? you know this warning was put on the packs as of january 1, 1966. did the warnings on the packs prevent mr. boatright when his friends came over and they had swiped cigarettes from their moms and dads, and they came over and said, hey, richard, come on with us, swipe a cigarette out of your stepmom's pack, let us go across the street. let us hide behind the shed and let us smoke a cigarette. you know that is how it happened. i asked mr. boatright: why did you go ahead and start smoking? he said: well, all the cool kids were smoking. he wanted to be one of the cool kids. he wanted to be with his friends. peer pressure. what makes people decide whether or not they are going to smoke or drink or whatever. peer pressure. it was just something to do. you were doing it to be a little rebellious, right? i think yeah, to a point, yeah. yeah, that is right. and you know that in 1967, mr. boatright -- first he is got the parents that he is living with. his dad and stepmom do not want him to smoke. then he goes to live with his natural mother in orlando for several months in 1967, and you know that he said, she told me not to smoke. and by the way, i also asked him -- i had to sort of drag this out of him. i do not know if you remember this or not. but i had to remind him from his deposition what he would said about his personal knowledge when he smoked that first cigarette because of his asthma, whether he did not know that that would be potentially bad for him because of his asthma. and here is what he said. i had him read the question at line 10. you knew there was a possibility that cigarette smoking could cause you to have an asthma attack from the time that you smoked your very first cigarette, right? and your answer was: whether it sank in or not, i just -- it is been too long ago to remember, while i would assume that cigarette smoking was bad for me. the question was: you knew enough to know that it might cause you to have a problem from that very first cigarette, whether you dwelled on it or not, you knew it? the answer was: yes. do you remember being asked those questions and giving those answers october 18, 2011? his answer was: yes. his answer was yes. but you did not hear a word about that in closing argument. why did he choose marlboros? here is what he said. in terms of the strength of the smoke, that is a matter of personal taste. and your answer was: for me, it was. and then you were asked: okay. so you liked them, meaning marlboros, better because, you liked the taste better. is that what you are telling me? answer: they are stronger also. that is what it says, and i did like marlboros. i did like the crush-proof box. all my brothers smoked marlboros too. why did mr. boatright choose marlboros? there you have it. that is his own testimony. again, i had to draw it out from his earlier testimony in deposition. his biological mother caught him smoking in orlando. she caught you smoking. she told you you should not be smoking because of health reasons and because you were too young, right? i believe that is what she said. yes. you hid your smoking from her, right? well, yes. so here he is got every adult responsible for his well-being telling him, do not smoke. now, mr. schlesinger and mr. hammer said, gosh, if we would just said that smoking causes illness he would never have begun smoking, he would never have smoked. but there you have people directly involved with him. this is not a class action. this is about one smoker and one smoker only. so now, how long did you stay with your mom there in orlando in 1967? not very long. she had forgotten or never even thought of -- we were not ozzie and harriet kids. she was trying to make us ozzie and harriet boys, and we just had our difference of opinions. now, that is mr. boatright describing himself at that age. and you know more about that story. so is there a serious contention here about what mr. boatright -- who was in control of mr. boatright's decisions about how he was going to live his life? and yes, he told you at age 15 or 16, he makes another decision for himself about how he is going to live his life. as i said, you do not live your life in a silo. he goes back to live with his parents, his dad and stepmother. his mom sends him home, back to savannah from orlando, because she really just cannot handle him. so he goes back to savannah, and now he starts drinking beer. i think he told us that he started racking balls in a pool hall for making money, and he drops out of school in the 10th grade. what is he doing? he is hanging out with his friends, and you know what happens. that takes us through the '60s. now, public service announcements. you saw them. i think, michael, do we have just the figure of bill talman? there is bill talman. 1300 of these running every year. mr. boatright said: i saw those. they did not have any effect on him. he still was going to smoke, and he did smoke. dr. proctor said: that is not so powerful as the ones today. ladies and gentlemen, that guy is standing right there telling you, i'm dying and i do not want to die. that is pretty powerful. let us go to the '70s. you know the story of mr. boatright joining the marines. you know the whole story, all right? that same year that he joins the marines, the warning changes on every pack of cigarettes. now it says: warning, the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. and you have an instruction from the judge that says, you know what? that is -- that is the warning that is necessary. you cannot criticize philip morris for not warning more than that. that is a reasonable warning. he goes to the marines. can mr. boatright quit smoking when he is sufficiently motivated to do so? sure. guess what? he goes to boot camp. now, he has not told them about his asthma, and does he have severe asthma? you know he does. but for the first two, two and a half weeks of boot camp, you cannot smoke. you are in marines boot camp. mr. boatright said: i did not get to smoke until -- the smoking lamp was lit sometime after the first two weeks for 20 minutes, time enough to smoke a cigarette, maybe two. could -- and mr. boatright said, hey, i did not smoke, of course not. because he was sufficiently motivated by the u.s. marine corps not to smoke, in boot camp, right? but as you know, he was discharged because of his asthma, and he went back to savannah, and he began to live that same lifestyle of hanging out with his buddies. then he is going to stay there until sometime in the late part of 1970. and this is really interesting. because i asked him, so -- he said he started dividing his time between his dad's house and his mom's house. his dad in savannah, his mom in orlando, right? and toward the ends of 1970, i said: you are living in orlando at the end of 1970? i think so. so you were staying at your mother's house, your natural mother's house in orlando dating donna. but remember in late 1970s, he starts to date donna grant, the lady that becomes the first mrs. boatright, right? he says: you were married in december of 1970, but you do not remember for how many months before that you had been living in orlando? i do not. once you started living in orlando with your mom and dating donna, did you just stay in orlando to date donna? yeah, i kind of grew apart from my best buddies, you know, ronny and daniel, the guys he had been hanging out with. i mean, i just kind of grew apart. well, what did he tell you -- he said: i saw joe cullman on "face the nation" on january 3, 1971 sitting at my dad's house with my stepmom, the hated stepmom, noon on sunday morning. well, he just got through telling you, i'm sorry, he was in orlando with his natural mother, dating donna. last time i looked, you cannot be two places at the same time. but he admitted that he found that clip of joe cullman on "face the nation" after this lawsuit started when he was cruising the internet, looking for stuff like that. mr. hammer: objection, judge, misstates the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. reilly: there is an instruction here about the credibility of witnesses, and you guys get to decide about the credibility of witnesses. he meets, dates, marries his first wife donna. 1971, no more marlboro ads on television or radio. 1972, that warning goes on every ad. 1972, he begins working for arthur murray dance studio, right? and now you heard about his lifestyle. it is dancing, it is partying, it is smoking, it is drinking. he said at this point the one element that had not been there in the time that he would been hanging out with his buddies was traveling. no more traveling. but you learned that he and the first donna boatright had an off and on again, off again and on again marriage. they get divorced once, they get divorced twice. they have a child and then he is gone. divorced his first wife in 1975. that is the same time that he gets a -- this is -- i almost let this one go by. he said: you saw the interview of joe cullman, the ceo of philip morris, on "face the nation." do you remember the date? no, i know it was '71. you went on the internet and searched and found that tv clip, did not you? that is how i found it. so there you go. it is in black and white. it is -- transcript. that is right out of the court reporter's transcript in this trial. mr. hammer: objection. he is left out part of that answer. the court: overruled. mr. reilly: so what you are saying is that you have a distinct memory of sitting down in the late morning with doris and the two of you watching "face the nation" on tv? i do not remember exactly where i was sitting, but i do remember it came on. those two stories, ladies and gentlemen, do not fit. now, 1975, he gets a call from his buddy don mann up in new york, up in buffalo. you moved up to new york because you had a friend up there by the name of don mann? yes, he was there. that is the reason you went to new york? that is correct. you went up there because he told you that there was a lot of people, a lot of parties, and a lot of what you described as blah, blah, blah. right? yeah. don was the coach, my teacher, and, yeah, he did say that. so now why did he go to buffalo? parties, people and blah, blah, blah, whatever that is. but you know what it is. it is parties, dancing, drinking, smoking, and now traveling. and you know that that is where he begins to -- when he meets donna conliffe, the pulmonary nurse who came here and testified under subpoena. she is a neonatal nurse now. you saw her. she went to arthur murray dance studio to get dance lessons, and he was there. he wanted to sell her dance lessons, then he ends up wanting to date her. and while they are dating, as a pulmonary nurse, what does she do? you remember. mr. boatright is -- this is 1975. he is what, 22, 23 years old. and she is very blunt with him. and she tells him: hey, look, you are an asthmatic. you are smoking. that is the worst thing you can possibly do for yourself. she works in the community hospital in the pulmonary ward. she is taking care of the patients who have lung cancer, emphysema, who are dying of smoking-related illnesses. and she says to him, i told him that is probably the worst thing in the world to do for asthma is to smoke. she had been in nursing school. she had a cadaver that she worked on. she said: i told him i had a human cadaver with black lungs that had been a smoker. i told him that. i said it is a coffin nail. you might as well just write yourself a death warrant. she offered to take him to the roswell park cancer center right there in buffalo, and she said: look, there is a wall of all the movie stars who have died from smoking-related illnesses. and i offered to take him down there and show him that wall to convince him that he really needed to stop smoking, because this was a death warrant for him if he continued to smoke. then i asked her: so what was his response? what did he tell you about what he wanted to do? and she said: he said nobody is going to tell me what to do. i'll stop if i want to stop. i do not want to stop. i like it. it relieves my stress. i'm fine. everybody in my family smokes. nothing is going to happen to me. quit griping to me. just arguing. now, that is the story you did not hear. well, of course, you did not hear it. all right. very, very bottom, the part i did not read. i said: did he ever tell you that he did not understand what you said? no. or that he disagreed or that he was uninformed? or he said, gosh, i do not understand you, this is not right. i've seen the guys on television or somewhere from philip morris or some cigarette company, and you are wrong, they are right. something like that? that never happened. let us go to the '80s. you know that he is with her -- they are married for a total of five years, but they are only together for, what, 15 months? by 1978, when their child is born, he is gone, right? last time she sees him is when their son is 10 days old. before that -- and what was his lifestyle? you saw it. partying, dancing, drinking, smoking; whole shooting match. but traveling, leaving the house a lot, coming back sometimes. she said one of the times that he came back, she made a condition for him coming back that he quit smoking. could he quit smoking when he was sufficiently motivated to do so? you heard her say: you know what? for the two weeks that he remained around, i never saw him smoke. never saw him smoke. but two and a half weeks later, he is gone. right? 1981. you heard the quote from dr. proctor. he said: by 1981, 95 percent of the americans are aware of the health risks of smoking and ninety percent realize their health could be affected. is mr. boatright in that crowd? of course he is. he is just had a registered nurse working in a pulmonary unit at a hospital as his wife. any question in your mind about it? 1982. he is going to move to miami. he moves to miami. he is working in arthur murray dance studio in miami. he meets, dates and marries nicki fraser. she too told him not to smoke. all right. now let me go back. you moved to miami in about what, the early '80s? yes, i believe so. and your lifestyle in miami was very similar to what it had been in the carolinas, when you were married to donna conliffe? because you remember, they moved from buffalo down to the carolinas. and she went to nursing school down in the carolinas. yes, i believe that was the lifestyle. we did a lot of dancing, a lot of practicing. we would go out and practice. yes, that was it. same lifestyle that we had. but now he is in miami. this is his testimony about her, nicki fraser, nicki boatright telling him about his health risks. and she talked to you about the health risks of smoking, did not she? in a passing conversation. we did not have a big, big conversation about it. but she probably mentioned it. i would not say she did not. that is a double negative. it means she did. what was your response to her? probably -- just probably ignored her. it is okay. but who is in control of your decisions? this is 1981, 1982. 1982. now, you know that in 1983, that nicki fraser, they had a child, cristal. nicki fraser is going to move back to miami. and mr. boatright is going to stay in orlando. there he is going to meet and date the fourth mrs. boatright, deborah. and you know that the lifestyle remains the same. this is what mrs. boatright said. what is his favorite drink? jim beam. same lifestyle. where do they go? dancing at nightclubs. that is okay. it is a lifestyle. but you have chosen your lifestyle. you chose your lifestyle. so in 1984, while at one of those nightclubs, what happens to mr. boatright? his asthma, which -- remember, donna conliffe had said: when i met him, he was using an inhaler. he had asthma when i met him. he is now going to have a serious asthma attack, so serious that he is got to go to the hospital. he is got to go to the hospital. asthma. and that is the same year that mr. boatright said, i saw that ceo of r.j. reynolds on nightline. remember that? he said: i saw that program. well, i put in evidence -- i realize it is a very fuzzy enlargement. i apologize for that. but it shows that nightline came on, and that program was nightline 11:30 on a thursday night, february 2, 1984. and, again, this is a question of did mr. boatright really see it then? did it really influence him then, or is this something he found on the internet after filing this lawsuit? because i asked him: what time did you get home when you were working at the arthur murray dance studio in orlando, florida? and he said -- here is his answer: uh, let me think. 1:00 would be the earliest. then he said: no, no, 12:30. okay. but nightline is over at midnight. over at midnight. so unless they are watching nightline while they are dancing, that was impossible. and i put this in evidence for you guys if you want to look at it. now, just to show you about environment as the precipitating factor for folks to smoke, you remember that he is now dating mrs. boatright, the fourth mrs. boatright, and she is a nonsmoker. when they begin dating, she is a nonsmoker, and this is what she testified. when you were growing up, your parents advised you, do not smoke, correct? yes. and they began advising you not to smoke before you were in high school? yes. and you never smoked in high school? no. never smoked after high school? no, not that i can remember, no. as a matter of fact, mr. boatright probably offered you his -- your first cigarette. now, how old is she? she is 23 years old. what was the reason why she took the cigarette? the environment. they are out at nightclubs. this is what she said. we are out in a nightclub. there is drinking, dancing. he offers me a cigarette. i took it. and she became a smoker. not as regular a smoker as mr. boatright, but she became a smoker. that is environment. that is peer pressure. does mr. boatright know -- if there were any question about mr. boatright knowing or not knowing that what he is doing comes with a health risk, i mean, at this juncture, is that even remotely possible? warnings changed on the packs in 1985. now they include a specific warning saying smoking causes lung cancer and emphysema. 1988, mrs. boatright becomes pregnant. public service announcements are continuing. i think we have just the image of yul brynner, another star who says, hey, you know what? i'm dying. i'm dead. that one actually said i'm dead. that one actually said, if you are seeing this now, i've died. mr. boatright sees the surgeon general's report, the news coverage of that, 1988. and at the same time, his wife says, i'm pregnant, i do not want you smoking around me anymore because of our as yet unborn baby. and what is he do? he is going to sign up for a smoking cessation class at st. joseph's hospital. he is going to take it, except it comes at the very same moment that their daughter danielle is born three weeks prematurely. does mr. boatright then sign up for that smoking cessation program after she is born? no. i said: so now let us take you to the time period where we left, and that is about 1989. danielle is born. you start trying to quit? correct. not because of health effects, but because debbie wanted you to -- actually, this is mr. hammer asking him questions. he said: that is correct. so is he now in 1989 quitting smoking because of the health effects out of a concern for his personal health? no. he is doing it because debbie wanted him to. that is correct. does mr. boatright want to quit smoking in 1989? that is his own lawyer asking him that question. and the answer was: no. and this, again, is mr. hammer asking mr. boatright these questions. throughout the '60s, did you ever think about quitting? no, i did not. all throughout the '70s, did you ever think about quitting? no, sir. the '80s, 1981. all the way through until around, say, '88 period of time when debbie gets pregnant. were you thinking about quitting? was it even a thought? no. this is his own lawyer asking him these questions. and after all of that, all that personal story of mr. boatright, is that really because he still had some question as to whether what he is doing comes with a health risk. or is it because mr. boatright genuinely enjoyed smoking. you know what he told his second wife donna conliffe? he said: it helps me relieve my stress. it is pleasurable. i enjoy it. now, he denied having a stressful job, but she said that is what he told her. helps me deal with my stress. 1990s. he is hospitalized for the first time that we know about in the medical records that we have for severe asthma. i'm going to go through the medical records briefly in just a minute when i get to the first question on the verdict form about what is going on medically. but the medical record shows that he is using the nicoderm patch by prescription. but is he really interested -- is he doing this for himself or is he doing this because someone else wants him to quit? well, what you know is -- what you know is that here in 1992, he told you that he went to dr. catz, and he maintained that dr. catz told him that he had emphysema, copd from smoking. i'll cover that in just a minute. but he said that was the eye opener for him. that is the first time he realized that smoking was dangerous. and what did he say to you? he said: i was angry. i felt deceived. i felt that i'd been misled by philip morris. and so what did he -- oh, and by the way, he said: up to that point, while i talked to dr. leibowitz in the late '80s and dr. tabb in 1992, and they would said to me, i ought to quit smoking. he said: right. and i asked him: and your point here was they were talking to you. but in your estimation, they were not counseling you. they were telling you to stop, but they were not counseling you. he said: well, yeah, but what i was trying to get across to the other attorney -- and that was mr. hammer -- was the -- mr. hammer: objection, judge, misstates the evidence. it was -- co-counsel was taking the deposition. the court: the jury will rely on their own memory. mr. reilly: well, yeah, what i was trying to get across to the other attorney was, a statement is something that says if you are talking to somebody that says, oh, richard, you are a little overweight. you should really cut back. you know, to me, that is a statement. but to counsel somebody, you try to sit down with them and explain to them, you know, the options. and that is what i was talking about with -- about counseling. a statement is one thing, counseling is another. that is from this trial transcript. so in 1993, '2, he says he has this epiphany with dr. catz. and now he is angry at philip morris for having deceived him. so what does he do, this angry man? this angry man sends in sweepstakes entry forms for philip morris saying, hey, i want to get stuff. i want to be in your sweepstakes. i want your logo'd stuff. you remember i said, gosh, you could have gotten that canvas bag at walmart or penney's or anywhere, right? and here he is, he wants the logo, fanny pack, jacket, carry bag. this is an angry, deceived man? this is a guy who did not know about the health risks of smoking? and that goes right on through to 2003. the records are in about the last time he signed up for something. he signed up -- telephoned in a sweepstakes request in 2003 just before he quit smoking. all right. by 1995, 50 million americans had quit smoking. throughout the '90s, mr. boatright had been seen at least 26 times by 12 different doctors. they all treat him for his long-standing asthma. they all advise him to stop smoking. we go to the 2000s. can mr. boatright quit smoking when he is sufficiently motivated to quit? yes, he can. because he does. the medical records are in evidence. we have separated in that little black binder the medical records that i think you will find to be the most interesting, not 45,000. just a few in there. and they include one that says that by the end of december 2001, mr. boatright is down to smoking two or three cigarettes a day. and as of january 1, i asked mr. boatright: did you make a new year's resolution to quit smoking? he said: yes, i did. and so in dr. forman's medical records, you will see that as of april 19th, he had quit smoking for three months. forman sees him again may 13. he is had one cigarette. by mid july, he would had a few cigarettes, up until two weeks ago. two weeks ago, he quit smoking again. and then you know the story of him quitting smoking on december 15, 2003. the rest of the story about how he quit smoking. he said what was different that day was that when he got out of the hospital, instead of stopping on the way home and getting a pack of cigarettes, as he would always done in the past, that day his nephew picked him up, and he said take me on home. he went on home, locked the door, went to bed. and while he was recuperating from his illness, he stays home, does not watch tv, apparently, does not see anybody smoking, does not put himself in proximity to somebody smoking, either on tv or in person. and at the end of that time frame, guess what? he never smoked again. and he never does smoke again. all right. just for finish this on out, you know about the rest of his care and treatment. you know about him going to shands hospital at the university of florida, looking for a lung transplant. they say no, your principal problem is asthma. he goes to the mayo clinic to get a second opinion. they accept him in their program. he gets a lung transplant in 2010 and 2012 again. all right. now, let me take you to -- i think i did that faster than in my opening. i think i did it -- oops, oops. calm down. all right. so let us look at the verdict form. this is the exact order in which it is going to occur. was richard boatright addicted to philip morris cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease that manifested on or before november 21, 1996? okay. really that is three questions at once. let me put some periods in here so it is easier to understand. containing nicotine. that is question 1. was he addicted to philip morris cigarettes containing nicotine? if so, was his addiction a legal cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd, that manifested -- so that is question number 2, that is question number 1. and here is question number 3 -- that manifested on or before november 21, 1996? if the answer to any of those three questions is no, then the answer to this question is no. and as the form says, if your answer to question 1 is no, please proceed no further than to sign and date the verdict form and return to the courtroom. here is the form i told you about in my opening statement. in the '90s, and all the way up, i think this is 2001 -- throughout the '90s, he sees these 12 doctors. and with the exception of dr. tabb for one visit in 1992, he is the first one to look at him. dr. tabb says: you know, you have got asthma. but he also says: i think you have chronic bronchitis caused by smoking. but no other doctor is going to come to that same diagnosis; nobody. and, in fact, dr. tabb sends mr. boatright to see dr. catz, the board-certified pulmonologist. he is an allergist, and he sends mr. boatright to see a pulmonologist. in the medical records that you are going to see, dr. -- michael, i think i'm going to need a little help. i think i got it. dr. tabb sends mr. boatright to dr. catz. dr. catz, in the medical records that we showed you during the course of this trial, saw dr. tabb's reference and said, no. and you will see it in the written -- i'm not going to take the time -- i do not have the time to take you all the way back through the medical records. dr. catz says, you know what? what he has is mild bronchitis. you guys all learned the difference between chronic bronchitis and acute bronchitis. the court: mr. reilly, you have used 50 minutes. mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. you know that in order to have chronic bronchitis -- and this came right out of the publication of dr. mannino signed off on it, their expert, you gotta have a cough with sputum for at least three months at least two years in a row. and you know that dr. catz did not diagnose him with chronic bronchitis, nor did any other one of these doctors. what did dr. catz say mr. boatright had? and i realize that mr. boatright once again has said something that is not in the records. he says that dr. catz told him that he had emphysema. he told him that he had copd. but fortunately, we do not have to rely on mr. boatright's memory, do we? because we have an actual letter. and it is in those records that was sent to mr. boatright on november 9, 1992, by dr. catz telling him exactly what dr. catz actually diagnosed him with. and what did he tell him? he said: you have asthma. that is the explanation for your lung problems. and you have allergic rhinitis. that is a runny nose because of your allergies. he does not say anything about chronic bronchitis, did not say anything about emphysema, or does he say you have copd. and he treats him for his asthma. again, i'm not going to take you through all the medical records, but every one of these doctors that are stated -- none of these doctors say he has copd, emphysema or chronic bronchitis. not one. and you were told that dr. tabb sees mr. boatright and diagnoses him three times in a row with chronic bronchitis? that is not right. he did it one time. he sees him two more times, but for completely different stuff. so i do not know why you were told that. now, yes, it is true there is an emergency room record in which mr. boatright apparently told somebody that he had asthma and emphysema. but here he is in january 11, 1995, personally filling out a new patient information sheet at the watson clinic. and he says, hey, i've got bronchitis, asthma, and he does not say he has emphysema. does not. do his doctors specifically say what he has? well, here is a great example of dr. estupinan. judge radabaugh had to tell me how to pronounce his name. i hope i got it right. september 7, 1996, he is ordering oxygen. what disease is he ordering it for? he is ordering it for chronic obstructive asthma. in fact, on one of the slides that plaintiff's counsel put up, he said in 1996 he had obstructive lung disease. he does. there it is right there. chronic obstructive asthma. because asthma can prevent you from being able to expel your air. what he does not check is emphysema/copd, chronic obstructive bronchitis. he specifically does not check any of those. why not? because mr. boatright does not have those diseases at this moment. copd does not manifest -- i have nothing against mr. schlesinger's shelties, but this is not a no landing zone. this is what the medical records show. when is the first time that anybody even hints at the possibility that there is something else going on? when is the first even possible manifestation of copd? well, here it is. this is dr. forman's pulmonary consult, march 6, 2001. and he says: severe obstructive airway disease clinically compatible with asthma; however, a possible component of cigarette smoking causing fixed airway obstruction. there it is. five years after the close of that class. this is not a trampoline no landing zone. this is the medical records in this case. and philip morris did not make them up. this is record after record after record, and they are all right there in that black binder. here is a little chart of all the dates. these are all the dates. look at all the dates that he is seeing a doctor. and many of these dates mr. boatright is being asked: what is your problem, what are you here for? and his answer is: asthma. many of those dates. that is what he reports he is there for. and you will see it in the records. asthma, asthma, asthma. yes, i did bring you dr. schroeder, a board-certified pulmonologist from california. and what he said was, you know, what really is helpful in this case to understand the timing of when he had copd, when it became manifest is to look at the physical evidence in the case. the pulmonary function test, look at the ct scans of the chest. look at the lung pictures. by the way, the lung pictures. did you notice that neither dr. mannino nor dr. illei were given the lung pictures? that you saw. and he said, look at the dance videos. because dr. schroeder said, and you know -- do we have just an image of the dance video? dr. schroeder said: if you have a severely -- this is december 2007. dr. schroeder said: if you have a severe -- somebody who is suffering from severe copd, from emphysema or chronic bronchitis, they will not appear on the dance floor like that, even if you tell me they walked off and got oxygen. six dances. he said asthmatics can do that. why? because asthma is like this. it is like that. some days you can do that, some days you cannot. you cannot at all. as a matter of fact, there is a medical record that says mr. boatright, in 2008, is still engaging in vigorous dancing activities. the ct scans. do you remember both dr. illei -- i hope i'm pronouncing his name right -- and dr. schroeder said, you know what? ct scans are exquisitely sensitive to the appearance of emphysema. and here are four ct scans, 2004, minimal paraseptal emphysematous change in the right lung apex, top of the lung. right lung. 2006. mild apical emphysematous changes seen bilaterally. 2008. ct scan of the chest, very minimal upper lobe emphysematous changes. 2009. not even a year before the surgery. mild emphysematous most pronounced in the apices. here is the surgeon general in 2014 helping you date the onset based on ct scans of emphysema. it says: visual analysis of the pattern extent of emphysema can identify small amounts of centrilobular emphysema usually in the upper lobes -- usually in the upper lobes. that is exactly where it was. and he said: small amounts in the upper lobes of persons who have minimal quantitative emphysema. this appears to be the earliest manifestations. my goodness, this is the very language out of the surgeon general's report. "earliest manifestations of lung structural change associated with copd." and there it is, that is exactly what the ct scans are telling you in 2004, '06, '08, and '09. that is completely consistent with dr. forman saying in 2001, five years after the close of the class, this is the first time there is even a suspicion, and then i only brought out one lung picture. but then dr. schroeder showed you right here the very same thing that the ct scans were showing, and that is very minimal upper lobe emphysema. minimal, mild, mild, right there. and you know what? neither dr. mannino nor dr. illei showed you those lungs, because they never even saw them. why did not they see them? dr. mannino. here is his testimony. i said: yeah, you have seen all the medical records you have and no doctor indicates that they ever told mr. boatright he had emphysema throughout the '90s, right? correct. that is their dr. mannino. here he is again. none of them, aside from dr. tabb on the very first visit that he had, ever said to mr. boatright that mr. boatright had emphysema, chronic bronchitis or copd, did they? dr. mannino, who said he looked at all the medical records said: i do not know. and i said: you say that if this is so plain, that if none of them made that diagnosis, they all missed it, did not they? if, in fact, none of them made that diagnosis, then yeah, they missed what i think should have been an obvious diagnosis. twelve doctors. they are all wrong. but the difference between them and dr. mannino is, guess what? they all actually saw doctor -- they all actually saw mr. boatright. they all listened to his chest. this is dr. alvarez. they said that dr. alvarez correlated all of this, and that they did not do a lung transplant because of asthma. well, here's the question that was posed. i said: am i correct that because it was not of primary concern -- i did not ask this. this was on video. am i correct that because it was not a primary concern, your group never really came to a final determination as to what, if any, of the conditions predominated? no, we thought he had an asthmatic component, and we thought he had copd as well. okay. so you thought he had both? yes, the best i can remember, yes. did dr. alvarez treat mr. boatright? did he examine him in the '90s? no, he does not see him until he goes to the mayo clinic in the mid 2000s. twelve treating physicians and dr. schroeder said he had asthma. eleven of them agreed with dr. schroeder. that is what he is got, is just asthma. no chronic bronchitis, no copd, no emphysema. throughout the '90s. and here is where we got real confusion. dr. illei, their pathologist, said that he thought it was predominantly emphysema with minimal chronic bronchitis. and dr. mannino said, no, no, he is got chronic bronchitis. what? and this was dr. schroeder's testimony. mr. boatright had end-stage obstructive lung disease that in my opinion was primarily due to asthma with fixed airflow obstruction. he did have copd from smoking from 2000 on. proven by the fact that in 2004, when he had his cat scan, you saw emphysema. and that is absolutely consistent with dr. forman, the record i showed you from dr. forman. so what is the question -- what is the answer to this question right here? did he have copd, chronic bronchitis or emphysema that manifested on or before november 21, 1996? the answer is no. so you do not have to worry about the rest of this question. because all of those things have to exist in order for the answer to be yes. but that is why this got like five minutes' coverage in closing argument by the plaintiff. because that is what -- that is how complex -- that is what the medical records show in this case. and they are in evidence. if for some reason all those records are wrong, unanimously you guys say no, no, no, that is wrong, then you do have to answer the other two questions. you know what? you do not get an instruction from judge radabaugh as to how you determine whether somebody is addicted. yes, there are lots of instances where there is a reference to him being dependent and that sort of thing. but the question does not end there. they have to show that his addiction was the legal cause of his copd. for the last time, i'll do that. here is a big old instruction telling you what you have to figure out in order to determine whether or not addiction was a legal cause of his copd. this was not even mentioned to you. and you cannot skip over it. you have got to determine it, if you get this far. the evidence does not, frankly, warrant that. but if you do, you have got to make a determination that addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing his copd. so that it can be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd would not have occurred. well, you have already been shown testimony that was elicited by plaintiff's counsel that indicated that mr. boatright had absolutely no interest in quitting smoking until what, as late as 1988, 1989? so had they satisfied you that his copd was substantially produced by addiction but for addiction that he would not have gotten copd. and if the answer to that question is no, either one of these, if either one of those is no, then the answer is no. your work is done. and you sign and date the verdict form and return to the courtroom. if for some reason you guys unanimously decide that is all wrong, i've got to go through the rest of the verdict form, i'll do it pretty quickly. please state whether philip morris's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of richard boatright's copd. i have not even seen this. the concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available or the failure to disclose a material fact concerning or proving health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes is a legal cause of copd if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to produce copd so that it can reasonably be said that but for -- looks like it should have been a period there -- but for the concealment, the copd would not have occurred. what does that require? that requires that they prove to you that he would not have gotten copd if philip morris -- he was waiting -- basically that says he was waiting to hear something from philip morris. and if he would only heard something from philip morris, he would have changed direction, changed his mind and not smoked or he would have quit sooner than he did. was there any evidence in that whole story that i just walked you through, was there any of that really and truly? are you convinced of that? and they have to show that plaintiffs relied -- or plaintiff's reliance on defendants' concealment or omission of material information to be a legal cause. you have to unanimously find that he reasonably relied on statements by philip morris that omitted material information. well, in light of that personal story, is there any chance of that? and in order for there to be -- in order for that to be a legal cause, this is a little diagram that i use to sort of give you a sense of the requirement of legal cause. whatever they are complaining about, was there really a direct connection between mr. boatright and the decisions that he made? did he see it? did he hear it? they showed you "death in the west." but, mrs. boatright -- you know the cowboy movie where the cowboys are supposed to be sick and all that. but i asked mrs. boatright: you never saw that? no. your husband never saw that? no. so why show it? i mean, this is mr. boatright's case, right? not only has there got to be a direct connection, but as i said, there has to be a substantial impact. and then it can be a legal cause. the court: mr. reilly, you have used 70 minutes. mr. reilly: that means i have about 10 left to give counsel her 10. all right. let me hurry on through here. all right. same applies to this concealment question. the answer to these questions are no, frankly, both for philip morris and liggett. the same instruction applies. i will not take the time to go through it again, because it is the same thing, basically. and then that would bring you, if you get this far -- and again, i think the evidence has indicated otherwise, but if you get this far, you have to assign percentages of responsibility, legal cause for mr. boatright's copd. i think it was mr. hammer who said, oh, goodness, mr. boatright deserves ten percent, 5 to ten percent, if you get this far. in light of this personal story? this is not a class action. in light of this personal story, if you got this far, what percentage of responsibility would you assign to mr. boatright? i leave that to you guys. i do not think you will get here, but if you did. what is the total amount of damages? if you get this far, you have to address damages. what is the total amount of mr. boatright's damages for lost earnings in the past, loss of earnings in the future, past medical expense, future medical expense? the only person that came and talked about that subject was the guy named padron, right? do you remember him? he was the cpa. he did not have any numbers that he created. he just was bringing numbers down to present day value. right? he relied entirely on a report by a guy named mr. morris who did not come here and explain a thing. but what you did learn was that in reaching a conclusion about his future medical expenses, mr. morris did not talk to anybody involved in giving care and treatment to mr. boatright. who did he talk to? he talked to their expert, dr. mannino. why would not you talk to the people that are actually giving him care? and when he was calculating his past lost wages, future lost pages, he made an adding and dividing by two mistake that i caught? if you saw my math skills, you would laugh. funnier than the hat on dr. -- what is his cookie's head -- schroeder's head. i mean, they make a $100,000 mistake. he did not consider the effect of medicare, did not base his numbers on the pay that mr. boatright actually earned. there is a schedule in there of what mr. boatright actually earned. and yes, mr. hammer did ask mr. boatright: hey, did you make $39,000 a year? and mr. boatright said: yes, i did. but you can see his actual earnings. they are in evidence in that report from that guy, mr. morris. so where did he get these numbers? frankly, i think the answer to this one is they have a burden of proof here, and i think they wholly failed to satisfy their burden of proof. wholly. and you heard about the lakeland ballroom. mrs. boatright said they are not doing business in lakeland, and they -- here is their face page. here is their lakeland jacksonville ballroom website. it says, lakeland ballroom has been teaching lakeland and polk county to dance since '93. they are now teaching and expanding into the jacksonville area. read more. here is the question where it says, what is the total amount of damages for pain and suffering? i leave that to your sound discretion if you get here. that is true for -- obviously they would like to receive millions and millions of dollars if you get here. again, i leave that to your sound discretion, if you got here. the same for mrs. boatright. same situation. and that brings us to the final question on this verdict form, and that is: under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted. you did get the definition of clear and convincing. in light of the lack of connection between philip morris and mr. boatright, other than he liked their ads and he liked their cigarettes the best. remember, i just showed you that board a little while ago that said he liked the taste, he liked the strength? and, yeah, they said he switched to marlboro lights, but for what, a week? that is what his wife said, or maybe two. and during that same period of time, he smoked a bunch of other cigarette brands. this has to be something that relates to mr. boatright. mr. boatright. who came in and testified about that? who came in and complained about philip morris and his conduct? well, it was dr. proctor. it was dr. proctor. you remember dr. proctor. he is the guy that said, oh, you ought to make cigarettes -- the fda is not doing anything. the national institutes of health, not doing anything. national cancer institute, not doing anything. they ought to do what i say, should be done. remember that? they ought to make cigarettes that have .1 milligrams of nicotine in the rod and make it so that the ph of smoke is 8. and i do not know why they are spending all that time, energy and money figuring out how cigarettes need to be advertised, made, et cetera. and he acknowledged that philip morris actually asked for this legislation to be passed going all the way back to 2000. wrote a letter to president obama, said please pass this. and the fda, national institutes of health, national cancer institute are funding $275 million worth of research to figure out how cigarettes ought to be advertised, manufactured, et cetera. dr. proctor said, that is completely unnecessary. just do as i say. he was critical of having financed nobel laureates for their medical research, looking at the genetic basis for things like cancer. not everything that philip morris ever did -- i told you in the very beginning, i would not stand up here and support everything they ever did, and i will not. right -- with dr. proctor. i said, you know, that dow deal was just bad, bad. they should never have said to dow, do not do that. but you know what? did that have anything to do with mr. boatright? absolutely not. did mr. boatright get nicorette gum whenever he wanted it? yeah. and if you look at the medical records, he did not want it. but that is exactly -- and why does dr. proctor get $2.2 million? why is he testifying here and there and everywhere? $50,000 a week? because he comes in and says stuff like that. that is a no-brainer. that is a no-brainer. all right. i think the answer -- the evidence shows that the answer on this entitlement to punitive damages -- and by the way, this money goes where? it goes to the boatrights, right? that is it. what is the answer to this question? no and no. and then you will work, if you even got that far -- i think the first question is where this whole thing ends. but if you disagree and you have to work your way all the way through this, then that is where you end up. if you answer no to these questions, then no, there is not a tomorrow. there is not a second phase. you do not come back. your work is done. if you answer yes, though, to these -- to this question, then yes, you do come back, there is more work, there is no evidence. there is no instructions. there is more of everything. but does not the evidence in this case, in light of this case, not some class actions, just this case, is not that where this all ends up? now, i have to sit down. ann st. peter is going to get up and address you on behalf of liggett. but then mr. schlesinger is going to get back up. he is got another 15 minutes, and he gets to go again. now, i do not know what cute images he is going to have, but he gets to go again because he has the burden of proof. he has to persuade you that -- and he said, you know, the scales of justice, he does not just have to tip them a little. he is got to bring a bigger mountain of evidence than i just showed you on these issues. not just a scintilla of evidence. he is got to bring a bigger mountain of evidence than i just showed you. mr. hammer: objection, judge, that is not the standard. the court: sustained. mr. reilly: maybe it is not a mountain. he showed a mountain. i said a mountain. he has to bring a greater weight of evidence than i did, whether it is a mountain or a molehill. he is got to have greater weight of the evidence than i showed you, except on this last issue, which is he is got to do it with precise evidence. all right. so all i would say is, please, just ask yourselves, what has this got to do with mr. boatright's case. that is all. i greatly appreciate your attention. you have been great. thank you. ms. st. peter-griffith: may it please the court, counsel, mr. and mrs. boatright. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon. jurors: good afternoon. ms. st. peter-griffith: thank you, again, for your service. i'm ann st. peter-griffith, and it is my privilege to be representing liggett group, llc, in this matter. to begin with, i need to stress with you there is only one tort count that you will consider against my client. and that is the conspiracy count. mr. reilly has done an excellent job detailing the evidence for you and giving you a roadmap to checking "no" as to each question on the jury verdict form as to both defendants, and we agree. before i talk about my client, what i would like to do is take you back to one of the very first witnesses, danielle boatright smiddy. mr. hammer showed you some of her testimony. what i would like for you to do is remember the very last question that i asked her on cross-examination. she gave testimony in a deposition. and i had to take her back to that testimony until she finally admitted that she testified earlier that her father only told her that asthma was the condition that he had. and what is that testimony consistent with? medical record after medical record after medical record that mr. reilly has gone through with you in this case. switching gears a little bit to my client. plaintiffs and dr. proctor would have you believe that all of the tobacco companies since 1953 have been conspiring, working as co-conspirators who worked in concert to hide the ball from mr. boatright and the public. dr. proctor, however, had to admit certain facts concerning my client. he did so in cross-examination. liggett publicly acknowledged the health effects of smoking and that smoking was addictive. in fact, liggett put on its packaging the warning "smoking is addictive." my client did not attend the plaza hotel meeting. it did not hire hill & knowlton. it did not participate in or publish the frank statement. it never belonged to an organization named tirc. liggett only belonged to the organization known as ctr, or council for tobacco research, for a little under four years in the mid-1960s, and then it dissociated itself. as dr. proctor admits, liggett's total contribution to the tobacco institute was 0.3 percent of all industry contributions, 0.3 percent. now, ladies and gentlemen, what i have before you here is liggett's evidence. madam clerk has kindly put blue tabs on it, so it is easily identifiable. you are going to take this back with you. you are not going to take the big screen back with you. you are going to take this evidence back with you. in the 1950s and '60s, liggett undertook an extensive multi-year research regarding the relationship between smoking and health risks. as dr. proctor admitted, that investment was more than the rest of the industry combined. that is not to say philip morris and the other companies did not do research. they did. the first document i'll show you. it is a big one. you will be glad to know i'm not going to ask you to read all 700-plus pages. this was the compilation of liggett's research that was handed over in 1963 to the number one public health authority, the surgeon general, for assistance in the surgeon general's report. now, you will remember the 1964 surgeon general's report. you heard about that. it was a very, very big deal. it was very, very public. and it led to cautions and warnings on cigarette packaging. i would just like to highlight a few points of what is in evidence in this document. in volume 1. liggett's researchers concluded there was a gross statistical association that existed between smoking, cancer, and death. the entire volume 3 is dedicated to the carcinogenic or cancer-causing links to harmful components in cigarette smoke. and, finally, just as another example. appendix 8 of volume 3 includes a chapter regarding habituation and addiction. my client gave all of this to the surgeon general in 1963, before mr. boatright ever started smoking. and liggett published critical portions of this report. and by the way, there is nothing in the arthur d. little l&m perspective document that my client did not disclose in this research. just briefly, the other tabs, we have also put into evidence documents that established that liggett's research was not a secret to the public health community. as early as 1954, liggett's researchers were meeting with the american cancer society. in liggett's exhibit 6965, the u.s. department of agriculture's top tobacco researcher praised liggett for ten years of productive collaboration. and, finally, exhibit 219, the surgeon general expressed the surgeon general's special gratitude for the tremendous time, effort, and expense expended in the production of liggett's research for the surgeon general. now, ladies and gentlemen, for all the millions of documents that dr. proctor told you he had access to, dr. proctor did not tell you about these documents. plaintiffs did not tell you about these documents. what is that expression that paul harvey used to have? now you know the rest of the story. my client was not hiding the ball. and plaintiffs certainly have not made any showing that liggett's conduct was a but-for cause of mr. boatright's claims, the injuries that he claims. nor has plaintiff shown by clear and convincing evidence. you heard that is a pretty high standard -- that my client engaged in any intentional conduct that would warrant punitive damages entitlement. and the same is true for philip morris. before i conclude, i would just like to say that we understand that serious illness can be difficult for an individual and his family. it is understandable to empathize, to a degree. however, when we began this process, as jurors you took an oath, and under that oath you promised to follow the evidence and base your decision only upon the evidence. as judge radabaugh will tell you, you should not be influenced by bias, sympathy, prejudice, or public opinion. you saw mr. boatright on the stand. he made his own decisions. and we ask that you render a verdict in favor of liggett and philip morris. on behalf of my client, myself, philip morris, the entire defense team and everyone who has been here with you for the past three weeks, thank you again for your time, for your patience, for the careful attention that you have paid to the evidence, and for your service on this jury. thank you.