mr. smith: may it please the court, counsel. ladies and gentlemen, i want to start off by 3248 echoing on behalf of mrs. bowden -- in fact, on behalf of everyone, our gratitude for which you have agreed to do and which you have done so diligently. i've been doing this an awfully long time, and i do not know that i have ever seen a jury as attentive as you have throughout this process. some of you have been note-taking a lot. some of you have been watching a lot, but all of you have been engaged in this, and on behalf of everybody i want to thank you for that. i also need to start off by apologizing to the court reporter in advance, because at some point i'll invariably go to fast. i think the most important thing you need to know this morning is our work is about done, your work is about to begin. my purpose in my final argument this morning will be in large part trying to address immediately you to the issues and the questions that you are going to be asked, because you are going to have a verdict form. it will be shown to you later by the court, and given to you for your use. that verdict form has the questions that need to be asked, and i thought what maybe the easiest way for me to proceed this morning is just to start with the questions. i want to back up to something you learned in 3249 opening, and you heard throughout the case, and that this case is one in which it derived from a much larger case, a case that we all now know is engle, something you may have never heard of before you got here, and may never forget when you leave here, but the engle case really frames much of what we will be doing today. the first question that is asked of you, and the one i would like to kind of address immediately is class membership. because if we accomplish class membership on behalf of mr. bowden finding he was one of the persons for whom engle was decided and, therefore, entitled to class membership, then the case becomes much more clear and the track to your solutions becomes much more evident. i'd like to start off with the first question, and that is the question of class membership. this is the question you will be asked initially: was mr. bowden addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. i want to make sure you understand that class membership is not about fault. there may be places that -- you will hear there are places in which fault may be apportioned. class membership is a yes or no; it is, 3250 does he meet the requirements, and you have seen those requirements in front of you. that is the first question. you notice that you will get an instruction, and this will be it on what a legal cause is. smoking because of addiction is a legal cause of death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the death so that it can be reasonably said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, smoking because of addiction need not be the only cause. it may be a legal cause, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some other cause, if the negligence contributes substantially to producing the death. what that means is that, as the court will instruct you of this, what that means is that it does not have to be the sole cause. it has to -- it can be a concurrent cause. it can be a cause that occurs at the same time, or in conjunction with other things. so, for instance, and we will talk about this in a few moments. if you found that there was some -- mr. reilly: your honor, i have to -- this is in 3251 error, the bottom of it. i hate to interrupt you, i apologize. but the bottom of it says if the negligence contributes. that is not right. mr. smith: it is on the form. that is exactly -- the court: well, that is. mr. reilly: i apologize, though, but i think your your honor will understand that is not right. the court: gentlemen, approach side bar, please. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. reilly: i apologize. negligence has nothing to do with the question. mr. smith: i checked it this morning. the court: i apologize. mr. smith: it says what it says. mr. miller: there is a mistake in the jury instruction, and we looked at it ten times. mr. smith: i looked at it; that is an odd instruction. the court: which number are you referring to? mr. miller: instruction number 10, page 11. the court: turn it this way. mr. miller: if the negligence. i think it should be the addiction. take out the "negligence" and put in 212-279-9424 veritext reporting company www.veritext.com "contributes". that is was mr. michael's suggestion, and plaintiff agrees. the court: just put it contributes? mr. miller: yes. the court: all right. mr. miller: very sorry. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, yesterday and the day before yesterday the attorneys and myself conferred extensively over the instructions on the law and when i give them to you at the close of the case you will see they are quite lengthy because there is a number of issues that are required to be covered, and quite a bit of evidence to be covered, too. so a mistake was made. it was missed by all, all the attorneys and the court. so mr. reilly has noted it, and it has been corrected. we are now back on final argument. mr. smith you may proceed. mr. reilly: i apologize, your honor. mr. smith: when i read it, i was thinking the same thing, so let me reread the last sentence together. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, smoking because of addiction need not be the only cause. 3253 it may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some other cause, if it contributes substantially to producing the death. now, that is the instruction, and that is the first question that you will be asked today. and as i already told you, the legal cause definition says the following: in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, smoking because of addiction need not be the only cause. that is clear. it may be a legal cause of death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some other cause, if it contributes substantially to producing the death. contributes substantially, we submit, means did the smoking because of addiction play an important role? but for the smoking because of addiction, and this is -- i think the way the question should be considered by yourselves: if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked one and a half to two packs per day of cigarettes every day for 54 years and developed lung cancer and die from it? as a beginning point, let us talk about what the weight of the evidence needs to be on this issue. it is simply, if you recall all the way back from the opening 3254 statements -- even actually voir dire when you were selected, it is just the greater weight of the evidence, the more pervasive weight. it is which way it tilts. so the two questions for our starting point this morning we should deal with are the question of addiction and the question of the cause of his death. this is the sequence that we believe that you will find, and we believe has been proven to be the sequence by which we apply what happened in this case to the facts in this case. he was addicted to nicotine, it caused him to smoke, which resulted in his lung cancer, which resulted in his death. that is the sequence that we will explain to you this morning. now we know, and i think we need to back up for a moment, that r.j. reynolds knew that nicotine was the substantial, important chemical that kept addicted smokers smoking. you see in 1963, you see in 1972, and again in 1972, and you have seen all these and many more. these are just selections of what many have you have seen over several days. moreover, nicotine is addicted. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. or, for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire, therefore, in designing any cigarette 3255 product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent -- and i submit to you potent means powerful drug, with a variety of physiologic effects. our industry is based upon the design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. philip morris knew that nicotine was a substantial and important chemical that kept addicted smokers smoking. in 1959, and this was long before there was any question about using a classical definition. this is the terms they used in their business years before 1988. this would be some almost 30 years before 1988 when the surgeon general made his final determination. why does one smoke? addiction. in 1969, the primary motivation for smoking is to obtain the pharmacologic, that is, the drug effect of nicotine. and how important was it? no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. the cigarette should be conceived not as a product, but as a package. the product is nicotine. that is what this industry knew, and these defendants said long before the surgeon general ever made his findings. r.j. reynolds and philip morris knew that nicotine 3256 was the substantial, important chemical that kept addicted smokers in smoking, but there were some people who did not know, and we know this from a 1959 document from brown & williamson, which is an r.j. reynolds company. mr. avera: that should be 1979. i'm sorry, mr. smith. that should be 1979. mr. smith: 1979. very few consumers -- this is 1979. very few consumers are aware of the effect of nicotine. it has been suggested, and it will be suggested and argued everybody knew. but the people who were the experts in the field of nicotine, the people whose business was the sale of the product nicotine, they knew, and this acknowledges as late as 1979 that the consumers -- that very few of the consumers are aware of the effects, its addictive nature, and that nicotine is poison. we know what the surgeon general of the united states has said about the matter. what he has said is in 1988, the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs, such as heroin and cocaine. that is what the surgeon general found now almost 30 years ago. 3257 i think as a starting point we have to recognize, and i'll go back to dr. hurt for a moment, which we will talk about a great deal later, but dr. hurt made it clear in his testimony that addiction is a disease of the brain. it is not a free choice. but if you choose to say well, i want more proof of that, let us ask what others have said who have looked at the issue over the years. in 1967, the federal trade commission in its report which is part of the evidence you received, there is no indication in the advertisement that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him, but becomes a matter of need. let us talk about what the surgeon general said about it in 1989. these two factors refute that smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted. and finally, let us look in 1980 to see what the tobacco industry knew. one of the co-conspirators in that industry, the tobacco institute, says the following. well, first of all, they quote robert dupont from the -- who had been with the national institute of drug addiction saying cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the 3258 people who ever smoke. but then at the end, remember the line? you have the document you have seen it. our attorneys tell us that we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. that is what the tobacco institute internally knew, and they were saying it eight years before the surgeon general made his finding regarding the addictiveness of nicotine. now, i gave you, and this is important to recall, that there is going to be no definition of addiction spelled out within your instructions. the addiction will be what you determine it to be. it is a combination of the testimony, the documentary evidence as the court has explained to you, and, frankly, it will be your common sense and experience that all of you bring to this court, and none of you are ever asked to abandon. addiction is defined by the national institute of drug abuse as following: addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. the mayo institute, one of the preeminent programs in the world, that you actually -- i think yesterday they presented you another reader's digest article, and 3259 in the reader's digest article they quote the mayo clinic as one of the preeminent places -- hospitals in america, and all of you through your own common experience know that. nicotine dependence is also called tobacco dependence, is an addiction to tobacco products caused by the drug nicotine. nicotine dependence means you cannot stop using the substance, even though it is causing you harm. now, let us talk about the evidence that we have before us in this case as to mr. bowden's addiction to nicotine. we know from the testimony of barbara dampier that he started smoking at approximately 15 years old. now, how do we know that? because if you recall mrs. dampier said, who is now 80 years old, mrs. dampier says i was about six years old when he went into the service. he was nine years older than me. it is in the testimony. that would mean he was 15. when he went into the service he was already smoking. when he went into the service he was already smoking. in fact, mrs. dampier later, and we will talk about that, defined him as a chain smoker back in the 1940s. we know that when he went into the marines was in 1942. we know that she says he had been smoking about a 3260 year before that. he went in the marines at 16, which means that at age 15 he would have been smoking. we also know, and then you can use this to support your opinion, that from the statistical evidence that was given us from that cohort -- you remember the cohort data from dr. burns, that the median age for people to start smoking was 16.7 years, much later in the 1940s. and the cohort for the 1940s was somewhere around 16 years old. so at 15 or 16 years old, we know that he was smoking. we know from the evidence both from dr. hurt and dr. burns, the younger you start, the more likely you will become addicted. ninety percent of addicted smokers started before they were 18 years old. we know he smoked one and a half, two packs a day for 54 years. we know that because if you do the math, he smoked until the last year of his life, 1994, and he started smoking in 1941 or '42. we know that he smoked lucky strikes and pall mall in the beginning. how do we know that? that is from yvonne tillman, bonnie tillman, a younger sister. she recalls that in 1946 when he came back from the war, she recalls that he was smoking lucky strikes. she also says she remembered lucky strikes. he was the only one smoking luckys in that household. she also remembers, 3261 but i know i had seen him smoking pall mall before. it does not matter in the larger sense, because r.j. reynolds is responsible for both pall mall and lucky strike. it does not matter in the bigger picture of things. and we know that he was smoking camel unfilters. and how do we know that? because in 1953 when he met mrs. bowden, he was smoking two packs a day of lucky strikes and camel. i want you to remember that, it is important, because later i will remind you that the two most advertised brands, or the two most successful brands on the marked in the early 1950s, according to the bates study, which we already have and the testimony you received, the bates study being 50 years looking back from 1953, the two most popular brands, the most advertised brands? lucky strikes and camels, unfiltered. we know that he switched to winston and -- he switched to a filtered cigarette. the two primary filters he smoked were winston and then marlboro. well, how do we know that? well, we have the statements by mrs. bowden, but more importantly is ted bowden, the son, the oldest son. ted left home in approximately 1970, '71. he came back in '70, i think, for the summer, then he was gone 3262 from the home in 1971. he would have been 20 years old at the time, because he was born in 1951. he says he only remembers his father smoking unfiltered cigarettes. he only remembers two brands, and he mostly remembers at the time he was there he was smoking marlboros. he does remember that there was a time he was smoking winstons. others have said that he smoked winstons first, then marlboros. why is that significant? well, because the two most important filtered cigarettes, the two largest in the market, the two most advertised, and the two most successful brands of all times of filtered cigarettes were first winston, which dominated the market in the 1950s into the early, mid 1960s, and then the marlboro cigarettes which by 1970 became the most popular filtered cigarette in the world. and you heard that not just from our experts, but you also heard that from the marlboro advertisement, internal advertisement promotion that you saw a few days ago. we know that he smoked mostly marlboros for the remainder of his life until very late, maybe in the late 1980s, maybe in the early 1990s, at which time he switched to smoking still marlboros and still winstons and still camels, but he was smoking the light variety, 3263 although it is true that he also during that time, according to the witnesses, was looking for the best deal. he was going to lights, and he said the reason, he told us in the presence of his grandson, to his daughter, and to his wife, he said that he went to them because it was better for him. either he had seen an article or an advertisement. we know, of course, that he did what the market was doing at the time, and that was switching to the light cigarette. his daughter explained that it seemed to her that while he seemed like he was smoking as much or more than ever, it seemed that he was trying to take a step towards quitting by using the light cigarette. we know that if he smoked at the rate we have determined from the consensus of witnesses, he smoked between -- he had between 360 and 480 hits of nicotine to the brain each day. we know for many years he slept with an ashtray beside the bed. we know that throughout his life he woke up in the middle of the night, as testified to by his wife and would go outside to smoke. we know that he smoked as soon as he woke up in the morning. 3264 now, i want you to remember this, because it becomes important in a few moments. he not only smoked first thing in the morning, what we know is his wife said the first thing he did was he went outside and lit up a cigarette. but his grandson, who lived with him in -- really served as his father for much of his early years as his grandson's life, chris marvin, if you recall, mr. marvin says, he would wake me up to get me ready for school. when he woke me up i could already smell he had a cigarette. he would take me in where he fixed my breakfast, and as i ate breakfast he would go outside to smoke another cigarette. he smoked the first thing in the morning and he smoked heavily in the morning. we know that he tried to stop several times cold turkey. we know that he even smoked late in his -- when he was facing health challenges, carotid artery, heart attack. we know he tried a patch. we know he smoked while he was on the patch. we know from the testimony of dr. hurt that is not uncommon, because people -- there are people who have such a need who have worn patches that are actually inadequate for their nicotine needs and, therefore, they end up smoking while on the patch. we know that the reason he smoked lights, they were better. we know that he had time after time, he 3265 discussed with his family over the years from ted forward, his desire to quit smoking cigarettes. and we know that he smoked continuously despite harmful consequences, meaning that after he knew he had health problems, he still could not stop smoking. and we know that he was so addicted to cigarettes, that in the -- if he ran out of cigarettes, he has been observed by various family members at different points in time going out among ashtrays and digging for butts so that he could get another hit of nicotine until he could get a cigarette. and finally, we know that in his last days he smoked right up until he could no longer smoke a cigarette anymore. and when he laid in the hospital bed in the middle of the house, we know that the motion he made, that people observed him doing it, was a repetition of his smoking experience, the most common experience of his entire life. now, we brought you an expert on addiction. i want to go through, because i think it is critically important, the highlights of the qualifications of dr. hurt. dr. hurt was the co-founder, and is the director of the nicotine dependence center at the mayo clinic. it is among the largest in the world. he is board 3266 certified in addiction medicine. the nicotine dependence center has treated more than 50,000 patients since he has served as its director. it trains physicians, and he trains health professionals, including ph.d. and post-doctoral students in ways to detect and treat nicotine addiction. he is an international lecturer in the areas of the tobacco industry and nicotine addiction. he is published in peer-reviewed articles more than 166 research findings. 140 of his articles dealt directly with nicotine addiction and the history of tobacco. we know that he has been asked to serve, and has served as a reviewer on the surgeon general's reports. he has testified before the united states senate on the initiation of youth smoking. he reviewed -- he was selected to review the confidential tobacco documents for the state of minnesota in a ground-breaking tobacco case. and we also know that he does not get paid to testify in cases because the mayo clinic, and he explained this to you, has a very special way. their doctors make their salary whatever they are doing. and maybe that explains why, but in the last 25 years this is only the third time he has chosen to testify in a case involving allegations against tobacco companies. 3267 i want to go over his opinions with you, because those opinions are to be given the weight that you believe that they should based on his experience, education, background, training, and your common sense. he said that it was his opinion that mr. bowden was not only addicted, but that he was heavily addicted to the nicotine contained in cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds and philip morris. he said that it was his determination from reading all the depositions that he smoked for approximately 54 years at the rate of one to two packs per day. in pack years, you do the math. it is somewhere between 54 pack years and 108 pack years. it does not really matter in one sense, and why is that? because dr. burns tells you that once you have gone beyond 30 pack years, you are already in very treacherous territory in terms of the risk that you have for developing the most common cigarette-related disease, which is lung cancer. we know -- it was his opinion that he smoked -- he talked to you about something called the fagerstrom test, which the fagerstrom test is a test used at the mayo clinic. it is a multifactorial unit based on an interview. he said, i actually use that as a tool just as i use other things as a tool. but the thing i look 3268 mostly at is what is called a heaviness of smoking index within that. the heaviness of smoking is a subsection of the fagerstrom test, and he says, my experience tells me for addiction -- for when we are going to treat someone for addiction, the answer to two questions matters most: how quickly does he smoke in the morning. if he smokes first thing in the morning we know he is fulfilling a nicotine need that has built over the night. number two is: how much has he smoked. this man smoked for more than 50 years at a rate greater than a pack a day. both of those put him in the heavily addicted category. he was asked about the dsm-iv-tr, which you will hear more about later, but he says we use it, it is a tool. we use it as it is warranted. it is one measurement used. we do not typically use it, and i did not use it here because some of the questions require that an interview to take place. and if you remember, some of the questions conceded by their expert could not be answered unless you actually interview the person, because you have to know what their expectations were when they began to smoke. if you do not know what their expectations were when they began to smoke, i mean, how soon did they 3269 think there going to stop; well, you cannot do that in a case of a person deceased for approaching 20 years and began to smoke before world war ii. so he said, i used the standard way i would do it if i were doing it in the clinic that i operate. he said that the things he looked to, he continued to smoke. another one he said was very serious, and he gave you some examples: how, when someone is facing a serious health-related issue and they continue to smoke, that is an indication of how addicted they are. he even told you about people who continue to smoke even when they are on transplant lists. in dr. hurt's testimony, he explained to you that this man, mr. bowden, after carotid artery surgery, and a heart attack, while on the patch, still continued to smoke. and according to his family members, smoked until he could no longer physically engage in the act. we know that he tried unsuccessfully to quite many times. we know that from the testimony of family members. we know that he tried -- he would say he was going to quit, and then what else would he tell them? he would finally tell his only children: do not pick them up because if you do you cannot put them down. and in his own way, using his common sense, he several times said i cannot quit because i'm addicted. 3270 and that was a message he gave to his grandchildren and children because i cannot quit because i'm addicted. we know that it interfered with aspects of his life. his wife, mrs. bowden at some point said we are not going to smoke in the house anymore, and he agreed. and he did, as wise of all husbands as she said, and he continued to smoke outside, so much so that when he would watch football games, he would smoke on the outside while the tv was through the sliding glass door or window on the inside. when guests would come over to the house, including his daughter-in-law and her husband gary cook, they would spend most of their time on the outside. why? accommodating his smoke. when he would go visit his children in atlanta, his grandchildren and son in atlanta and north carolina, every hour they had to pull over to have a cigarette. and when they got there, he smoked in the garage because he was not allowed to smoke in the house around his grandchildren. we know that he -- we know that he, even going on a short trip as silver springs, i think it was silver springs and disney world, he would pull off at the rest stops and he would have to take a smoke because she did not want him to, and he honored her request that he not 3271 smoke in the car when she was in the car. those were dr. hurt's opinions. he was not just addicted, he was heavily addicted. now, they brought a dr. kaplan, dr. eric kaplan. and for a moment i think, because you will see in a moment why i stress this, so please do not take it as he -- i do not have any personal attack on anyone whatever, but i want this to be noted in weighing out the experts. dr. kaplan is not board certified in addiction medicine. he is not a member of the florida medical association or the american medical association. he is never performed research related to any aspect of tobacco or nicotine addiction. he is never published one article related to tobacco or nicotine addiction. he currently does not have hospital privileges anywhere. he is never been a reviewer for the surgeon general. he is never asked to be a reviewer for a peer-reviewed journal. he is never taught any classes anywhere, or lectured on nicotine addiction or tobacco abuse. his testimony was that he has a one-man practice, and by one-man practice, if you remember the billing exchange that took place, he means one man, it is just him, in lutz, florida. and his practice involves not more than 1 percent involving patients who are seeking help for nicotine addiction. 3272 and if you reverse that, what it means is 99 percent of the people he sees, he sees for things other than nicotine addiction. he is never been involved with an institution where the focus was on nicotine addiction. he is never testified in any proceedings prior to his having met mr. reilly on an airplane, at which time he determined -- they determined they would meet again and he would be interviewed by other attorneys for the tobacco industry, at which time he is now provided testimony in some 15 or 16, even more, engle cases alone. he is made over $1.1 million as a result of actually meeting mr. reilly and being accepted as an expert with the credentials we have just outlined. and what were his opinions? well, there were several that are interesting. first of all, he does not find that the american psychiatric association's position -- he does not find their position authoritative. he does not find the american cancer society's position authoritative. he does not find the position of the surgeon general of the united states authoritative. the reason why? at least as to the surgeon general, they disagreed, and they have disagreed since 1988. 3273 he does not find addiction to be a cause of any disease. he does not find addiction to be a cause of any disease, unless the person suffers from cognitive deficiencies. in other words, unless the person has a mental cognitive deficiency, he believes addiction does not ever cause disease, despite the findings of the surgeon general and others. he does not -- he used the dsm-iv criteria despite the fact that, of course, some of it he admits required an interview. and he assumed -- even when assuming mr. bowden met the criteria for lung cancer -- for addiction, excuse me. even when he assumed, when he was asked by his counsel, i want you to assume he was addicted, did the addiction cause his lung cancer? no. based on the testimony of dr. kaplan, be sure of this: there may be cases where he is found addiction at different times, i think is what he said, but he is never found that addiction causes disease. based on the position of dr. kaplan, unless you have a cognitive deficiency, unless you have a mental disorder, you would never be a class member under the engle decision. now, you have -- you are going to be instructed on this, but this is what an expert -- how you should judge an expert's testimony. 3274 first of all, you can accept it, you can reject it, or you can take it in part. you may accept such opinion, reject it, or give it weight -- the weight you think it deserves, considering the knowledge, the skill, the experience, the training, or the education of a witness, the reasons given by the witness for the opinion expressed, and all the other evidence in the case. dr. kaplan tells you that nicotine is not a powerful drug. the surgeon general holds to the contrary since 1988. but the interesting thing is he must not have read the internal documents of the tobacco industry, because they have held for years that it is a potent pharmacologic agent, and we will see that in a moment. using that scale, tipping it this way, the question i submit to you is this: in looking for an expert, would you go to the mayo clinic, find a person who ran the program, who had been published nationally and had received international awards for the history of his work, or would you go to lutz, florida, and find a person who treats 1 percent of his patients for addiction? where would you look in a genuine effort to find expertise? there are a few things on addiction and disease in 3275 this case that you learned that i think are important. long-term heavy smoking causes -- long-term heavy smoking of cigarettes causes lung cancer and death. 7,000 chemical compounds and 69 carcinogens identified within cigarettes. 15 to twenty percent of all smokers get lung cancer and die. ninety percent of all lung cancers or greater are caused by smoker. 50 to 60 of all long-term smokers die of a smoking-related disease. and 450,000 americans die each year from a smoking-related disease. we had dr. burns. dr. burns was here, and i will not spend much time because i do not think anybody would ever assail the credentials of dr. burns'. for a moment, dr. burns' credentials are that he has spent his entire life in nicotine, literally since he went to work for the cdc, the centers for disease control, the national clearinghouse for smoking and health, and as a young doctor began to author the 1975 surgeon general's report. dr. burns publishing, researching, reviewing, he is done it all. dr. burns said, without hesitation, the cause of mr. bowden's death was squamous cell carcinoma caused by cigarette smoke. in fact, you recall there was a slide show. he went through in great detail with you the actual process over time, how it takes a dose response: the more 3276 smoke, the more damage. the more damage over time -- for some people it is a different rate, and for some people the rate does not occur, but for those that it does, ultimately it results. the carcinogen attacks and the process takes place. and as the carcinogens attack, lung cancer is caused and then spreads and results. and he tells you that actually in this case the kind of lung cancer of squamous cell lung cancer, in the location, was he had very little prospect from the moment he was diagnosed, which as we know he died four months later. he was asked about: what about family? there is a lot of family members. he said well, one problem with a lot of family members who have had illness from cancer is that everybody in the family smoked, and they smoked a lot. but if i set that aside for a moment and i look at it, i want you to understand -- and he tried to -- he said just follow me. it is a vulnerability. the carcinogen has to come from somewhere. some people may have a vulnerability. if you remember, he actually gave the malaria analogy, and he said ultimately some people got malaria and some people did not, but when we got rid of the source, nobody got it. 3277 that is the same thing going on here. and he said -- he told you 90 to 95 percent of squamous cell lung cancers caused by smoking, less than 2 percent is identified to have a genetic component. dr. wolfe, the treating physician, dr. wolfe says yes, there were two possible causes, but this is very clearly what he said. he says: can you tell us, independent of mr. bowden's risk factors, what the cause was with a reasonable degree of medical certainty for his lung disease. from the information presented today, the patient had two distinct risk factors that are both real, the family history of tobacco abuse. just statistically, the tobacco abuse is known to cause squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. that is all the information i have. that being cigarette smoking? based on the fact 95 percent of squamous cell carcinomas of the lungs are caused by tobacco smoke, does that lead you to the opinion his lung cancer was caused by cigarettes? based on that information, yes. he looked at them both. he is the treating physician. he said, i'll acknowledge it looks like there is a family issue here, but the cause of this man's squamous cell carcinoma was cigarette smoking. 3278 not another doctor, not a pulmonologist, not an oncologist, not another doctor has come into this courtroom that said dr. burns or dr. wolfe are wrong in their opinion. it is unrebutted that he died from cigarette smoking. and once we have determined that he smoked cigarettes and it was caused by his addiction, we are a long way toward answering the first question. remember, nicotine is the most important chemical that keeps the tobacco companies profitable. if you remember dr. teague saying, many, but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so, meaning most are not. most are not able to do so, and that is not from somebody we brought in here. that is from a person who worked his life in the tobacco industry for r.j. reynolds. nicotine is important, and how do we know it? because philip morris said without the chemical compound nicotine -- without chemical compound, referring to nicotine, the cigarette market would collapse. philip morris would collapse, and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. and r.j. reynolds said we cannot be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using, if they could. what is to say if the exit gate 3279 for our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. and folks, that is all this was ever about. so, what do we have? mr. bowden was addicted. he was addicted according to your common sense. he was addicted according to our expert testimony. he was addicted to cigarettes for 50-plus years. he could not stop despite his efforts, and he died of lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking. so the answer to class membership is yes. that being the case, once you find class membership, there are some instructions which i told you all the way back to opening statement dictate much of where we are. you will be told the following: that the engle decision that the florida supreme court as held, and this judge will instruct you that you must find: cigarettes cause lung cancer, cigarettes are addictive. philip morris and r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. philip morris and r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes 3280 or both. philip morris and r.j. reynolds agreed with other companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes, or their addictive nature, or both, with the intention that the smokers and the public would rely on the information to their detriment, and philip morris and r.j. reynolds were negligent. so, from that we will know the following: first, you are going to be asked on the verdict form if he is a class member, you will be asked were they negligent? you are instructed they were. you are going to be asked did they -- are they strict -- did they put a defective product on the market? you have an instruction, they did. additionally, i want to talk a little bit about, just for a few moments about the conspiracy. you heard about it. it started in 1953. they signed the frank statement right after the meeting. they agreed and they continued throughout, and we will go through it quickly, that they will continue to mislead the public, that they would create a false controversy, that they would create doubt where none existed, and they would reassure the public constantly by saying if we ever find anything we will take it out. from the beginning, we know that the scientific 3281 directors when they were first faced with a problem, they said it is fortunate for us cigarettes is a habit they cannot break. that is not something we said, that is somebody tobacco said in 1953. boy would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. you do not need a cancer-free cigarette unless the one you are now producing causes cancer. they knew what was going on. there was no doubt of confusion internally that cigarettes caused cancer. you see the documents right here, but i think the one you focus on is the bates statement. this was the trip, you remember, the tobacco individuals came over, they met with the american tobacco company, they met with the tirc, they met with philip morris. and on the way back they wrote a memo, and they said: the individuals with whom we met with believed that smoking causes lung cancer. that was in 1958. philip morris and r.j. reynolds and i'm not going to go through all these documents again with you, but you remember these people you see below, and you remember the statements above, but i think the most important one for a moment is this: doubt is our product. 1969, philip morris. 3282 doubt is our product, since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public. it is also the means of establishing a controversy. all they wanted to do was to give the -- as dr. burns said, they wanted to talk to the addicted smoker and make sure they knew it was okay, we will keep researching, you keep smoking. they never found the answer because they knew the answer, they just found the questions, because the motive all along was keep them smoking and keep selling those billions and billions of cigarettes. philip morris and r.j. reynolds committed two major frauds in this. one, it saved the market the first time. 1953, the market was going like this (indicating). they were on their way out. the scientific results from all around the world, including the mice painting, were hitting the market and it was going like this (indicating). they said a month later, if we find anything we will take it out. then the filter began. marlboro went from being a little female, or woman's cigarette, and all of a sudden it was a powerful/powerful cigarette aimed at a filtered market. winston became the number one cigarette replacing 3283 camel? why? because it had a filter. the filter never worked, but the public always thought i'm smoking safer. why? it is a filter, a filter. what do we do with a filter? it filters out something, that is what they believe. now, we know in 1958 congress said that is not what is happening. they are actually getting more tar and nicotine. the filter does not work, but they already knew that. in 1966 they talked about a new cigarette, and they said look, the illusion of filtration is just as important as the fact of filtration. it was the illusion that was important to them in marketing their product. they committed a massive fraud against the public with the use of low tar and low nicotine cigarettes, the so-called light cigarette solution. you heard from dr. burns. he believed it. you heard from the surgeon generals, they believed it. and then they saw the internal documents from the company in 1999, and they realized wait a minute, the way we have been testing these on calibrated machines is inaccurate. that is not how smoking -- smokers actually behave. and they found it from the documents, some of them 20 years old from the tobacco industry. the light cigarette was 3284 a fraud. but people, including people today, thought hey, it is light. that must mean something. it is filtered, that must mean something. yeah, it did. it kept selling cigarettes, and kept the growth of cigarettes in america until the 1980 when they were on a decline in 1953, but for the fraud of filtration, but for the fraud of the light cigarette, but they say if we had any thought or knowledge that in any way we were selling a product harmful to our consumers, we would stop business tomorrow. 1958, they knew it formed cancer. did not stop, did they? in fact, let us play this, a little montage we put together over how many times or how many years they promised they would take care of it if there was a problem. (video played:) "so far we have found none that give us any cause for concern. if we do find any we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette." mr. smith: 1955. "well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there 3285 are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them, and if they are found they will be removed." mr. smith: 1964. "we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as and if, any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human life, we have confident we can eliminate that ingredient." mr. smith: 1972. "do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe? i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe." "take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, the house testimony heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the records shows that many of the countries most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims." "and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking." "cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? 3286 it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. all right, sir. it has not been causally established. cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? despite all the research to date, there last been no causal link established." "okay. the jury has not come in. it may not be harmful. you are not convinced? it may be or it may not be, we do not know." yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven." (video concluded.) mr. smith: 1994. april of the year mr. bowden died. that is the fraud and conspiracy, and they made it work beautifully. and then there was this that nobody knew about. they were manipulating the nicotine in a contest to raise the ph so they could make the product get to the brain faster. why? because that gave it more of a kick, and they all were after more of a kick. the youth market liked the kick. adults and addicted smokers felt the kick. 3287 these are the documents that were presented to you. i'm not going to read them all, but you know what they say. they say ultimately they were in a contest to find the free based element, so that that would be the most rapid delivery system of the cigarette and enhance the kick. and according to the tobacco industry's rival, be it brown & williamson and rjr company, the sole of marlboro which took over the market in the 1970s, the sole of marlboro is controlled ammonia processing of tobacco. it was not just they had nicotine in cigarettes, they found out a way to jazz them up, and that is what they did and nobody knew. concealment is at the heart of this case. to understand concealment, you got to know it is an intentional tort. that means it is something where you have to have a frame of mind. the frame of mind that we have in this case is real simple. there is three documents i presented to you, all three of which dealt with the issue. one says if we get results back with nicotine similar to those gotten with morphine and caffeine, we will want to bury it. another says, back to the general counsel. we do not see or foresee any difficulty to remove certain reports from research files once it becomes clear such action is necessary for the successful defense of our 3288 present and future suits. and finally, handwritten from t.s. osdene, a high-ranking official with the company. what is he say in film writing? ship all documents to cologne. keep in cologne. okay to phone and telex (these will be destroyed). and then down there before you see notes, important papers, we will destroy them. that is concealment. that is the state of mind of concealment, and that is the state of mind of these companies, and they keep the controversy alive. and you know what? we will talk about it more later, but they also in the evidence -- it is interesting. they came back, and not one time did they attack the documentation we provided about youth smoking. they targeted teenagers because they knew the following. they knew if you do not get them before they are 18, there is only a 5 percent chance you will ever get them. and they went after 14-, 15-, 16-, 17-, and, in fact, one document, 12-year-olds, and that was their replacement document. now, it should have said something to us. why did they need to have a replacement market? well, they had to have a replacement market because they were losing 3 to 400,000 smokers every year. 3289 and they advertised to them, they appealed to them, and they said, you know, people say advertising is not effective. well, this is what the ftc said: cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. 1967. so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising, and they did not. and what happened to the advertising? you know, they presented a number of very -- i think talman, he was perry mason all the time. that is a moving statement. yul brynner's death, that is a moving statement. what did tobacco do? they went off television after those came out. why? they would rather be off television than have the fairness doctrine which allowed one out of every four messages to be about public safety and the harm of smoking. and they chose to take their 250 billion, quarter of a trillion dollar investment that they made in promoting and advertising their product, and they took it off the tv and they put it on race cars and they put it on tennis courts, and they kept that smoking number. (video played:) 3290 "what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered that question. tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked, 'what cigarette do you smoke?'" "luckys tastes better. lucky, fresher and smoother. lucky strike." (video concluded.) you remember all those? i just wanted to remind you what it was like. i still love the bogart thing. you have four more questions that you are going to be asked to answer, and i'm going to put those up now. i want to remind you of this evidence that we had, and one other item. you will be asked about reliance. reliance can be inferred, and in this case we know that mr. bowden was not immune to the forces that shaped his time. we know that he smoked camels and luckys when it was the most popular. we know he went to filters when that was the thing to do. we know he moved to lights. we know that he was just like his generation of smokers. this is what the company said when they were telling people it was not injurious, they intended the public to rely on the statements. i want to remind you 3291 of this one: (video played.) "throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position, but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health. is that accurate? through my tenure? yes. yes, that is so. that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? yes. it is a statement the american tobacco placed great reliance on? we issued that statement, yes. certainly we wanted them to believe that statement. as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? yes." (video concluded.) that ought to be all we need to know about reliance, and we know that in 1994 they stood before congress and they swore under oath that nicotine was not addictive. you have four other questions to answer. i want 3292 to go to those questions now. question number 2, i told you before: state whether mr. bowden's smoking of each defendant's cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. well, if you found he is part of the class, which clearly he should be, then you have already received instructions from the judge, his honor, you will receive that they were negligent and they were -- they put a defective product, so as to the smoking of their -- since the product was defective, that is a finding, and they were negligent, that is a finding, we submit that is an easy question to answer. next, please. state for each defendant whether the concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a legal cause of mr. bowden's lung cancer and death. guys, it is very simple. they would not tell a lie for 50 years, maintain it under oath and spend a quarter of a trillion dollars supporting it if they did not know the lie would change people's minds. if they had told the truth about manipulation of nicotine, if they told the truth about light cigarettes or filters being a failure, if they had stood up once 3293 and said the surgeon general is right, it would have changed, and everybody knows that. and finally: state for each defendant whether the agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. bowden's lung cancer and death. remember with all of these, it does not have to be the only cause. they will argue enjoyment, they will say choice. those things may be a factor, but if it was a substantial cause, meaning it was not insubstantial, that the information they held back, the agreement that they used from 1953 throughout his life, to hide and conceal what they were doing, how they were doing it, it made a difference, and the answer to all these ought to be yes. at this point you get a break from me. i want to turn this over to my partner, mr. avera, and the good news for you is he speaks a lot slower. the court: mr. avera? mr. avera: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. it is been a couple weeks; a long time. sixty-one years ago a handsome young man asked a beautiful young girl to marry him, start a family 3294 together, and live the rest of their lives together. their time when they got married in december of 1953 was an american culture of cigarettes, a culture created by the cigarette industry. you could not turn sideways or upside down and avoid seeing a cigarette ad. they appeared sexy or popular or cool, and they were everywhere. athletes pitched them, movie stars made them look alluring and sexy. junior bowden and gloria bowden grew up during the depression and the second world ii. you may remember tom brokaw wrote a book, and he called them the greatest american generation. their home was one that was rich in love and closest to family. like so many blue collar families of that era, junior was in charge of working hard, an honest day's work for an honest day's wage. mrs. bowden kept the home, and both of them provided unlimited love to their two boys and two girls. they did everything together. they were joined at the hip. and although most folks from that generation were not very public in their displays of affection, we know now how wonderful their relationship must have been based on how their children speak of them. most certainly, some of gloria's love for junior had to come from his decision to adopt his stepson, ted bowden, and treat him as his own son for his entire 3295 life, and for junior's emotional capability to treat ted as his own son for ted's entire life and for mr. bowden's entire life. over 41 years' remembrance by family, children, birthdays, christmas, laughter echoing through the halls of the family home, the giggles of children, the touch of a loving husband, and the sharing of a bed with a husband. those memories, ladies and gentlemen, were tragically tainted when junior bowden, loving husband, wonderful father to gloria's children died a horrible death four days before christmas 1994. over a period of four months from diagnosis to death, she watched her husband, her protector, her rock of over 40 years, waste away and die from lung cancer caused by smoking. he died from a 53-year addiction to nicotine and cigarettes. nicotine that at various times had unknowingly to junior been manipulated to get the most efficient nicotine kick, a long addiction and exposure to carcinogens, things that the industry had promised that they would take out if they ever identified them. those things caused his inoperable lung cancer. what you will likely not hear today is any acknowledgment by these defendants as it goes to 3296 punitive damages, these purveyors of addiction and death, that they did anything wrong. they truly are "addiction incorporated." paraphrasing mr. reilly's questions to a witness in this case: do people choose to tell the truth? yes. do they do it every day? yes. do people choose to acknowledge their wrongdoing? yes. do they do it everyday? sure. philip morris and r.j. reynolds have always raised the shield, i'll call it the shield of personal choice and freedom of choice, creating controversy when none existed over the science, over the medicine. personal choice. when chasing each other, manipulating ph levels of free nicotine to increase the effects of nicotine; personal choice. even attacking the great american smokeout. philip morris encouraged smokers to not stop smoking. they were encouraging people to use their right of freedom of choice when they knew their dosages of nicotine addicted their customers, and long-term 3297 exposure caused cancer, including children. got to get them when they are young, you have to get them early, hook them early, hook them for life. in their press release on the great american smokeout, philip morris said the smoker's message is freedom of choice. does that sound familiar? it should because you have heard it from them in this very courtroom starting in voir dire. some would say that the word "freedom" was a hollow word until our familiar founding fathers crafted the constitution of the united states of america. i looked up the word "freedom", and merriam webster defined it as the absence of necessity, coercion or constraint in choice of action. absence of necessity, in choice of action. when you are smoking and you are addicted to nicotine, there is no absence of necessity in your choice of action. your brain craves nicotine. it needs nicotine. and their own folks told them that they could not defend free choice in smoking when the smoker was addicted. how about absence of coercion of choice? anybody's common sense tells them that spending a quarter of a trillion dollars in marketing and advertising cigarettes leaves one with an absence of coercion to smoke. is that the case? no, there is 3298 coercion. what about the great american smokeout, their encouragement to smoke? freedom, ladies and gentlemen, should be a word reserved for the true ideals of our country. now, i'm going to suggest to you that for as long as a they have used the words choice or freedom in a debate over the science and medicine, it has been their cohort to wrap themselves in american ideals and the american flag. but their version of choice is a perverse one. their version contradicts our american values. the american values we should be focusing on are truth, honor, character. remember growing up, our parents told us character is a thing that you do when no one is looking? we should all be focusing on the real american ideals, striving to be good citizens, good corporate citizens that we do know harm. how does it become in their eyes an american ideal to manipulate the addictive qualities of a product that contains over 60 carcinogens and thousands of additives and not tell the truth about it? how does it become an american ideal in their eyes to allow greed and averist to overcome their 3299 responsibility, their corporate responsibility, the executives personal responsibility to tell the truth and to do no harm. you see, in their view they get to do those things as long as they point fingers and say the word "freedom" or use the word "choice". now, if you have any doubt how strongly they wrap those subtle messages of america and freedom into our subconscious, just look at the hundreds of thousands of kits they sent out on the day of the great american smokeout. do you remember seeing that document publication by philip morris? but you may not have noticed as the document came up what color those kits were. they are graphically designed in red, in white, and blue. these folks at philip morris and r.j. reynolds made those choices. they do not get to shield themselves from personal responsibility by hiding for decades in laboratories and corporate boardrooms, knowing their product addicts and kills people, while at the same time promising they will take out whatever is harmful. you do not get to avoid personal responsibility by choosing children as young as 12, getting them to use your product without admitting to the child, the adolescent, their moms, their dads, that it will addict 3300 them and one day probably kill them. you do not get to avoid personal responsibility by wrapping yourself in the american flag and yelling freedom of choice or personal choice. gloria bowden had years left with junior. their acts robbed her of those wonderful golden year memories, and left her instead with her husband's horrible death from cancer and wasting away. they caused those harms, they harmed her, and they must now make up for those harms, and the only means by which we can do that in our system is by money damages. what they must pay is commensurate with the amount of harm and hurt that they have caused her. now, how do you measure that? now, some may measure mrs. bowden's suffering and her mental pain and anguish by what is been taken from her. and in evaluating that, you should ask this question: what kind of folks are these, mr. and mrs. bowden? they are like our neighbors, our co-workers. they have similar dreams for themselves, for their children, for their grandchildren. they sought nothing more from life than what they could get or earn from an honest day's work. to understand fully the nature of mental suffering, you have to consider components of that: grief, sorrow, worry, fear, loss of enjoyment, loss of 3301 companionship. mrs. bowden lost her lover, her companion, her confidant, her best friend of 41 years. we have folks like you evaluate this because there is no magic formula to figure out what is fair or what the magnitude of her suffering is. we all know that broken hearts are far more difficult to fix than broken bones. her legacy in losing mr. bowden is grief, is sorrow, is mental pain and agony. we all know that joy sure has a lot of friends, and the only friend grief has is loneliness. grief makes the heart sick and worry consumes it. now, a friend, a relative might pat mrs. bowden on the back and encourage her to remember the good times. that fails to recognize that she knows that those good times are never to happen again for her or her husband. worry and fear are the types of emotions that can consume a person and cause them immeasurable anxiety. and although she comes from a generation, you can tell when she was on the stand, that is fiercely independent, there is little question from hearing her share her story with us that she is scared that she lives alone. she never lived alone until she lost junior bowden. she did not know that she was scared of the dark until she lost him. 3302 it is really only here, ladies and gentlemen, in a courtroom where grief, sorrow, worry, fear, only have a small amount in terms of value. to mrs. bowden the harm that they have caused made all of those components a substantial part of her life. and yes, 19 years have past, and we know the pain and the suffering, the grief and the sorrow had to be much worse 19 years ago, but for those of us using common life experiences and commonsense know it is not really true that time heals all wounds. they are always there. how substantial for mrs. bowden? look at the hole that is been left in her life. he was handy, he was essential, he was her protector, her rock, her best friend. when she awoke in the middle of the night, he was there. her life today is much different, much different than 19 years ago when lung cancer struck. they were together in the mornings, the evenings, weekends with children, vacations with children, spending time with grand kids, ball games, church. there were simple pleasures, but what made them special was having him by her side. now, in a few moments i'm going to suggest to you an amount that we would suggest would be fair to make up for the harm they caused her, but i want to chat a 3303 little bit about allocation of fault and how we do that, what values are fair comparing the harm they have caused. let us begin with allocation. you heard in opening that mrs. bowden stepped forward to take some responsibility for her husband not being successful in quitting. mr. bowden started smoking before entering the military at age 16. smoked for 53 years, not withstanding all the things that mr. smith talked about in his part. so when you go back to deliberate, ask yourself questions like this: where did he, junior bowden, where did he cover anything up? where did he hide the harmful effects of a drug delivery device used by about 85 percent of americans at the time in 1953? did he choose to misrepresent, to lie about this thing? did he choose to cover anything up? did he sit in front of congress with a straight face and misrepresent the addictive qualities of the component of that drug delivery device? you cannot say any of those things about junior bowden. they did those things. they did not hesitate, they did not equivocate, it was all intentional. now, junior bowden cannot avoid some fault. he could not beat his addiction. they, you, can think of 3304 him as weak and not being able to do that. you can say he did not try hard enough. you can fault him for those things, but he did not do what they did. and all of you now know 100 times more about the addictive qualities of nicotine and the power of that addiction than junior bowden ever could have during his lifetime. he did not understand the power of addiction from nicotine and the hold that it had on him, how it changed the human brain. and in so deciding these numbers on allocation, in these numbers that we are going to address in just a minute, i want to take you to dr. kaplan's testimony, and you will remember his phrase about motivation and commitment. everybody remember that? he talked about motivation, commitment. why do i want you to remember it? because it applies, it applies to them, it applies to the defendants. i want you to look through all the documents. you have seen only a few pages from the documents that you have. i want you to look through all the notes that you have, and i want you to find one document, internal document that expresses some concern, any concern about an american consumer, about an american smoker, about a 3305 child, about an adolescent, them becoming addicted, or them dying from a smoking-related disease. you will not find one, not one. do you think that one of the executives at one of these companies could have had the intentional fortitude, the motivation, the commitment to get up one morning and look himself in the mirror and say to himself: today i'm going to be motivated. today i'm going to be committed, motivated and committed to stopping the lie, the controversy over addiction and smoking. maybe not today. maybe tomorrow. profits look good this year, maybe next year. maybe next decade. maybe never. do you think for one second if one of those executives had expressed to the american public or to the junior bowdens of this country, in particular, that the industry equated a smoker's addiction to nicotine to a padlocked dog, or to a rat pressing a lever for a nicotine hit, that that would not have made a difference to the american public and to junior bowden on the question of motivation and commitment? use your reasonable person's standard. use your common sense and answer that question. of course it would. 3306 being motivated to commit to stop what they were doing was not compatible with corporate profits. junior bowden never understood the power nicotine had over him and what they had done to optimize the delivery of nicotine into his brain. he did not understand addiction like you do, like we do today. but there was a type of addiction that was understood by the industry separate and apart from nicotine. they completely understood their addiction to greed. i want to suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, as it pertains to the allocation of responsibility, equating someone who believed the lie against those that told it, the allocation of fault should be as follows: 35 percent to each of the defendants, and thirty percent to mr. bowden. i'm going to suggest to you a figure for what mrs. bowden went through over those horrible four months, and the 19 years since. all the nights alone, visiting the cemetery for the 10 or 15 years when she could have mr. bowden when she did not, that the sum of $6 million would be fair. now that is a figure, ladies and gentlemen, that you use your common sense on. you use your life experiences each of you have been through collectively, 3307 individually, to assess what would be fair and gist in light of how they harmed her, mrs. bowden, how they hurt her, what they have taken from her, and perhaps most importantly what they have left her with. i'm going to close by chatting about punitive damages for just a moment, because one of the questions you are going to be asked on this verdict form are whether punitive damages are warranted. and mr. smith has laid out for you the conspiracy, the concealment, and we have talked about what would have made a difference. because, remember, back on the freedom of choice and personal choice issues, i want to draw your attention to one -- well, a number of factors, but one with this thought: there was a time when these -- this industry, these defendants had a choice, and it was back in 1953, early 1954 when the frank statement came out. but remember, every day, every week, every year they had the ability to change their choice about this, and their choice was this: when faced with corporate profits, stocks declining like they were when the mouse paintings came out, they had three choices: somebody had to stand up and voice what was right, but apparently no one did. the three choices you maybe already figured out are this: one, they can tell the truth about what they 3308 knew internally. they could agree with the scientists and the medical doctors about what the science and medicine was. or, they let be and just be quiet about it, not say anything. leave it alone. or, lie about it and create a controversy, create an open debate, the question is still open, create doubt, and that is what they chose to do, and they never changed it until five to six years after junior bowden's death. in considering whether punitive damages are warranted, some things that you should consider: was the conduct causing the loss to the plaintiff so grossly flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life, or the safety of the persons exposed to the affects of such conduct. we have proven that. we tipped the scales, ladies and gentlemen. we have proved to you beyond and to the exclusion of a reasonable doubt. or, two, the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that phillip morris or r.j. reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequence. can anybody reasonably argue that they were not indifferent to the consequences of what they were doing? or, three: the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that philip morris and/or r.j. reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public; and go back and look for one 3309 reference to whether they internally were concerned about the welfare of the public, the american people, the children of those american families. not one. or, four, the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be the equivalent of an intentional violation of those rights. of course. if you find any of those, ladies and gentlemen, punitive damages are warranted. now, in considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm that these defendants caused to mrs. bowden as a result of junior bowden's death. and in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of their conduct as proven in this case. that is everyone else, not just the junior bowdens. we met that burden, ladies and gentlemen. it is conduct that resulted in the death, according to dr. burns, i think, of almost 20 million americans. they never thought that they would be before a group of people, their peers, a jury answering for what they did. well here they are. 3310 today, all across america in courtrooms just like this, jurors are listening to evidence, listening to the law and the facts, applying the law to the facts in determining what is right, what is right, and what is just. in 1861 in his first inaugural address, abraham lincoln said: why should there not be a patient confidence in the ultimate justice of the people? is there any better or equal hope in the world? he was speaking to every american of that time. he was speaking to every american to come. he was speaking to all of us, he was speaking to you. thank you. mr. smith: may it please the court. 3429 good afternoon. it is worse to go fourth. what i want to tell -- go back is just over a few things that have happened today, and i want to get us recentered what this case is about. after having heard the arguments that were made today by these very capable counsel, you would have believed that the last five days we did not hear repeatedly about a company or companies that lied and conspired and covered up everything from knowing that lung cancer was caused -- and by 1958, they knew that. r.j. reynolds got up today and said, "well, we -- we -- we disclosed a lot of stuff." you-all remember when dr. burns was on the stand. when dr. burns was on the stand, i asked him about, in 1964, a study by dr. rodgman from r.j. reynolds. it was an eight-year study that had started in 1955. they had looked at the epidemiology, the pathology, the biology, and the chemistry that they could find in trying to determine -- and rodgman was their chief chemist, as you know from other evidence -- making sure that all of them consistently -- because they said it -- if any one of those factors does not agree, then we can argue that cancer is not caused by cigarette smoking. 3430 in 1964, dr. rodgman concluded that it was -- and i love the terms -- "not inconsistent with the causation of cancer." meaning that they knew, in 1964, within months of the surgeon general's report, that an eight-year study that they had taken on themselves, they knew that lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. they never told a soul during his lifetime. they never admitted it during my client's lifetime. mr. bowden, in 1994 -- do you remember some of the letters -- i actually put a 1988 letter -- it was called "spock to olson." it is a letter -- it was written to r.j. reynolds and it got a -- a -- and it got a response. r.j. reynolds, when they get a letter, they would write back a response, and what did they say? they said, "it has not been proven. it has not been proven." that is what they told every time. so to say that r.j. reynolds somehow, by having this study -- and, by the way, do not forget the green monster for one moment because what actually happened, dr. burns said, yes, it was a fine document. "dr. burns was there anything missing in it?" "yes." 3431 "what is that?" there were not any -- burns says there was not any real research on what caused cancer or linking cigarette smoking to cancer causation. there were many fine subjects in it, but that was not what it was about. because, remember, they never wanted to get the answer. they started out, they had a controversy. they started out, they had a doubt. doubt was their product. not because i say it; because they said it. controversy was their goal. not because i suggest it; their documents show it -- showed it. so the first thing that happened today was you would act like this was -- this case -- that this -- there was nothing in this case that had to do with the tobacco companies. in fact, if we put up a timeline, the timeline would read like this: 1953 to 1963, they lied about smoking and addiction. 1963 to 1973, they lied about smoking and addiction. 1970 -- you get the idea. until 1994, when mr. bowden died, they were still lying about what? addiction and lung cancer causation. so let us get this thing recentered for a 3432 minute. this is not a one-sided case. it is not just about his life. it is also about the -- the acts that they engaged in. and we are going to get to that in a moment. i think a good place to go is -- let us start with question number 1. and i -- i hope -- because i -- you-all take notes pretty religiously and pretty well. i hope you took the same notes that i did when it was suggested just a few minutes ago in argument by counsel for r.j. reynolds -- "he did not have to be told. he knew he was addicted. he recognized he was addicted." that is what they said. he did not have -- mr. bowden did not have to be told. he recognized he was addicted. now, they are -- they are caught in a trap. they want to say, "we -- we concealed addiction but it did not make a difference." so to say it did not make a difference, their answer is he knew he was addicted. when he told his wife he was addicted, he knew. when he told his grandson he was addicted, he knew. way back when he told ted he was addicted, he knew. when he said, "i cannot quit. i -- i -- i want to quit, but i cannot stop," when he told his daughter, "do not start because if you ever start and you pick them up, you will never put them down," it is 3433 right -- they are -- he is right, he did know he was addicted. and what do we know about addiction? that if you are addicted -- not because i say it, because their own documents show it -- that once you have established addiction, free choice is gone as an argument. but, folks, they cannot let it go. they -- they cannot let it go. it is the argument they have got to make. it is his fault. his fault for believing us. his fault for doing what we wanted him to do. his fault for smoking our product. his fault for believing in our advertising. his fault for believing our -- the statements we made. his fault for falling for our tricks. his fault for not knowing that filters were not any better for you. his fault for his not knowing that light cigarettes were a scam. let us go to the first question. mr. bowden was addicted to cigarettes. that is the first thing and i -- i actually think mr. reilly made a good point. you can actually break this down as you suggested. i believe my question was, was he addicted? well, we know he was addicted. but their argument is -- and we just -- and -- and i -- i do not want to move -- move away from this for a 3434 moment. dr. hurt is recognized throughout the world for his expertise in the program he operates. we brought you the pre- -- one of the preeminent people in his field in the nation. and he said he was heavily addicted. yes, he used this, the heaviness of smoking index from the fagerstrm test. he said, "that tells me the most as a clinician." but he also said something else that none of them mentioned today. he said, "we used all of this together. but we meld it together and we use our experience, our education, our background, our training, and our practical experience of dealing with people who are smokers and addicted smokers." and he tells you, he -- from time to time, people come to the clinic and he does not find them not to be addicted. this was an easy call for him. he said, "because, in addition to the heaviness of smoking index, one of the things i also look to is how long did they smoke and how -- how much did they smoke." he smoked a pack and a half to two packs for 50-plus years. that is the evidence. and they would have you believe, "well, he is an uncle charlie." well, wait a second. the example "uncle 3435 charlie" was given by dr. hurt. he said there are those people and we find them from time to time. and what did he say? "this man's not one of them. this man was addicted." why do he know that? because uncle charlie -- who can just put them down any time he wants to -- he does not go to the ashtray and dig out cigarette butts to light them up at night when he cannot find his cigarettes. he does not give up time with his grandchildren in atlanta or north carolina so he can go out in the -- in the garage and smoke a cigarette, having brought -- taking the trip to be with his grandkids, to be with his son. he was addicted. as counsel said, he was addicted. he did not have to have some special definition, nor did they. put up the addiction, please, for a moment. i want to put up the addiction documents just for a second. in 1959, they used the term "addiction." remember that? 1959, their term. 1964, they used the term "addiction," their term. throughout the '60s, they used the term "addiction," their term. in the '70s, they talked about the addictiveness internally. remember the document i showed you? "that is 3436 not what we say to outsiders?" outsiders did not get to hear. philip morris knew it. they knew what addiction was. the primary motivation for smoking is to obtain the pharmacological effect of nicotine. the product is nicotine. why does one smoke? addiction. they knew it. you know it. now, there are people who smoke -- remember this, the -- the numbers -- there are people who quit smoking, yes. but think of this. after all that we now know after we finally got the documents, there are still as many people smoking as there were in 1964. that is the testimony. there are still as many smokers. we know that, of the people who become addicted, one of the great common centerpieces is they start when they are very young. we know from the -- they -- they -- they -- you -- you -- ms. dampier could not have been clearer. "i'm not sure about this, but i know i was about six years old. he was nine years older than me, that would make him 15. he was smoking then." we know when he came back from the war, he was smoking then. the only difference is, we know he was smoking then and the brand he was smoking. so what are they falling back on? they are 3437 falling back on dr. kaplan, their expert. and i think we have tried to compare the credentials fairly. if you will simply go back and -- and -- and take one who is an internationally recognized resource and a guy who is a small practice in lutz, florida, i think that alone should tell you so much. but i think if you take the man who runs the preeminent program in the country and compare him to a psychiatrist who actually says that one percent of his patients see him for nicotine addiction, he does see people for addictions, some who smoke. but the primary reasons he sees those people -- not for nicotine addiction -- that is not what he does. that is why he is perfect for the 16 or 17 cases that he is stood up and testified on behalf of tobacco companies every time. go back to the first question. now, while we are on the addictive subject -- please show me for just a moment the dsm-iv-r criteria. now, remember, they showed you dsm-iv and they used it today. do you remember my partner cross-examined from it the other day? and this is the test that is given. and then there is a -- and my partner cross-examined dr. kaplan about it -- 3438 there is a guide and examples are given for people who suffer from one or more of these situations. number 1, tolerance. tolerance can be defined -- and it says this: "examples: most smokers escalate use to one pack a day, or more, by age 25." we know he did. he was smoking two packs in 1953. "absence of nausea, dizziness, et cetera." we know that that had long since passed, if it ever existed. go to the next criteria. criteria number 2, "withdrawal as manifested by either..." -- and it says, as an example, "many smokers light up immediately after being in a smoke-free area." he would leave his own living room to go outside to smoke. he was -- if he was in the car and she was with him, he would not smoke until he had -- they had to pull off the road at the -- at the most convenient places so that he could go and smoke a cigarette. and when we talk about withdrawal, remember, one of the things you will -- you have -- you have heard in the cross-examination, you do not even have to have withdrawal, but he clearly -- one of the examples, when he would be in an area where he could smoke, do you remember the front of the store when 3439 he had the partnership with gary cooke? the front of the store and they said there was no smoking? what did he -- what did we learn that he did? he smoked at the back door and, in fact, his daughter noticed that he was smoking so heavily that she actually talked to him about it because she noticed what? his smoking was going up so much that there would be lit cigarettes in more than one location while he was moving around doing his job. that is a person who is addicted. next one. number 3, "a maladaptive pattern of substance abuse leading to clinically significant impairment or distress." and it says, "the substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended." now, one of the reasons that we did not have the answer to that for him is he admits -- which is why dr. hurt told you he did not rely just on the dsm -- is because what? he could not interview the guy. and, really, to get the correct answer on this, he would have to be the interviewer because you would have to know what his expectations were. but the example given here is, most smokers do not intend to smoke five years later. but, in fact, 3440 seventy percent continue to use. actually, what happened in this case, not just five years later but 50 years later, he was still smoking cigarettes. go to the next criteria. "there is a persistent desire or" -- so stop there. or "a persistent desire" -- how many times did he tell family members he wanted to quit over the years? every single family member that came in here that testified on any substance in this case said, "yes, i talked to him about it. he told me he wanted to quit. he told me never to do it. he wished he had never done it. he wanted to quit." persistent desire. secondly, he did try. he tried cold turkey. he tried light cigarettes because they were better for him. and he talked constantly with his parents -- with his family regarding his desire to quit. and, by the way, he smoked when he was on the patch. now, we will get to this in a moment. do you think that you smoke while you are on the patch for the enjoyment of smoking? do you think that you scratch through the butts in an ashtray for the enjoyment of smoking? there is something else 3441 driving you at that point. that is what addiction is all about. next one. a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to abstain -- obtain the substance. the example they use is chain-smoking. let us talk about chain-smoking in this case. barbara dampier testified that in the 1940s he was a chain-smoker. his daughter testified he was a chain-smoker several times in his life. his wife talked about how he smoked and would light up one after another. that is chain-smoking. that is having two cigarettes lit in two different places in the same office. that was the evidence in the case. he was a chain-smoker. that is what you are supposed to be looking for as an element in criteria -- this criteria, number 5, and he meets it. go to the next one. "important social occupational or rec -- recreational activities are given up because of substance abuse." look at this. he would smoke outside watch- -- while watching football games or to watch television. his grandson said he could not make it 3442 through a show. he had frequent rest stops for smoke breaks while he was driving in the car. he would visit family members, including his children and grandchildren. he could not smoke around his grandchildren. he would go out and be alone in the garage so he could smoke and be away from his children and grandchildren, even though that is the reason he went on the trip. why? he had to smoke. he meets criteria number 6. and what is the final criteria? "smoke compulsively despite harmful consequences." folks, he had carotid surgery and a heart attack, and he continued to smoke when he was on the patch. how much evidence would it take to convince them he was addicted? never. because they know they cannot do it. why? because in 1980 they confessed. and what they confessed in 1980 was, "you cannot use the argument of free choice if a smoker was addicted." and their whole argument is always about his choice, never about the addiction. but the addiction is as clear -- there is -- if -- if i gave you these facts, if i told you this history, if i told you a man smoked 50-plus years every single day 3443 of his life; that he smoked despite the fact that he had a heart attack and carotid surgery; that he smoked daytime, nighttime, first thing when he got up in the morning; that he could never give it up despite the fact that he did anything he could do for his children and grandchildren; what kind of character -- i think sometimes they want you to believe that this is a character flaw. addiction is a brain disease. if you leave here knowing nothing else, we know that now. we know -- we have seen the autopsy photographs of what it does to the human brain over time. we know that he was addicted. he was addicted. you will not get a definition, but you cannot hardly make up a definition that he does not meet, including the one that they used. all right. the next part of question number 1, and this is the one that surprises me the most, but i -- i guess i should not be surprised at anything. the argument apparently made today is the second part. and that is, we did not prove that the smoking caused the lung cancer. no. we brought in the only two doctors who have ever made an opinion on that. his treating physician -- i mean, he does not work for us. his 3444 treating physician, dr. wolfe. dr. wolfe, who talks about the family issue. and what does dr. wolfe arrive at as his conclusion? he got small cell carcinoma of the lung because of cigarette smoking. what did he say -- remember what he actually said, even when he gave the horrible news to the family? she looked at him, "what caused this, doctor?" and the doctor went (indicating). the doctor knew. it was cigarette smoking. we bring in a pulmonologist who is one of the recognized experts in the world since 1975. looks at the file, he looks at the medical. he he says, "look, i cannot tell you if there really was a family disposition here, a problem of disposition. because everybody that i see smoked heavily." so that, alone, makes it very difficult to kind of analyze independent risk. but what i can tell you is this: "that this kind of cancer, small cell carcinoma of the lung, is almost always attributable to cigarette smoking. almost always." he said 1 to 2 percent. but then he says the following -- and we will get to concurrent cause in a moment -- because then he said, "well, look, if he had a family vul- -- vulnerability, it would be a factor." he said, "it is about a .5." 3445 doctor -- i think dr. wolfe said it is about a 2- -- 2- -- 200 percent. let us compare that with what the data is that we know from both doctors. the risk for lung cancer from small cell -- excuse me -- squamous cell carcinoma for long-term smokers is 2000 percent. so he says, "the other thing about a family disposition is there are people who may get cancer easier." we know that. there may be families that have that vulnerability. we know that. but the carcinogens still has to come from somewhere. it does not self-implode. you do not independently -- and i asked him the "but for" question. "but for his cigarette smoking, would he have developed lung cancer, small cell carcinoma of the lung?" and the answer was "no." now, you know they found dr. kaplan. surely, they could find another doctor. if there was a pulmonologist or an oncologist or anyone who would back this theory somehow, a family predisposition, i assure you, you would have heard from them. but they were not here. we have two opinions and two opinions only in the case. they both apply -- they both are consistent and they both apply. he died of lung cancer. it was squamous cell. 3446 it was a bronchogenic cancer, and it was caused from cigarette smoking. that is the evidence from that stand, from both doctors who looked at the rec -- records. so i want to look to the third part of that question. and was it a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? well, it was "the" cause, by the way. it was "the" cause, but it does not have to be. nor does his addiction have to be the cause. it is a cause. because, remember this. smoking cause of addiction is a legal cause if it directly and natural and in a continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the death so that it can be reasonably said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred. do you remember earlier i showed you the sequence? nicotine addiction, smoking, body reaction, cancer and death. the beginning point is when you become addicted to nicotine. you bring in that nicotine, and it goes to your brain rapidly. but as dr. burns explained, all the rest of those carcinogens, and those 7,000 chemicals, they go here. that is what 3447 causes it, and he outlined it perfectly for you. so even if you believe that he had a family disposition, it does not matter because smoking was certainly a substantial contributing factor and that is all the standard is. and by the greater weight of the evidence, his addiction and his lung cancer causation have been established. he is a class member. engle was decided for people like him. now, before i leave that, one more thing. it is been argued that he enjoyed smoking. and i -- i think that we can all say that several people, all of his family said, "yeah." i asked dr. hurt about that, did not i? i asked dr. hurt about enjoyment. of course, he enjoyed smoking. every addicted smoker enjoys smoking. why? because what did his grandson say happened to him? he said, "he would get fidgety; he would get nervous; he would get without focus; he had to have a cigarette at the shop. i remember when he got a cigarette, it would calm him down." when he was around -- when he had a cigarette, he was calm and he was relaxed. why? well, we know the biology, folks. you saw it. all of those receptors that have been building in his brain since he was 15 years old are getting fed, and that feels 3448 good. what does not feel good is when they are not being fed. and so if you ask any smoker, i -- i cannot imagine that there would be an addicted smoker in the world who says, "i do not enjoy smoking." "wait a minute. you may want to quit." we know from their own documents, and we know from the surgeon general they all want to quit. we know they have very low success rate. why? it is not about -- "i enjoy it so much, i'll keep doing these things. i'll act against the wishes of my wife of 40 years, against my children and my grandchildren. i'll do that just because i want to enjoy myself"? was he that kind of man? no. we have heard about his character. when there was a problem in his family, he took care of it. and a daughter ended up being a deputy sheriff because he took care of the problem. and every weekend he got in the car and drove down there. he had to work up here, but he went down there while they were recovering from their problem. was he a weak person? no. he lost a son and recovered from it. what is the one thing we ask everybody that he could not beat? he could not beat cigarettes. it is not a character flaw, and it is not 3449 a choice. it was long since a choice. now, it was suggested today, "well, now, if he had quit in 1979" -- wait a minute. in 1979, they have got a lot of nerve to raise that suggestion because in 1979 they were in the middle of this conspiracy of lying about everything of any consequence to smokers. but, more importantly, by 1979, he would been smoking almost 30 years. ask yourselves this. at what point, ever, did either of these companies suggest to the public that the product was addictive? at what point did they ever say that it will kill fifty percent of the people? they ask today about this little -- you have not shown the information that we concealed. put up the concealed information for a moment. this is just a quick run-through of things r.j. reynolds and philip morris concealed. they manipulated nicotine and added chemicals such as ammonia -- and urea actually should be on there. r.j. reynolds and philip morris wanted him to start smoking as a teenager. we know that. we know -- you know, did you notice that they not one time today addressed the smoking documents dealing with their recruitment of children? in fact, it was not just a recruitment of children. it came in 3450 the context that r.j. reynolds upset. because, guess what, philip morris was beating them in the 12-to-20 market. never denied any of that. they know it is there. they wanted him to start smoking as a teenager. we know that because we actually put in a 1928 document. remember that document? "school's out. summer school is here. make sure you have got plenty of product to go see these high school kids." they wanted them to smoke. they never told him that smoking is not a choice, that nicotine in his -- in his cigarettes was addictive, and it was as addictive as cocaine and heroin. they never told him that the winston and marlboro filters that he switched to -- and i think that the argument today is he switched about 1959, which, by the way, i remember is -- was when dr. kyriakoudes said it probably happened because of the recollections of ted. they never told him at that time that they did not -- that they did not filter anything. they never told him that he had a fifty percent chance of dying once he became a regular smoker. 3451 they never told him about the statements of scientists. they never told him about the fact that in 1964, right after the surgeon general's report, they got together and said, "you know what? we have to have" -- and you have seen the document. "we have got to give the smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking." and what happened right after that in 1967? tiderock corporation says, "we have got to reestablish the controversy." and you saw e.a. horrigan, in 1984, say, "not proven. not proven. all the research we are doing is still not proven." why? the psychological crutch, the whisper to the addicted smoker was, "it is okay to keep smoking. they have not proven it. they really have not proven it, you know. they really do not know what causes lung cancer. you know that, do not you?" and it worked, folks. it worked. cigarette smoking went down briefly in 1964 for one quarter. remember that document? and immediately went back to 19- -- by 1966, they were back at previous rates where they plateaued per capita, but continued -- total consumption continued to rise until the mid-1980s. veritext reporting company 212-490-3430 3452 it was not like he was a special -- foolish person for believing them. a wide number of smokers did just the same. that is how we know what happens in markets. you know, they talked today about -- oh, they also -- they told people that they expected them to rely upon their lies and continue smoking their addictive cigarettes. you remember we had one witness -- can you bring up dr. figlar, please? this is the rjr company rep in this case -- or in some case. i do not remember which case, but we used this. this is a -- (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) "unidentified speaker: specifically you think it was reasonable for your customer, smokers of your cigarettes, to believe what we said and rely on what the public has said, including these advertisements? "unidentified speaker: i would say that it is -- that would be reasonable, yes. that is why they put them out." (the video clip was ended.) mr. smith: that is why they put them out. that is why they put them out. that is why they put 3453 the statements out there. every time the surgeon general would come up with a finding, it was like point, counterpoint. before they even -- in fact, in one case, the day before the report came out -- remember 1979? the day before the surgeon general's report came out, they came out and said why it was wrong. they were geared every time, because they could not let people get consistent messages. the message always had to be doubt and controversy. every time. not one time did they stand up beside the surgeon general and say, "this time he is right." not during the lifetime of my client. not during the time when he was suffering from cancer. that did not happen then, because in 1994, just a few months before, they did stand up. and if you remember -- we were reminded that we only played a short clip, and the short clip we played was the one that shows -- you remember, they all stood up, they raised their right hand, they said, "i do not believe it is addictive." "i too do not believe it is addictive." "i too do not believe it is addictive." remember that? 3454 so we then played you some more. and you have the ceo of these two companies talking to congress earlier in the meeting. and they were still saying what? "it has not been proven." now, i could be convinced, but i'm not convinced yet." when? in 1994. i got to tell you one thing, if you get out of this nothing else, these executives must not have taken the reader's digest, because all they have done for the last few days is throw the reader's digest out. everybody in the world read it. everybody in the world, except the tobacco industry. and then they said, "and, by the way, the surgeon general warned you and warned you." what did they say every time the surgeon general came out? "he is wrong." and what did heimann say? not just wrong, but "dead wrong." no. what is dead is my client. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. i'll withdraw it. the court: all right. proceed, mr. smith. mr. smith: they talk about reliance. reliance is real simple, folks. some of the most serious cases have to do with circumstantial evidence. we 3455 do not always have -- 20 years after someone has passed, we do not have eyewitnesses a lot of times, in lots of kinds of cases. we go to circumstantial evidence. that is how we prove many kinds of cases: civil, criminal, administrative, all kinds. oftentimes, it is circumstantial evidence. in these cases you are allowed to use what is called inferred reliance, "inferred reliance" meaning that you can infer from what occurred that there was some reliance because nobody's going to be able to go back now and say, "oh, by the way, could you please tell me the ad you saw in 1953, or in 1965?" who -- who could do that? i cannot remember the ad i saw this morning. but that -- can you remember which particular statement -- which ad was it that convinced you? we know this: the unrebutted testimony is that they spent a quarter of a trillion dollars and that they were the most heavily advertised product in america. the most heavily. now, when voir dire was going on and you were asked, do you think advertising works? everybody in the room, if i remember right, said, yes. nobody would buy a -- put a clydesdale on the super bowl at that price if it did not work. remember that? 3456 but then when we asked particular people, "did it make you up -- make your mind up? did it make you make your mind up? was that what -- "well, no, no, not me." folks, that is how advertising works. that is how public statements work. that is how word filters out. you do not have to have seen the frank statement. there is lots of things i did not see that somebody told me about the next day. i thought i knew what they told me about the next day. that is just the way information gets out there. that is it. that is how information percolates up into any society. so the inferred reliance would be this. we can infer reliance if during the times when he -- when lucky strike and camels were the number 1 and number 2 cigarette and most advertised product -- and that is according to bates -- he smoked their product. well, that is true. he did. he smoked unfiltered camels and lucky strikes. okay. that is inferred reliance. but you say, "well, it may have just been his friends were smoking it." okay. what did he do next? he switched to filters. according to counsel, he switched to filters in 3457 about 1959. that would be a little earlier, i think, but it does not matter. because we know this: by 1958, the congress was beside themselves trying to tell folks, "it is a lie. the filter is a lie. it is being built up by advertising." but, of course, the congress issues a report. i cannot tell you what a congressional report circulation is, but i can tell you what two -- what $300 million a year of advertising in those days would do. dominated nighttime television. remember the document that i showed that said that every single person during that january, february period, in that year, was exposed to 5.8 ads a week? that is the science of what advertising is about. it is about exposure. so he bought the filter. he bought winston. he bought marlboro. where do they rank? well, winston was first number 1. it was bypassed by marlboro, and he continued to smoke marlboro all the way up until the late 1980s and then maybe even 1990. and where was marlboro -- was -- you saw the -- you saw the wonderful infomercial. they led the nation in their advertising effort and they -- when they went off television -- because they had to get off television. they wanted to get away from 3458 yul brynner and all that. when they got off television, they upped the ante. they became number 1 in billboards. number 1 in street advertising. number 1 in transit advertising. number 1 in points of sale advertising. when you went in the store, they were the best locations. how do we know it worked? because marlboro remained the number 1 product in the cigarette industry. and for all those years mr. bowden followed it. and then what did he do? he started moving towards lights. now, they said -- and i -- i read the information. they said that -- mrs. bowden said, "i know he showed me an article and i remember seeing the cigarette and the picture of the cigarette saying, 'why did you switch?'" and he said, "because they are better for me. they are low tar." now, i suspect that is an ad, but it does not matter. because who -- if it was advertisement or an article, in the 1990s, who had fooled everybody? dr. burns said, "they fooled me." surgeon general said, "now they fooled me. we did not realize light cigarettes were a scam. we did not realize that they knew internally what they were doing. we did not 3459 know it or we would not have said some of the things we said." dr. burns is one of those people. said, "had i known, had i seen the internal documents, had i seen what they knew, i'd have never said that it was better. it is not better." put up the ph regulation for a moment. they, today, would have you think that dr. hurt was the proponent of some absurd theory about manipulation of ph. well, i want to go back and point out the following. every single one of these documents came from those companies that sit here today. dr. hurt did not write a line. did not write a word. none of dr. hurt's theory. every line up there was provided by these companies. a high ph smoke is strong due to a high concentration of unbound or free nicotine in the smoke. thus, as the amount of ammonia or the ammonium salts in smoke increases above a certain level, the smoke becomes less acidic. more nicotine occurs in free, volatile, rapidly absorbed form, and the nicotine impact is enhanced. enhanced. it was not enough that they had -- and i know they used the word -- they said that i had used the 3460 word "kit." actually, let us go back and look at where the word "kit" was used in the documents. can you pull that up for me, please? i think it is a -- it is a document that deals with child smoking. yes. this is -- they are trying to figure out -- r.j. reynolds is worried they are losing -- losing their audience among the -- they need a larger segment of the youth market, which i think in this document is 14 to 20. down at the bottom, look where it is still with an old-style filter, "any desired additional nicotine kick could easily -- could easily be obtained through ph regulation." folks, those documents were not from dr. hurt. he did not write a word of that. i think we -- i want to show you a couple more documents to respond to things that were brought up today. this is what is interesting. this was all about -- although they were co-conspirators throughout all of this, r.j. reynolds is really upset. they are upset because marlboro's doing so well. all evidence indicates that the relatively 3461 high smoke ph shown by marlboro and other philip morris brands and kool is deliberate and controlled. deliberate and controlled by whom? by philip morris. and do you remember they got up, and they made all these points about, "oh, it was not 6.5"? now, before i leave this, dr. hurt did not say the surgeon general was wrong in the way it was applied. dr. hurt is a reviewer of the surgeon general, a scientific reviewer for the surgeon general. what dr. hurt said was, "in 1979, what we thought we knew is no longer good science." that is probably true in any number of fields. but what he is saying is in 1979, that is probably what they thought. it is not true anymore. but then we went to this document. remember what was driving the argument? there were the documents that said that the market's share used by high ph cigarettes translated to a larger market share as you moved up with the ph manipulation and the nicotine enhancement. it was always about the money, folks. everything is. this was always about the money. that is why they got together to start with. it was 3462 about the money. but here's what we had. this is -- is not dr. hurt's chart. this is their chart. and guess what it shows? it shows that free nicotine and market share corresponded just like he said from reviewing their documents. the market share expanded as the ph regulation went up. that is not dr. hurt's theory. that was their practices, and those are their documents. i want to go to -- i think i'm almost done, folks, and i know that is good news to all of you. oh. you were shown -- it was -- it was spoken -- there was a 1996 analysis, and it said, "oh, that market share document that we all did, that turned out to be" -- that was in 1996. and do you remember what i showed you on redirect examination? that document was issued by rjr at a time when they still were hiding all their documents, and it was issued for what purpose? legal and regulatory purposes. i'll bet you they were not about to admit what they knew in those documents in 1996 when they were preparing their legal and regulatory response document. if they had had half -- if -- if they had been half sincere with the surgeon general's office, they would have 3463 provided much of that information earlier than they did. they held it. and one of the interesting things they said, "well, you know, tirc" -- and i believe they said "ctr and ti, those are all gone now." they were not gone voluntarily. that is not why they are gone. nobody voluntarily got rid of them. and dr. burns told you that. they talked about, "well, there is been warning labels." do you guys remember the 198- -- ah, -7 -- '67 and the 1981 ftc reports? they did not agree on everything. but you know what they agreed on? labels do not seem to have any effect on consumers. have not had any effect on the customer. they do not. that is what they said. not because i found it, not because what -- ny experts found it. that is what is the ftc, having reviewed, said, "it is not having an effect." it does not have an effect. and it certainly does not have enough effect, i submit to you, to change the mind of an addicted smoker. i want to go to reliance, please. this is the instruction: "as to each of the plaintiff's claims, the conduct of philip morris and/or r.j. reynolds company need not be the only 3464 cause." that is true to every claim. "the conduct of philip morris or r.j. reynolds tobacco company may be a legal cause of death, though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause. even if you believe it was enjoyment, and you know he was addicted, it does not matter. if" -- "if such other cause occurs at the same time as the conduct, and the conduct contributes substantially to producing the death." you saw earlier, and you will read and the judge will read to you an instruction which says, "if it is in regular" -- you will see the language essentially: "if it is a regular sequence, and the sequence ends up" -- that is written for this case in so many ways. he was addicted. he smoked for 50 years. he smoked a lot of cigarettes. he got lung cancer and he died. it was that sequence. and that is the process i asked about earlier in the case. and every expert agreed that process is that way. some talk about the beginning; some talk of the end. but you smoke the cigarettes so long because you are addicted, so heavily because you are addicted. it causes the damage. smoke causes the damage, and we lose a smoker. 3465 the court: mr. smith, you are getting close to being out of time. mr. smith: i am ready to wrap up. the court: thank you. mr. smith: ladies and gentlemen, i'll finish with this. this is an easy case. question number 1 really dictates numbers 2 and 3. but mr. reilly did not contest that. the instructions of engle -- once you answer "yes" to number 1, the instructions of engle apply and they guide you through this, and you are bound by them. what i want you to also remember is this. this is a case -- the number you use for compensation is yours. this is a case where if anyone had ever told the truth on this smoker, can you imagine? if -- no matter how addicted you were, if -- if the tobacco company themselves came out and said, "our products will kill you. our product's addictive. our product causes lung cancer." but they could not do that because the market would not stand it, because we knew what happened in 1953 when people believed it. this is a man who played by the rules his whole life. grew up in the depression, went into world 3466 war ii. he came home. he raised a family. he married. he married once for two weeks. bless her heart. she does not even remember the date of the marriage. it was actually -- she says 1945. he was not back in 1945. they married quickly. it did not last long. she does not recall much. then he married the love of his life. he worked hard. he worked two jobs so she could be with the kids. he worked for the telephone company. worked for 25 years without retirement, kept working every night. when his children had a crisis, he took care of it. his kids and his grandkids loved him greatly, and his wife loved that fact. he played his whole life by the rules. by the measure of some people, he was not -- was not a great person; but by the measure of his wife, by the measure of his family, by the only measure that really counts in the end, he was a great man. and he died too young, and he died because nobody had the courage on their side one time to just come out and tell the truth during his lifetime. and now they want to blame it all on him. it is not their fault he was a sucker. he believed us. that is his fault? no. as my partner said, this 3467 case, when you measure the damages, you remember this: you are measuring one person who is guilty of believing a lie, and two companies that are guilty of telling it for a half century. thank you.