mr. reilly: it is still good morning, everybody, so good morning. i began my opening statement by thanking you for your service that you had not yet performed but you had been selected for, so now at the beginning of my closing argument i'm going to thank you for your service as mr. smith did. obviously we have taken you from your homes, your families, your normal lives, and you have spent two weeks and two days with us. i hope it is been informative and interesting. and now you are on to what we brought you here for, and that is to resolve this civil dispute. and as you can see in front of me, i have a stack of boards. and you can remember when i began my -- when i presented my opening statement, i used lots of boards. i'm old fashion, i use lots of boards to communicate what i thought the evidence was going to be. and i predicted that i would be using many of the very same boards when i addressed you in closing argument, because i was confident that what i had on these boards is exactly what the evidence was going to be. and sure enough, i have many of the same boards. as you can see they have grown, multiplied. they have grown and multiplied, because what i've supplemented them with are actual passages of testimony that occurred in this case. 3313 what happens every day is the court reporter takes down everything that occurs in this courtroom, all the questions that are asked, all the answers that are given. and then at the end of every day we get what they call a daily transcript. so we have -- and it is measured by page and line number, so we know exactly what is been testified to. and so as i go through my closing argument, i'm going to show you some of the exact testimony that occurred right here in this courtroom just to refresh your recollection as to who said what. what did they really say? now, i warned you, forewarned you at the beginning of my opening statement, that at the end of the case judge tygart was going to give you pages of jury instructions, and you are going to get pages of jury instructions. i think every one will get a set of instructions, and i warned you that they will be filled with legal terms, lots and lots of legal terms, and they are. and i said the same is going to apply to the verdict form, you are going to get pages of the verdict form. and that too has lots of legal terms. but i said to you what can we distill all that down to? what is this case -- back to my opening 3314 statement, what is this case really going to be about? and i put up this board. can everybody see that? okay. i'll try to not stand in the way. i'm sorry. and i said look, this case is going to be about control and responsibility. first of all, i said this is not a class action, this is not about the american public or even the florida public. this case is about one smoker and one smoker only, and it is the decisions that that smoker made about beginning to smoke, continuing to smoke, and whether or not he quit. and i said this was -- this case is going to be about control. who is in control of -- who is that? it is william bowden, junior, right? that is what you are here all about, the decisions made by mr. william bowden, junior. say that five times fast. now, i said, you know, control. this is going to relate to the decisions that he made about how he lived his life, including, of course, most importantly the decisions he made about whether he was going to begin to smoke, continue to smoke, and either continue or quit. and i said part of what you are going to be hearing about in the course of this trial is whether or not mr. bowden smoked because he enjoyed smoking, or did he smoke because he became addicted and an involuntary smoker? so that is going to be a big part of what 3315 happens in this courtroom. you are going to be -- people are you are going to get asked whether or not mr. bowden enjoyed smoking. did he smoke because he enjoyed it? you know, it is a pleasurable thing. did he smoke because he enjoyed it? and then there was also going to be the question of whether or not philip morris or r.j. reynolds actually controlled whether or not he smoked or not. did they do anything more, really, in connection with mr. bowden alone, because that is the smoker in this case, other than make the cigarettes that he bought; advertise them and make the cigarettes that he bought? that is really what control was all about. and then i said when you get past control, then you will be able to address responsibility, and that is your guys' job, to determine whether or not, and they have acknowledged -- of course they had to acknowledge in this case in light of the personal history of mr. bowden, they had to acknowledge that mr. bowden through the choices, the decisions, the life-style decisions he made in connection with smoking in particular, the decisions he made about smoking caused him to develop his lung cancer and die. they had to admit that. and so what is left? what is left for you guys to decide is whether or not philip morris or r.j. reynolds 3316 have responsibility as well. now, i told you these two words would not appear in the verdict form and would not appear in the instructions, and they do not. they do not. and we now have -- you are going to -- when all the opening statements -- closing arguments, i'm sorry, when the closing arguments are done, then you are going to get the actual verdict form, and it is going to ask you to answer a series of questions, and it is up to you guys how many questions you think need to be answered in this case. the first question that is going to get asked, and this is exactly how it is going to read, is question number 1, engle class member. was mr. bowden addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and, if so, was cigarette smoking, because of such addiction, a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? well, you know that is actually truly three questions at once. the first question is: was mr. bowden addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? you can put a period right there, because that is a question all by itself. you are right, it should be a question mark. there we go. how's that? and the second question then is: if he was -- that is the first questioning you have to decide for 3317 yourselves, was he addicted. if he was, was cigarette smoking a cause of such addiction, a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? so we are already into very complex legal terms here. and implied in this is the question of well, why did he get his lung cancer? was it really caused by cigarette smoking? did they actually prove that? well, i'm going to address the first two questions now in my closing argument, and mark seiden is going to talk to you about that third implied question. so what was the evidence in this case about whether or not mr. bowden was truly addicted? well, judge tygart is not going to give you a definition of addiction, and he is not going to give you a test for determining whether or not mr. bowden truly was addicted or not. it is not going to come in the instructions. so it is up to you guys to decide collectively what is the definition you are going to apply, and what is the standard you are going to use to determine whether or not mr. bowden was truly addicted or not? there were a few medical experts who came here and addressed that subject. one was their dr. hurt and our dr. kaplan, and they did agree on a couple of things. here's one of the most important ones, and that was can 3318 you determine whether somebody is addicted to cigarettes just by knowing if they smoked a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time? and they both agreed they cannot tell just based on smoking a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time. here's the trial transcript page and line numbers. this is their exact testimony. dr. hurt was asked, i think by his own counsel: "i understand, doctor, you said that not all smokers are not addicted? that is correct. okay. in fact, not all smokers who smoke lots of cigarettes over a long period of time are addicted? that is correct." that is their expert. dr. kaplan, i asked dr. kaplan: "okay. can people who smoke a pack or two a day and do it a long time and still not be addicted?" he said sure they can. both experts agree on that. so, did mr. bowden smoke a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time? there is no question about that. but does that answer the question in the opinions of these two experts together? no. now, dr. kaplan -- this that was interesting to 3319 listen to how he described him. dr. kaplan is a board certified psychiatrist. board certified. he is the only board certified psychiatrist that came here and talked to you folks. he is a diplomat of the american board of psychiatry and neurology. mr. smith said he has only treated 1 percent of his patients for nicotine addiction or nicotine. that is not right. what he said was that he ordinarily does not have people come to him solely to deal with cigarette smoking, and that makes sense. most people -- during the course of this trial you heard that ninety percent of all folks who quit smoking quit without any medical intervention whatsoever. the do not ordinarily end up going to a psychiatrist just to stop smoking. but in his practice, he said: personally in my clinical practice i've treated thousands of patients who have come to me for other reasons, and during the course of that care and treatment i've diagnosed them as to whether or not they were nicotine dependent, and whether they were dependent or not, whether they were addicted or not, i treated them, i assisted them if they wanted assistance in quitting smoking if that is what they wanted to do, thousands. 3320 in addition to that, he was the director of the alcohol and drug treatment program. this is what he started back in the '90s, charter hospital, care unit, two different hospitals in tampa, florida. he is the guy that was in charge of the drug unit and, in part, he is the guy that created smoking cessation programs in both those hospitals. so, yes, today he is chosen to no longer go to the hospital, but that is a personal choice he made, not because he is not qualified to work in hospitals. he is the guy that created these tracks that charter in the care unit for treating and assisting folks in smoking cessation. what did he say? i forget whether it was hundreds or thousands of patients doing that right there in tampa. he said he does not teach anybody. that is flat wrong. he told you that he voluntarily teaches at the south florida -- what it is, south florida medical school right there in tampa. volunteers. how many doctors do you know that volunteer their time like he does? and what does he teach them? he teaches them about addiction and nicotine dependence in particular. that is what he testified to. now, he is been -- his qualifications have been 3321 accepted 16 times to come and testify in courts in state court and federal court here in florida on this very subject. now, mr. smith said that before i met him on an airplane and used my charming personality to convince him to come and engage in this kind of work, that he was already a forensic medicine -- board certified in forensic medicine, and the state of florida hires him, a bunch of other folks hire him to come and testify about a variety of situations. that is dr. kaplan. now, dr. kaplan explained to you how he went about assessing whether or not mr. bowden is truly addicted. and he said -- i used -- first of all, what did he do? what did he do in this case? he read every deposition of every person who gave testimony pretrial so that he could have a complete picture, as complete a picture as could be given through this litigation process of mr. bowden, and mr. bowden's decisions and smoking behavior. 4,000 pages. and then what did he do? he took that information and he put it together with -- he used these two manuals put out by the american psychiatric association, the apa, the diagnostic and statistical manual, roman number iv-tr, and the diagnostic and statistical manual number 5. 3322 and he took you through -- he took you through -- remember this page? he put it up on the elmo, or put it up on the screen, and he walked you through all of these criteria, including the second page that has to do with withdrawal symptoms. he walked you through each and every element, including the over-arching requirements of a maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to clinically significant impairment. he explained it all to you in detail. i only have an hour and a half, so i cannot go through it all with you right now, but he did it all in detail with you guys so that you would have as good of an understanding as we can give you in this court of law about whether or not mr. bowden really met a rigorous criteria. what did he call this? he called this the gold standard. do you remember that? he said this is the gold standard for how physicians determine whether or not someone is truly addicted. we folks, we nonmedical people use the term addiction all the time. we are addicted to, you know, we are addicted to shoes, we are addicted to exercise. we are addicted to a variety of things, right? we use the term in common parlance. the official diagnosis, that is the test, that is the gold standard. this is a statement by their expert. what was his 3323 conclusion? before i leave this, what was his conclusion? his conclusion was that mr. bowden did not meet the criteria for substance dependence, in this particular instance nicotine addiction, right? he said he does not meet the criteria. did anybody come here and say this is not the gold standard? no. did anybody come here and say oh, doctor, you have gone through this analysis improperly? no. there it is. that is the one person who went through the gold standard with you folks in this courtroom, the one guy. here's another statement by their expert, dr. hurt, in describing the fact there are people who smoke lots of cigarettes over a long period of time and do not become addicted. he nicknamed them uncle charlie. i do not remember if you remember this part, but he nicknamed them uncle charlie. and he had some things he said about it. then there is people called uncle charlie. uncle charlie smoked a pack and a half a day for 30 years. these dots are -- he said he was unemployed, and he said he was something else. one day announces to the family i'm going to stop smoking, and he did, no withdrawal, no problems. and he said this guy is not addicted, uncle 3324 charlie is not addicted. all right. then when mr. smith was asking him questions about the dsm, and about how he diagnosed whether or not mr. bowden was truly addicted or not. this is his testimony. you can see from the question, mr. smith started off by saying: why did not you use, and then he switched. he said: why do you not use at the mayo clinic the dsm-iv, or now the dsm-5 in making the assessment? well, that was wrong. they do, because look at the answer he gave. well, we do. of course at the mayo clinic do they use the gold standard? of course they do. he is ask why do not you use it? he said, we do. he went on to say but we do not use it only. as explained earlier, we use -- we talk to the patient because it, again, is a patient-centered academic center. we are academics, and so we want to make sure we get the diagnoses right. well, all doctors want to get the diagnoses right. remember, this is the guy when we are talking about -- who came here? dr. hurt is the guy that lectures to the plaintiff's lawyers on how to 3325 successfully pursue these cases, remember that? do you remember he is the guy that said i lecture about -- i never give a yes or no answer. and he said i always get my message in. and do you remember there were several times i would ask him what was, frankly, just a yes or no question. and then he would go on and on and on. and i said, doctor, is that an example of you getting your message in? yeah. he said: but there are many other factors that go into this other than some of those written criteria. then he went on for another two or three pages. this is what he did. this is how he made his decision as to whether or not mr. bowden was addicted. this is exactly what he said. this is the question from mr. smith: is the method you used in arriving at your opinion that mr. bowden was addicted to nicotine the same as you commonly employ at the mayo clinic? that is correct. and heavy necessary of smoking -- that is what mr. smith was calling the heaviness of smoking index, is the easiest one. so when we teach physicians on how to do this, we say we know your busy and we know it is hard to do, but you need to ask people about their smoking 3326 behavior. you need to advise them to stop smoking. by the way, if you want to know where they are on a scale of addiction, just ask these two questions: time before first cigarette; and, two was how much they smoked. and that will give you -- that will give you a clue as to what you are dealing with. and if we can get clinicians to do that, that is a pretty good deal. so now, ladies and gentlemen, we are here in a court of law, and mr. avera just asked to you award $6 million, $6 million in this case. and you got to ask yourselves what standard in this court of law am i going to apply when i'm considering a request for something like $6 million. are you going to use the test that is the gold standard, or are you going to use the test that will give you a clue? that is undisputed testimony from the very dr. hurt. that is what he gave you. the test he gave you, the results he gave you, gave you nothing more, by his own admission, a clue. so now you folks have to decide well, what standard am i going to apply. what standard, what criteria will i have to go along with my standard in this court of law? an important place to be. 3327 all right if after all that you have seen -- and by the way -- by the way, using this standard: time before a first cigarette and how much they smoked, could you ever know whether the person you are dealing with is uncle charlie or a truly addicted person? could you ever possibly know that with this little clue test? no way. there is no way to differentiate between an addicted and a nonaddicted smoker with the little clue test. that is not possible. so what is the answer to this question? well, if you guys conclude that you ought to be applying the gold standard test, i do not think there is any -- there is no other evidence in this case other than does it meet the gold standard? and i do not have the burden of proof. i did not have the obligation to bring you somebody and present to you gold standard and say yes, does it meet it, or no it does not, but i did. but i did. so now what is the answer to this question? well, if you apply the gold standard then the answer is no. if all you need to know is a clue -- each and every one of you has to address this issue. you have to unanimously decide whether or not your apply the clue, or the gold standard. and then you really and truly believe that they have proved their case that mr. bowden 3328 was addicted. if your answer to this question is no, then you stop there, because you do not have to answer the second half of the question, or the third half. i guess that is not possible. there is not three, sorry. you do not have to follow up with the next two questions. you only stop there, answer no, and then you do nothing further with the rest of the verdict form except sign it and return it. now, if unanimously you all decide that you got to go on and answer the second question, then you have to address this question: was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause for his lung cancer and death? now here, it has to be because of addiction, and it has to be a legal cause. now, there is that term "legal cause." and i told you we were -- i said law students spend three years in law school trying to figure out what this is, and we give it to you in two weeks and expect you to not only understand it, but apply it, and that is a challenge. and here it is. this is the introductory. that is the same question. so i'm just going to drop down to the operative part, the definition of legal cause. it is complicated enough. 3329 it says: smoking because of addiction is the legal cause of death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces -- in other words it has to do it by itself, or contributes substantially to producing the death so it can be said -- and here's the most important language -- but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, death would not have occurred. now, it goes on to say -- i do not have room on this board for everything, but it goes on to say there can be more than one legal cause, but there does not have to be. and it does not reduce the obligation of proving that addiction was a "but for" reason why mr. bowden developed his lung cancer and died. now, in order to know why did mr. bowden smoke all those years? long enough -- if smoking was the cause of his lung cancer, long enough to develop lung cancer, why did he smoke all those years? was he an involuntary smoker who did not enjoy smoking? was he compelled to smoke against his will? or was he somebody that really and truly enjoyed smoking? there is are folks who really and truly enjoy smoking and smoke because it is a pleasurable thing to do. and so how will you know the answer to that 3330 question? well, do not you want to look at what people who were there when he was around both heard him say and watched what he did? do not you want to hear from them, and do not you want to see -- do not you want to see how he reacted when people would suggest to him that he quit smoking? do not you want to see when finally when he is -- what is he, 67, 66, 67 years old, when for the very first time in his life he makes any effort whatsoever to quit smoking, do not you want to see what effort he put into it? in order to figure out whether addiction is up here for a reason, or whether he is smoking because, against the advice of everybody else, he enjoys it and wants to keep doing it, you know what? this is not a criticism of mr. bowden, how he lives his life. this is a legal thing for people to do here in the united states. but do not you want to know that? so what i did is i pulled out the testimony of some folks. starting from the very beginning. here is bonnie tillman, this is his sister. and she is going to be talking began him in the '40s and '50s. what does she say? here's a question that was posed: 3331 "do you have any perception if mr. bowden enjoyed smoking? i think he really did. okay. did he seem to be enjoying himself when he was smoking and socializing with people? what that a time -- was that a time he seemed to enjoy smoking to you? i would say yes." that is his sister going back to the '40s and '50s. you know that mrs. bowden meets him in 1953. they date, they marry. you know, once they are married what he does first thing in the morning is going to be known to mrs. bowden, right? and so there are folks who enjoy smoking with a cup of coffee in the morning. that is how they wake up, right? and it is thoroughly enjoyable. here's mrs. bowden: "all right. how many cups would he have in the morning just to get started? he probably drank two or three in the morning before noon. all right. and he enjoyed having a cigarette in the morning when he had his coffee? yes." that is mrs. bowden, the plaintiff in this case, 3332 acknowledging mr. bowden enjoyed having a cup of coffee in the morning with a cigarette. this is -- i'm going to run out of space. just a second. that is an occupational hazard of using boards. okay. ted bowden, we know he is born in 1951. and he is going to be talking about -- what is it, late 50s, early 60s, straight on through the rest of his dad's life. "and he would say it was because he liked the taste, right? that is correct." this is talking about why he smoked. "he liked the taste. and he told you he enjoyed smoking cigarettes? yes, he did. that is a quote. he told you he enjoyed smoking cigarettes? yes, he did. he would say to you, i enjoy smoking cigarettes, right? yes. he would say that from early on. and you believed he seemed to enjoy smoking cigarettes? that is correct." that is from his son. and that is -- i do not know. is that -- we do not 3333 have exact dates. is that the late '50s? is that the early '60s? straight on through from early on. here's ted again: "from your observations, he appeared relaxed when he smoked? yes, it did relax him." does smoking relax people? sure. does nicotine play a significant role in that? sure. people have known that for 150 years. here's his grandson, christopher marvin. "mr. bowden would sometimes say to you that smoking relaxed him? i do not know if he said it directly to me but i -- i can -- you know, you can remember hearing him say that, though, yeah. for example, when you observed that he was edgy or worked up, smoking would help take his mind off the situation? correct. correct." here's mrs. bowden again. this is -- you know, mr. smith just a minute ago in his closing argument talked about getting up at night to smoke. this is what mrs. bowden actually said: "during your marriage were there times when 3334 mr. bowden would get up at night to smoke? yes. how often would he do that? well, if he had a lot on his mind and he was not sleeping well, then he would get up. he would go out and have a cigarette." now is that a very different story than what you just heard? do people use cigarettes to relax? sure. did mr. bowden do that? absolutely. and did he do it at night sometimes when he had a lot on his mind and he was not sleeping well? sure. is that addiction or is that using a cigarette to help him relax? here's mrs. bowden again. all right. and at the same time -- remember, mr. cook married their daughter tammy in the late '80s. so mr. cook is coming over to the bowden house, late '80s. i think it is '88 -- '89, '90-'91. all right. "at the same time mr. cook used to come over to your house a lot? yes, he did. and tammy, of course, would come with him? yes. all right. so they enjoyed going out on your back 3335 patio after dinner and socializing?" and i did not ask her this, she volunteered it: "and smoking with my husband. and smoking with her your husband? uh-huh (affirmative). that was a -- that was one of the things that they truly enjoyed doing?" i mean, look at that. truly enjoyed doing? i think so. i think so. that is mrs. bowden. all right. how did mr. bowden respond when people would tell him to quit? for the sake of space, i reduced this down. mrs. bowden said he would shrug me off, he would ignore me. he was going to do whatever he wanted to do. his daughter tammy, he pooh-poohed her advice, he blew her off. now, sometimes he would say occasionally -- i think we had two quotes that he would say i'm addicted, i cannot stop. sure. but he said -- that is what he said most often right there. and there are all the folks who actually talked to him and said he enjoyed it, they observed him enjoying it, and that is how he used the cigarette. can you tell somebody's attitude about whether they really want to stop smoking by their quit efforts? 3336 sure. sure. this is another thing that dr. kaplan and dr. hurt agreed on, and that was in the medical world if you are evaluating a patient and you are trying to figure out whether they are serious about quitting, you look and see how long they quit for. and if they do not quit for at least 24 hours, they have not made a serious quit attempt. they both agreed on it. there is dr. hurt: "more people who do addiction research, addiction specialists, they have a definition for a serious quit attempt, do not they? yes. and that is a quit attempt lasting more than a day, that is 24 hours or longer? yes." here's dr. kaplan: "and you know there is a description of attempts to quit. i do not think his attempts to quit would be considered serious. they did not occur for 24 hours or greater." in fact, in this courtroom nobody said that mr. bowden quit for 24 hours. the longest anybody said he quit for was his son -- his grandson christopher, and 3337 he said well, he quit for eight hours but he went to bed and woke up the next morning and smoked. you remember that -- when did mr. bowden quit for the very first time? it was after his son-in-law, mr. cook, quit in -- it is either '89 or '90. mr. bowden is at that point, what, 65 years old? for the first time at 65, mr. bowden -- mr. cook says i'm going to quit. mr. cook is, like, 40-something years old. he said i've smoked long enough, i'm not going to do this anymore. and he quit and he used mints. remember, he ate a mint instead of smoking a cigarette. so he recommended both to his wife tammy and mr. bowden that they both quit too, and tammy quit. tammy quit cold turkey, and that was that. mr. bowden did not quit then, did not try to quit then. but christopher said he followed the example of mr. cook and for a little while he would eat a werther's caramel candy, and he would delay smoking a cigarette for a little while. he said all that did was result in eating some candies for a little while and not quitting at all. that is it. now he also used a patch. you heard he used a patch. but what you heard was that he went to his 3338 doctor. he was diagnosed with hypertension, like, in 1991 or -- it must have been '92 because the patch did not become available until by prescription only until 1992. his hypertension physician said you need to stop smoking. i'm going to prescribe you the patch. he prescribed the patch. we went to the store, he got the patch, and he put it on and he smoked, and he smoked. and yes, dr. hurt said there are some people that need more than one patch. but dr. kaplan told you, you know what? if you are a pack, pack and a half, two pack a day smoker, a 21-milligram patch is more than sufficient to take away that nicotine craving if that is what you have. but what mr. bowden did was not follow even the most fundamental of the requirements of using the patch, and then he did not use it anymore. and did he go back to his doctor and say doc, you know what? this did not work. i want to quit. i need some more help? nope. so what else? if you are really intent on quitting smoking, what do you do? it is like anything else. first thing you do is you get rid of whatever it is you do not want to use, right? 3339 if you want to quit eating dunkin' donuts, you stop going to the dunkin' donuts store, right? did mr. bowden ever throw his cigarettes away? no. did he ever throw his ashtrays or lighters or matches away so he would not have all that stuff lying around? never. mrs. bowden said that he found that there was someplace you could go to be hypnotized, but did he go? did he get in his car? did he call and make an appointment? no. did he ever attend a smoking cessation program? never. and we put in evidence that there were smoking cessation programs here in jacksonville. in fact, it was easy to find in the paper going back to 1962. we showed multiple -- just randomly going through the paper, we found multiple opportunities put on by the latter day saints, i think it was, the american cancer society, for free. did mr. bowden ever make an inquiry about going to a smoking cessation program? no. he smoked while using a patch, never quit for more than a day. so is this somebody who seriously wanted to quit 3340 smoking? you guys have to decide that based on -- this is not a class action, this is not a case about smokers in general or the american public. this is a case about one smoker, and one smoker only. did mr. bowden ever quit? well, i do not know. i do not know. i know that dr. wolfe said that mr. bowden said he did. mr. bowden in 1994, when he saw dr. wolfe in august said he did, and mrs. bowden said he did not. i did not know the answer to that. i know that dr. wolfe did a physical examination on this date, it is in the medical records. he got close enough to look at his teeth and listen to his heart. so if mr. bowden was still a pack and a half, two pack a day smoker, do not you think mr. wolfe would smell cigarette smoke on him? that is just common sense. if, in fact, he quit for two months, then all the nicotine is out of his body. if he had any withdrawal symptoms, they are all gone. if he had an up-regulation in neuro receptors, they are either back to normal or on their way back to normal. but i do not know whether he quit or did not, i do not know. but that is information in this case. but if he did, he certainly could when he was motivated to do so. 3341 all right. so that is the actual evidence in this case in connection with question 2. why did mr. bowden smoke for all those years? why did he do that? was addiction a but-for reason why he smoked all those years? would he have stopped smoking if he had not been addicted? that is the question you have to ask yourself. would mr. bowden truly have stopped smoking if he had not been addicted, if you have concluded that he was addicted? because if your conclusion is no, he would not quit smoking, then addiction was not the but-for reason why he smoked all those years. if he would have continued to smoke because of enjoyment or pleasure, then addiction is not a but-for reason. now, here you have two questions: if some of you folks think i do not think he was addicted, and some of you folks think well, i think he was addicted, but i do not think addiction was a but-for reason why he continued to smoke, but all together, you all conclude that for one reason or another the answer to this question ought to be no, then your answer to that question is no, and your work is done and do not go on further in the verdict form. that is how this works. on the other hand, if unanimously all of you 3342 conclude that mr. bowden was both addicted and you believe his addiction was a but-for reason why he continued to smoke, then you have to proceed in the verdict form, and you have to answer more questions. here's the second question. you also have to decide whether or not smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of why he developed his cancer and died, and i'm going to leave that to mark seiden to talk to you about, because you already know about his significant family history of cancer, you also know that he smoked a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time, so i'm going to let mark talk to you about that. i'm going to move to the third and fourth questions on this verdict form. this is where the legal-ease gets really heavy. state for each defendant whether the concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of mr. bowden's lung cancer and death. this is concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking. health effects or addictive nature. what does that boil down to? was there something that philip morris or r.j. reynolds failed to say about whether or not smoking could cause health problems, or 3343 the addictiveness of cigarettes? that was a but-for reason on why mr. bowden developed his lung cancer and died. and here, again, is that same question again. and once again we have that but-for requirement for legal cause. now, it is a complicated concept, but you cannot jump over it you cannot ignore it. it is the heart of question 3 and 4, right? it was the heart of question 1. now it is the heart of question 3 and 4. and here's that but-for language. now, what does this boil down to? what does it really mean? i put this little chart to help you understand this concept. whatever it is they are complaining that philip morris, r.j. reynolds failed to say, has to have had a direct connection with mr. bowden. in other words, he had to have been waiting to hear from them, waiting to hear from philip morris or r.j. reynolds that smoking could cause you to get sick, or smoking could be addictive. and then they have to show not only that he was waiting to hear for it, but that if philip morris or r.j. reynolds had only said something, that he would have done what? that he would have not started smoking, 3344 or that he would have quit in time to avoid getting lung cancer. that is how pivotal -- that is how pivotal this requirement of but-for is. so they have to show not only that he is waiting to hear for it, but that it would have had a substantial impact on him. how substantial? he would have changed his behavior. he either would not have started, or he would have quit or quit in time to avoid developing his lung cancer. and if they have not proved that, then the answer to these two questions for each defendant is no, period. now, how will you know the answer to these questions in mr. bowden's case? well, do not you have to have a review of the evidence about mr. bowden? not simply was there some speech given by some representative or a deposition, or a deposition taken in a lawsuit of some former official of the cigarette company. do not you have to look back at mr. bowden and his life and see whether or not -- see what he knew, when he knew it, and what he is doing about it, so that you can fairly determine whether or not -- whatever it is they are complaining that r.j. reynolds or phillip morris did not say would have been so pivotal that mr. bowden 3345 would have either not begin smoking, or would have quit in time to avoid getting lung cancer. so this is where i take us back to the timeline that i put up in the beginning of this case, because this is mr. bowden's life. and i'm going to walk you back through it again -- not as slowly as i did the first time, i promise, but just to hit the highlights of not only what was going on in mr. bowden's life with his friends and family, his close relatives, but also what was mr. bowden being exposed to personally. well, why did mr. bowden start smoking? nobody knows. nobody came here and told you i know why mr. bowden started smoking. nobody. because mr. bowden -- nobody -- if there was anybody around when he had his first cigarette, or his 10th, or his 100th, there is nobody here that came and told you about that, nobody. what we did learn was that he had parents and older brothers and sisters that smoked. and you learned from their expert, dr. burns, that when you live in a family -- these are the questions i asked: now, when we think about mr. bowden and beginning smoking, if your parents smoke, that has a significant possibility of causing you to smoke, does not it? and he said: well, "causing" is a difficult word to use in that context. it is one of the forces that 3346 predict you are likely to become a cigarette smoker, yes. and then i asked: another predictor is whether your siblings, that is your brothers and sisters smoked? that is correct. and did you know that mr. bowden had an older brother and older sister and both of them smoked? yes. so that is another significant predictor in whether or not somebody like mr. bowden is going to smoke? correct. correct. they talk about advertising. they talked about advertising, and they brought dr. kyriakoudes. remember dr. kyriakoudes? he also lectures to plaintiffs lawyers on how to win lawsuits like this. he is the guy that got paid $30,000, and all he really needed to know was tell me what brands he smoked and when he smoked them, that is all i need to know. he was asked point blank: "you are not here to tell this jury why mr. bowden begin to smoke? no. i have not mentioned that so far, and i do not intend to. you are not here to talk about specifically mr. bowden, whether advertising influenced him specifically or not, are you?" i love this answer: as distinct from the broader 3347 verse of history, no. i do not even know what the first part means. no. did anybody come here and say that mr. bowden was the kind of guy that was particularly susceptible to advertising? no. did anybody come here and tell you that mr. bowden ever said that he was influenced by advertising; he had been smoking or continued smoking? no. did anybody tell you -- as a matter of fact, what was the attitude in the bowden home when he was growing up? you heard it from his sister bonnie. she said smoking was a no-no in our home. i told you in my opening statement, i said, you know, from the very earliest time, what you are going to learn about mr. bowden was he was having people that he loved and respected were telling him do not smoke, smoking is bad from the very earliest time. and there it was, it came from his sister. in our household, smoking was a no-no. and do we know when mr. bowden -- oh, by the way, i'm not going do show you all these things right now, 3348 but we gave you samples of reader's digest, the encyclopedia, all kinds of stuff, newspaper articles, showing you that was it any secret that there was nicotine in tobacco and cigarettes? no. were they called cancer sticks? were they called coffin nails? did people know that smoking was harmful for you, even in the '30s and '40s? yes. did they link it to lung cancer? no. that did not come until 1950 and beyond. did they know that -- did they call it addicting? absolutely. did they -- and you will see it. if you want to take the time to look in the reader's digest articles that i showed you on the elmo and more -- that is the elmo -- then you are going to see that in a totally nonsophisticated, available to the american public, number one magazine in this country, reader's digest, that they were calling cigarettes addicting and that nicotine was why they did it and it had a pharmacological affect, they called it a drug. they did everything. is this some secret that philip morris or r.j. reynolds was hiding from mr. bowden? absolutely not. was mr. -- when did mr. bowden begin smoking? we 3349 do not know. yeah, he had a cousin who said i think i remember him smoking before he went in the military. well, she did not remember that he was in world war ii. his sister said i do not remember him smoking before he came home from the military. his first wife said -- he was married in 1946, said i do not remember him being a smoker. so when did he begin smoking? dr. burns said, i do not know. he reviewed all this stuff too. he said, i do not know. i do not think we will ever know. what we do know is -- oh, and by the way, in the '40s are students here in florida, right here in jacksonville being taught that smoking is bad for your health and that it is addicting? absolutely. barbara dampier, the same cousin that was talking about her recollection -- she is the 80-year-old lady, his cousin, and she said she remembers to this day in her last year of high school when -- she left in the 10th grade. she remembered that she was being taught that smoking was bad for your health and it was addicting in high school right here. now is there any way that mr. bowden -- she is being taught in the 10th grade. is there any way that mr. bowden does not know that? is somebody waiting to hear from philip morris or 3350 r.j. reynolds? no. let us go to the '50s. let us revisit mr. bowden's life in the '50s. oh, and by the way, talking about beginning smoking, back then in world war ii, was smoking encouraged in the military? sure. you got free cigarettes in your rations, you got very inexpensive cigarettes in the px. maybe he started smoking in the military. yeah, he may have, but we do not know. 1950s, and this is when this avalanche of information, breaking news about connecting smoking with lung cancer is coming out, and i can tell you, we put all this stuff in evidence for you guys just as examples of articles that were appearing in everyday publications. mrs. bowden testified that she took reader's digest; that they got life magazine from her parents. i put up -- and that they read the jacksonville newspaper, the florida times-union. i put these documents in as examples of what was being published here in jacksonville. and mr. bowden was described as an intelligent man. he loved to read the paper, read reader's digest, read life magazine, watched the news on television. that is why we put it in evidence, so you would have firsthand information about 3351 what mr. bowden really was seeing. all right. now, you know he started work at southern bell in 1951. did he control his smoking? sure, he had to, because as a worker for the company you can only smoke one smoke break in the morning and one smoke break in the afternoon. he meets and marries mrs. bowden in 1953. along with mrs. bowden, comes what? a mother and father-in-law. and what is your recollection about the position of mr. horne and mrs. horne about smoking? well, let me refresh your recollection because i promised you that there would be evidence that mr. bowden would be told from the very beginning by the people that he loved and respected do not smoke, smoking is bad for you. do not smoke. and here is the exchange i had, the questions and answers with mrs. bowden about her dad. i said: "but your dad was very, very close to smoking, was not he? yes. and there was a rule in your parents' house while you were there that no one could smoke in the house, right? just an accepted thing. you knew that dad would 3352 not have liked it. but smoking was a bad thing -- " this is conversations between mr. horne, her dad, and mr. bowden. "-- that smoking was a bad thing for him to be doing, and your dad would have told him that straight up, would not he? yes, he would have. my dad was very out spoken. right. and so that remained the rule for your husband -- that remained the rule that your husband had to live by: a father-in-law who was constantly reminding him do not smoke, smoking is bad for you, and you cannot smoke in my house, right?" and mrs. bowden said: "well, he did not constantly remind him. you know, once it was said, that was it. you knew. you knew." now is this the story -- this is 1953. this is before any conspiracy they are talking about, before any concealment. this is "you knew." this is mr. bowden's life. let us go back to the timeline for just a second. you remember mrs. bowden began smoking herself in 1952. did she begin smoking because of advertising? no. she told you that she began smoking against the 3353 will of her parents because she was riding too and from work with folks that smoked, so she just took it up. peers. parents, siblings, peers. is that how we smoke? is that how we begin smoking? in her case that is exactly how mrs. bowden began smoking. now, when she meets mr. bowden, the two of them smoke together. they are both smoking unfiltered cigarettes, and they enjoyed smoking together. but now in 1954, their first child together is born -- that is michael -- and what does mrs. bowden do? she quits smoking. now she did not tell us in this courtroom why she quit, but is not it obvious? she has a mom, she has a dad, they are both telling her to quit smoking. she has this avalanche of information that she is seeing in magazines and newspapers that she wants to read, she gets and she reads, and she has a new baby. so what does she do? she quits smoking, and here's what she says to her husband: "all right. at some point you became -- i saw in your deposition the word "harping"." and i said: "i do not really like that word. you were encouraging, let us put it that way." and she nodded her head. 3354 and i said: "you were encouraging your husband to stop smoking? yeah. and you did that for an awful long time in his life, did not you? yes, i did." so now let us look at mr. bowden's life. from here in the '50s he has his mother-in-law, his father-in-law, his wife, all telling him do not smoke, smoking is bad for you. and what decision is mr. bowden making at this point in time? can you really -- as you sit here right now, can you really say to yourself gosh, if philip morris and r.j. reynolds had simply said we agree, smoking -- there is information coming out about lung cancer, smoking may cause lung cancer, would mr. bowden have changed his mind? that is what they have to prove to you, is that whatever it is they are complaining philip morris concealed, it would have made mr. bowden do something he was not that would have made him quit. when his mother-in-law is telling him to quit, his father-in-law is telling him to quit, his wife is telling him to quit, do you think if philip morris had 3355 written something in the paper and said we agree, that mr. bowden all of a sudden would have said okay, i quit? he is installing phones at homes. can he can control his smoking? of course he has to. we showed you this survey from the gallup poll, ninety percent of the americans in 1954 had heard smoking can cause cancer. any reason to believe mr. bowden is not one of those? no. see it now. i think this will appear on your monitors. this is, just a short segment from -- there were television programs. here's edward r. murrow. mrs. bowden told you in her trial testimony she knew who edward r. murrow was. he was a very famous broadcaster of the day. her husband watched to watch the news. two nightly programs, special program by edward r. murrow, and i think you are going to see -- this is -- pardon? see it now. sorry. it will be on your monitors. (video played:) "good evening. this is see it now, produced by the partnership of friendly and murrow. tonight, the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer. in 1952, drs. hammond and horn of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking 3356 habits of american men. here is dr. hammond reporting on the results of the first two years. it is now set in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they want to smoke or not, is their own business." (video end.) mr. reilly: there you are, ladies and gentlemen. here's this program telling you that people should be warned and are being warned, and now it is up to you, and it was up to mr. bowden, and what decision did mr. bowden make? you have programs like this on television. it is very personable communications from this man. we do not want you to smoke. do not smoke. smoking is bad for you. let us move on to the '60s. 1962. remember, mrs. bowden is more emphatic than simply telling him to quit. now she is telling him you cannot smoke in the house, you cannot smoke in the car. do you need more reminders than that? is it 3357 something that philip morris or r.j. reynolds could say that we believe smoking -- that you smoke for nicotine? is that going to make mr. bowden do something his wife is not making him do? million americans have quit smoking by the early '60s. per capita consumption of cigarettes peaks in 1963, then you have the surgeon general's report in 1964. very briefly, here's the news coverage. you know we only had three channels then: abc, cbs -- what did i say? abc, nbc, and cbs, thank you. and so here's cbs's special report with harry reasoner, a young harry reasoner. (video played.) "this is a cbs news extra, on smoking and health: the findings of the surgeon general's committee. almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. but the attack took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says: 'cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx, and probably the most important cause of 3358 chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an affective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him its good for him either. the decision is his. the decision and the health may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video ended.) mr. reilly: you know that in the '60s ted was talking to his father about quitting smoking, and here is ted talking about his grandmother and mrs. bowden. and he says: 3359 "and in the '60s you would also hear your grandmother, yvonne horne, tell mr. bowden he should not smoke cigarettes, right? yes. after you graduated high school, even though you went away to college, you would still hear your mother telling your father that smoking was unhealthy; is that correct? correct. and you were telling him the same thing? that is correct." and you have seen the public service announcements. i'm not going to take the time to play them. you just saw a few more. yes, bill talman, very impactful, and running in the '60s, and a whole bunch of other ones running in the '60s, and yul brynner. and these things keep going straight on through right to the present day, right? but they did not stop at the end of 1970 or 1971 when cigarette advertising stopped. they kept on going. yul brynner is in the '80s. larry hagman is in the '80s. did mr. bowden express any interest in quitting smoking? did he make any effort in quitting smoking? did he decide he wanted to quit smoking in the '50s, or 3360 the '60s, or the '70s, or at any time until the very, very end of the '80s? did he ever say you know what, i want to give up the pleasure that i'm getting from smoking? no. the warning on packs in 1966: caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. and in the late '60s, early '70s, ted's father talked about the link between smoking and cancer. this is mrs. bowden testimony again: "i think you told us you would tell your husband to quit, and he should quit smoking. and you knew he was going to do whatever he wanted to do, right? right." about the switch to -- this is the testimony about the switch to filters or lights. this is the exact testimony from mrs. bowden. this was from a question posed to her by mr. avera: "did you ever have any discussions with him, meaning mr. bowden, as to why he started smoking filtered as opposed to unfiltered cigarettes? we had a conversation. i do not know if it was going to filters or going to lights. well, that is a difference in time." you just heard mr. smith say that he thinks the switch to filters was around 1970, and then the switch 3361 to lights is by tammy's recollection sometime around 1990. so mrs. bowden is not remembering whether it is apparently around 1970 or around 1990, but she said: "i do not know if it was going to filters or going to lights. and there was a magazine article, not an ad, a magazine article, and i think it was in life magazine, and i noticed the pack was different. i said when did you change your mind? and he said -- and he showed me the magazine and he said it was lower in tar and stuff like that." well, here is mr. bowden demonstrating that he has an understanding that tar is what is bad in cigarettes, that is the thing that causes you to get sick, not nicotine. and he gets an article in life magazine. well, there is no evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that philip morris or r.j. reynolds ever put an article in life magazine that switching to filters would be any better for you or that switching to lights would be any better for you. but i can tell you that in this trial during the testimony of dr. burns, this is what was shown to you from the international agency for the research of cancer, the world health organization, their conclusion a year ago in 2012 was that nevertheless, it was concluded that changes in cigarette types since the 3362 1950s have probably tended to reduce the risk for lung cancer associated with tobacco smoking. comparative smokers of medium tar-filtered cigarettes, risk was higher -- higher among men and women who smoked higher tar, not filtered brands. nonfiltered brands. so here's the international agency for the research of cancer explaining to folks -- this is the world health organization saying filters have reduced, they did not make a safe cigarette. mr. bowden did not think he was smoking a safe cigarette, but they have reduced somewhat over unfiltered cigarettes the risk of developing lung cancer. let us go to the '70s. how do you know how mr. bowden felt about smoking? just look at what he tells his children. he catches tammy in 1970, when i think she was in 7th grade, and told her do not smoke, do not start. i should not have started, do not smoke. and if your mother catches you she will kill you. that is the year that mr. horne dies. for 17 years he is been telling his son-in-law do not smoke, smoking is bad for you, you cannot smoke in the house. his wife continues on. she survives him for another -- i do not remember how many years, but she lives on into her 80's, and she keeps up that same story. 3363 and she knows the new warnings goes on the packs: warning, the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health in 1970 and '71. all the cigarette ads they talk about are gone. 1972, warning -- this warning goes on every ad, it is a bill board, it is a magazine. there it is. why did i tell you about michael and tammy and going into the program for street drugs down in fort lauderdale? only to let you know that the bowdens know that if you want to quit something that you are doing and you think you need some help, you can look it up. you can look up smoking cessation. you can find these smoking cessation programs if you want to. they are not hard to find, not even remotely hard to find. they are advertised in the paper. so that is why i told you about that. and we showed you -- we put ads for these programs both in fort lauderdale and right here in jacksonville in evidence so you could see that they are plentiful and -- and remarkably successful. dr. burns, their expert, gave a quote in 1975 that said more people know smoking is dangerous than know the president's name, 1975. any reason to believe that mr. bowden was not among 3364 those folks? and i asked him who was the president? i think he said gerald ford. i hope i got that right. psas continue, 1964 to 1979, 30 million americans quit. she says you cannot smoke in my house. you saw at various points in time members of mr. bowden's family developed lung cancer, or cancers. this is mrs. bowden's testimony about cancer discussions that she had with her husband: "when his sister had cancer, when his mother had cancer, did you take those opportunities and say to your husband hey, you know what? you really ought to quit smoking? i'm sure we had some discussions all the time about he should not smoke." and yet their burden of proof is to show you that philip morris or r.j. reynolds should have done something, when the wife is telling him all the time do not smoke; that mr. bowden would have stopped taking the pleasure he got out of smoking and quit smoking when there is a warning on every cigarette pack? every cigarette pack made by philip morris or r.j. reynolds that this gentlemen smoked from 1966 on had a warning on it. oh, yes. they said we made cigarettes. we juiced 3365 them up, i think was the phrase they used. that was the theory that dr. hurt presented to you, and i debunked it with three steps. this is the way his theory goes: if you use ammonia when you manufacture cigarettes, you are going to increase the ph, the acidity or baseness, in this case baseness of cigarette smoke, it is a chemical status. and that is going to create unprotonated nicotine. unprotonated nicotine because it has one less proton in each nicotine molecule is going to pass across the membrane walls of your lungs, what they call the alveoli of your lungs, and it is going to get to your brain faster. and he said the faster it gets to your brain, the more potential addictiveness of the substance, right? so his whole theory rests on the idea that the cigarettes that mr. bowden is smoking deliver unprotonated nicotine, that is the key, because it is unprotonated nicotine is supposed to go faster to the brain, right? i realize that is a complex concept, but how do you debunk it? well, the first thing you do is you go to the 1979 surgeon general's report, and you say well, what does the surgeon general say? was the surgeon general 3366 unaware of this ammonia concept? no. he addressed it right here. he said since cigarettes in the united states, and most foreign countries are made of flue- cured tobacco, which, of course, our cigarettes are, are blended with flue-cured tobacco is a major ingredient, or in a few cases are blended with turkish tobacco, the ph of the resulting mainstream smoke is below 6.5 and thus is essentially protonated. there it was. that is the end of the story. that is the end of dr. hurt's theory, right there. and i said there it is. he said the surgeon general is wrong. the surgeon general is wrong. so that is the end of his theory, it contains only protonated nicotine. so then just to show the ph, the magic number here was 6.5. then to show the ph, of philip morris cigarettes, marlboro and marlboro lights that mr. bowden smoked were well below that 6.5, here it is from the massachusetts department of health, 6.028, 6.128, well below -- just like the surgeon general said. so that was the end of that. but, of course, dr. hurt said oh, that is wrong because they used a canadian lab to figure these numbers out; like the department of health in the state of massachusetts cannot figure out what laboratory to hire to go do these tests. i mean, that is ridiculous. 3367 but since it blew mr. -- or dr. hurt's theory all to smithereens, but then i went another step because -- i love kitchen chemistry. i said, okay, doctor. let us talk about what is this major -- they said kick, or this major -- i forget what other word was used, but kick. what does this amount to? what is the time differential in delivery that we are talking about? this was the examination that we had on that subject. i said: "oh, yeah. you said that to have unprotonated nicotine, unprotonated nicotine delivers to the brain faster. do you remember that?" he said it increases the speed of absorption. that is cutting across the cell walls. "by how much? well, we do not know exactly how much it does because it depends on what the slope of the curve was to begin with." i said: "let us cut the hogwash here. let us get down to the body. we are talking about milliseconds, are not we?" and his answer was we are talking about a very short time, yes. "tell the jury what a millisecond is. it is a thousandth of a second." 3368 that is the time, a thousandth of a second. and i said: "doctor, how long does it take to blink your eye, a tenth of a second? you do not even notice it." and i noticed everybody in this room blinked. what did it feel like? because it is just natural, you know. that is what i call kitchen chemistry. but the whole idea that somehow getting nicotine to your brain a thousandths of a second faster is going to make nicotine more addictive is ridiculous. and, in fact, they put a document in for philip morris that addresses this protonated and unprotonated nicotine whole concept. if you really talk the time to look at that document, you would see that the guy who wrote it was talking about a sensation in the back of your throat if you drove the ph level up to, like, 8 or 11 or something like that. it has nothing to do with racing to the brain. on top of that, yes, there is some documents by the folks at reynolds that occurred back in the '70s, but look at the 1996 analysis by the fella at reynolds. he went back, he looked at everything and said this is just hogwash. this is just nonsense. that guy was all wrong, wrong, wrong. 3369 so let us go to the '80s. we are about done. mr. bowden worked at convenience stores. he is retired from southern bell. everyday he is handing cigarettes to people who are buying them. do you think he really does not know about the warnings on the packs or what everybody is saying about cigarettes? 1981, this is another quote from dr. burns: 95 percent of all americans are thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking, and ninety percent believe it applies to them. that is a quote from their expert. i asked him about it on the stand. he said yeah, i said it. 1982, mr. bowden -- the family said mr. bowden developed a smoker's cough, and they recommended he go to the doctor to have it checked out. now mr. bowden can do what he wants to do, that is a quote from mrs. bowden. and so what did mr. bowden do? did he take their advice and go to the doctor? no, he did not. he did not go to the doctor. they all agreed he did not go to the doctor. it is not a criticism of mr. bowden, it is his body, right? it is his decision about how he is going to live with it. 3370 we all have -- this is not a dry run, this is our lives, right? 1985, the warnings change. now we have the explicit warning that says smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, et cetera. his brother charles dies in 1989. he does not make a quit attempt in connection with that. we already know about gary cook and all that, i'm not going to repeat that. 38 million americans quit in 1989. mr. smith talked about switching to lights, and there is a couple things you need to know about switching to lights. number one, mr. bowden smoked lights. their dr. dr. kyriakoudes said lights became or began being advertised in 1965. mr. bowden switches to lights in 1990. he is waited 25 years to be affected by the advertising. that is a pretty slow affect. but what is really happening is mr. bowden is not brand loyal, he is smoking marlboro lights -- what did he say, winston lights, camel lights, marlboros, winston, full flavors, unfiltered cigarettes, unfiltered camels, and whatever is only sale. he is not brand loyal. he might switch back and forth between brands, right? 3371 yes, sir. and on top of that, this was testimony from their dr. burns: the fact of the matter is that cancer, lung cancer is what they call a latent disease. by latent disease it means that it takes a long time to develop. and dr. burns here is telling you that mr. bowden's lung cancer was already in his body by 1985. so whatever he smoked, whether it was filtered, unfiltered, et cetera in 1989, 1990, it did not matter, and that is exactly what dr. burns said. i asked him: "when he switched to lights, did it matter?" he said: "no, it did not matter. it is too late. so yes, had he quit in the mid '80s it would have -- it would not have been large enough to allow us to say that he would not have developed his lung cancer when he did." they have to show that mr. bowden relied to his detriment -- they have to say -- they have to prove that mr. bowden would have relied on something philip morris or r.j. reynolds failed to say, and that his reliance caused him to get his lung cancer. so if mr. bowden, when he switches and begins to smoke some light cigarettes, if that was some act of reliance, it came to late to avoid his lung cancer 3372 anyway. but can you really say that mr. bowden was truly trying to reduce his risk when he continues to smoke marlboro reds, winston full flavors, and anything else people are selling because it is on sale? i mean, really and truly? so let us go to the '90s. remember, we talked gary and tammy quitting, we talked about the patch, we talked about psas continuing. unfortunately, mr. bowden is diagnosed with cancer and dies. and yes, he smoked after his doctor diagnosed him with lung cancer. you remember the conversation that mrs. bowden had? the conversation was doctor, he is smoking again. and the doctor said look, he only has so many -- so much time left. let him do what he wants to do. let him do what he enjoys to do. and yes, i saw that mr. smith did this when -- he does not know what he is doing, he is talking to people that are not in the room. and dr. kaplan explained that is just a motor movement that did over and over again. all right. so now what is the answer to these questions? in light of what you all know now, what you have been reminded of now from the very testimony that 3373 occurred in this case, have they proved to you that this concealment, whatever it is they are complaining about that had to do with the health effects or addictive nature of smoking, that mr. bowden would have quit, and quit in time to avoid getting his lung cancer? truly, with all those people telling him all that time, and all that information, is not the answer to all four of those questions no? now, you have to go on if you have gotten this far, and i do not think you will ever get this far in this. i think question number one is going to stop you. but if unanimously you get this far in the verdict form, you have to address comparative fault. and i heard mr. avera say that he thought that when he looked in the mirror with mr. bowden, that he saw mr. bowden in about a third of the mirror. less than philip morris and less than r.j. reynolds. and i asked him in light of mrs. bowden saying mr. bowden was going to do whatever he wanted to do, and in light of all that you have seen and the exact testimony in this case, really and truly is anybody else in the mirror when mr. bowden gets up in the morning and goes and has his coffee and smokes his cigarette, really and truly? is he less than ninety percent of the person that is in the mirror. 3374 i leave that to your sound discretion. i'm not going to offer you a number, because i think you guys can apply your common sense. you did not leave it when you came in the courthouse. i leave that -- if you get this far, i leave that to your sound discretion. and as for the damages, if you get this far, then the only thing i would say to you, i realize mr. avera put up an enormous number, but i would just remind you look, any time whenever there is a marriage, one spouse is going to outlive the other one, unless you die simultaneously somehow, every spouse -- some spouses always are going to survive the other, and it is always going to be sad, always; not possible to be otherwise. but one of the very first questions that i asked each one of you was when you hear this lawsuit, can you set aside feelings of sympathy that are only natural for any human being when one spouse loses another? and each one of you said you could. and i said there is going to be an instruction from the judge that asks you to do that. and i know after i sit down plaintiff's counsel is going to get back up and he is going to say we are not asking for sympathy, we are asking for fairness and justice and all of that, and i understand that. all i'm 3375 really asking you is this: if anybody mentions something that you construe to be sympathy, just remind them look, that has no business in our deliberations if you get this far in the case. all right. again, only if you answer these questions yes do you go on to question number 7. so after all of that evidence i, frankly, think there is no way that unanimously you get to question number 7, but i have to cover it just on the chance that i'm wrong, that you see this completely different. under the circumstances of this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages awarded against each defendant. what is clear and convincing evidence? clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling than persuasive. greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and affect of the entire evidence in the case. in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue. and this instruction tells you that it has to be a firm conviction about mr. bowden having been impacted by 3376 something that philip morris or r.j. reynolds failed to say or do. in other words, you have to be firm in your belief that mr. bowden would have done something else than what he did do in the face of all that information he had, all those people recommending to him that he quit smoking in order to answer question number 7 yes. well, guess what? i'm out of boards. i greatly appreciate your attention. you guys have been fabulous throughout my closing argument and mr. smith's and mr. avera's, and i know you are going to give mark seiden the same level of attention, no question about it. thank you very much. and by the way, i'm going to sit down. i do not address you again. mr. seiden is going to get up. he is going to talk and he will not address you again, but the plaintiff gets to get back up again. they have another, i think, another 30 minutes to talk to you again. why? because they have the burden of proof, and i do not know what they are going to say. i do not know whether they are going to say here's some more documents, here's some more stuff, here's more videotapes. i do not know what they are going to say. all i would ask you is i do not get to get back up and say hey, wait a minute. just ask yourself where is 3377 mr. bowden in that picture. thanks. mr. seiden: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. so i do not know if it was a month or two ago you got an invitation in the mail, and it said, please come down to this courthouse on march 10th, probably around 8:00, 8:30. all of you did. we 3385 thank you for that. i suspect at the time you never dreamed or suspected that you would spend at least 12 days here. twelve days out of your life. so when counsel talk about the sacrifice that you have made that we all recognize, we do. it is an incredible service, incredible burden, incredible obligation that you-all have done; and for that, we thank you. so, again, i'm third. i cut and slashed a little. i may repeat a couple of things mr. reilly said, but i'll try not to. i'll try my best when i get there to move quickly if mr. reilly's already covered the point. but to be clear so no one mistakes it, i agree with all the points mr. reilly was just making and, particularly, that when it comes to the issue of class membership, when it comes to all of those claims, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. and in this case, this case about mr. bowden and the reasons he smoked, the plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proof. at the end of two weeks of evidence, a week and a half of evidence, it is clear mr. bowden smoked for pleasure. mr. reilly ran you through the testimony, put up a slide that shows various elements with it. 3386 you heard he enjoyed to smoke with his coffee. he liked to smoke after dinner. we heard about after dinner, and then we heard about the apple pie. he liked that. he liked that smoke. he liked to have apple pie. and he loved to have the two of them together. he loved to socialize and smoke. and you heard it from several witnesses. maybe it would not be what you would think, but he enjoyed the taste of cigarettes. that was clear. mr. bowden enjoyed smoking. and that is the reason why for a period of nearly 50 years -- whether it is 49, whether it is 53 -- that is the reason why, during that entire period of time, mr. bowden never had one serious quit attempt. you heard mr. reilly talk about where that definition comes from, the surgeon general's report. you heard dr. hurt accepts it as accurate. eight hours. that was the most you heard about in this case, was an eight-hour quit attempt. unless, of course, that august 17th, 1994, medical record is correct. and i agree we do not know if it is or it is not. but if it is, then you know that when mr. bowden wanted to quit, he could quit. because 3387 that record indicates a quit period of two months. that is what the evidence is. mr. bowden, no matter what you think about whether or not he quit for the two months, the picture of him is someone who enjoys smoking, who wants to smoke. there is no evidence of a desperate man, who, year after year after year, is struggling with addiction; who cannot stop smoking. that is not the picture. this is a picture of a man who never even tried to quit until at least the mid-'80s, probably the late '80s. this is not a man who is struggling with addiction. this is a man who wants to smoke, and he does just that. and, again, that might not be your choice. it might not be my choice. that was mr. bowden's choice, and we ask that you respect it. you heard that -- you have heard it from witnesses, "stop smoking, dad." he pooh-poohed them. he brushes it off. and, ultimately, as mr. reilly showed you on that slide, it was agreed mr. bowden would do what mr. bowden wanted to do. that is the individual he was. that is the man he was. i want to talk about some of the points that 3388 the experts for the plaintiffs made. where i want to start is freebase nicotine because, to me, that was dr. hurt's big point. it was the freebase nicotine. and you know what? he used a bunch of documents from my client to try to make that point. what he did not tell you on direct exam, though, is he did not show you what mr. reilly just showed you from the surgeon general; that there is only pronated nicotine, essentially below 6.5. he did not talk about that. and do you know what? those documents that he showed you from my client you saw on direct, those documents, they had the p- -- the smoke ph levels in them. remember i asked him, "did you look at these before your testimony, dr. hurt? did you review them"? he said he did not remember. he remembered looking at the documents up there, but he did not remember looking at the very things, the smoke ph levels of the documents. can you imagine? he is telling you that we are going to freebase nicotine, and he does not even look at the levels to see if they are above 6.5. and you saw i showed him the documents. "let us look through the charts." ultimately, he agreed he had no evidence that 3389 the smoke ph of camel cigarettes was ever at 6.5 or above. he had no evidence that the smoke ph of lucky strikes was ever at 6.5 or above. and when it came to winstons, he had no evidence that the smoke ph was ever above 6.5, except i showed him that the documents showed that winston lights in 1978 and 1979, it was above 6.5. and do you know what? two things to remember about that: one, there is no evidence here and there is no claim that mr. bowden ever smoked a light cigarette before the mid to late 19- -- 1989, 1990. there is no evidence of that, so the winston lights is irrelevant. but after the surgeon general's report came out, what happened to the winston lights? they dropped below 6.5 and never came above. so when you are going to tell a jury about freebasing nicotine, do not you think you should come with some evidence that they actually did it, not just that they were looking at smoke ph; but they actually raised it to the level where there'd be freebase nicotine? you did not get that from dr. hurt. you did not get that at all. now, one of the things that mr. smith showed you during his op- -- his closing presentation was 3390 an instruction regarding expert witnesses and how you should try to evaluate them. well, i want to show you another instruction you are going to get which is about witnesses generally and relates to expert witnesses as well. and it is -- can i have the envelope, please? -- it is an instruction on believability of witnesses. this is something i ask you to think about when you are thinking about the expert witness testimony. okay. instruction number 4. "in determining the believability of any witness, the weight to be given to testimony of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the testimony." well, when you think about demeanor, would they answer the questions that were asked, or did they make speeches to try to make points? did they come up -- did they answer questions by talking about things that were not responsive to the question? that is demeanor. and when you get to frankness, were they saying things that made sense, that seemed true? when they are telling you that their advertisements for cigarettes in stars and stripes -- and now you have 3391 seen them -- are they being frank with you? when on direct exam they are telling you about the flintstones and we get to it and they do not tell you the full story, are they being frank with you? when dr. burns tell you about the memo from dr. rodgman in 1956 and does not -- and tells you on direct that the surgeon general did not know about the constituents identified in there, and then on cross, he says they did. then it came out through the tirc, and they have been published in the reader's digest. is he being frank with you? that is instruction number 4. that goes hand in hand with the witness's qualification, the reasonableness of his testimony considered in light of all the evidence in the case. are you getting the full story? that is something to think about, instruction number 4. so i want to turn to the marketing evidence. at the end, the plaintiff failed again their burden of proof -- or her -- mrs. bowden's burden of proof. plaintiff failed to produce evidence that any of reynolds' or philip morris's advertising or marketing contributed to mr. bowden's development of lung cancer. now, you heard testimony -- think about who 3392 testified here in terms of fact witnesses. you heard from mrs. bowden. you heard from three of her children. you heard from tammy. you heard from nancy. you heard from ted, and you heard from her grandchild, chris. and then you heard from -- by deposition, you heard from yvonne tillman, mr. bowden's sister; and you heard from a cousin or second cousin -- cousin removed, barbara dampier. think about it. no fact witness testified that mr. bowden -- whoops. you are out of focus. okay. i do not know if it is okay on the screens -- no? okay. we will go -- there it is. okay. no fact witness in this case. all these fact witnesses plaintiff, who has the burden of proof, brought to you. you had all this expert testimony about marketing. was there any fact witness who testified that mr. bowden started smoking about an ad? was there any fact witness that mr. bowden purchased any product -- forget about cigarettes -- but he purchased any product at all based on a product ad? was there any fact witness who testified about mr. bowden's attitude about ads? did he believe ads? was he skeptical of ads? what was his reaction to ads? 3393 and how about cigarette ads? plaintiff's burden of proof. all this testimony about the marketing, marketing, marketing; this generic testimony because dr. kyriakoudes was not there to give you opinions about mr. bowden. why did not the fact witnesses tell you about how ads impacted mr. bowden, what they meant to him? it is plaintiff's burden of proof. so much focus on marketing generically with no mention of mr. bowden and marketing. did any witness tell you that he chose a brand of cigarettes based on an ad? they did not. they did not. you simply did not hear it. the evidence suggests it was not advertising that drove mr. bowden's selection of cigarettes. it was taste. it was price and availability; right? he looked for what was the lowest. he bummed from a friend. he enjoyed the taste. that is what you heard from the fact witnesses. you did not hear a single thing about advertising. that is what drove mr. bowden's decisions about what to smoke and when. can i have demonstrative 7, please? ultimately, when it comes to quitting and marketing, you are told about reassurance. there was not a single fact witness that testified -- who testified that cigarette advertising influenced 3394 mr. bowden's choices not to try to quit smoking in the '40s, the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, or the '80s. undisputed. at least up through the mid-'80s, if not later, he never tried to quit. did anyone tell you he did not try to quit because of an advertisement? did anyone ever tell you that he did not try to quit because of something philip morris said or r.j. reynolds said? you did not hear that from a single fact witness. no. all that testimony about marketing generically and nothing about mr. bowden in a case that is all about mr. bowden. let us go on to the specifics they did show you: puck. the sunday comments. you all remember that; right? i had a good run-through with dr. kyriakoudes, rinso soap and lysol disinfectant and cudahy. and you had to hear about how he would purchase mr. clean once or twice. i'm sure you-all remember that testimony. you know what you did not hear, the sunday comics. did anyone ask any of those fact witnesses, mr. bowden read the sunday comics? was that something he was interested in? all that testimony. you are going to tie it to mr. bowden at all? i did not hear it. 3395 let us turn to the flintstones. so you were shown the flintstones by plaintiff during opening statements. they said something about youth marketing, and they put that flintstones' sponsorship up there for you to see; right? all right. first impressions. it was put up there to make you mad. you were not told anything about it by -- during plaintiff's opening. you were just shown, this is how they marketed to youth. that is what they showed you. they did not even tell you the year it was on -- 1960. mr. bowden was 35 -- they just showed it to you. now you know. you know the full story, and you did not even get the full story when dr. kyriakoudes showed it to you. it did not come out until direct. remember that instruction? frankness? reasonableness of the evidence? you did not get that. you did not get it on direct exam from dr. kyriakoudes. no matter how hard dr. kyriakoudes tried to fight it, you know alka seltzer is an adult product. anyone who is thinking one a day vitamins and alka seltzer in 1960s? they are spending their money on advertising because they thought it was a youth show. come on. common sense. you heard plaintiff's counsel and 3396 mr. reilly say it. you do not leave your common sense at the door. you know better. you know now that the network abc, they marketed that as an adult show. and, finally, you know -- or at least after cross-examination -- maybe the most important part. you know that in the second season, abc moved it to saturday morning, and reynolds' sponsorship stopped. how does someone who is telling you he is a historian professor who follows the historical method to give the complete story -- how do you leave that out of your direct testimony? you think that is frank? you think that is reasonable? winston stops. reynolds stops sponsoring it when they moved it to the morning. and he omits that fact from his testimony? on the issue of reliance, they showed you the clip from mr. heimann in his deposition testimony that mr. burns agreed mr. bowden would never see. well, the testimony was could someone be justified in relying? and he said, yes. but remember this: the fact that they could be justified in relying does not prove that mr. bowden relied. it does not prove that he was not aware of the dangers of smoking, and it does not prove he 3397 was not aware that cigarettes could be addictive. all it proves -- it -- it does not prove any of those things as relates to mr. bowden. so i want to take a few minutes now to talk about medical-cause issue in this case. i'm going to start where i started two weeks ago in my opening statement and say, "is it possible that cigarettes were the cause?" i told you then yes, and i'm going to tell you again the answer's yes. but the question for you-all to answer is whether plaintiff has proved it, whether it -- whether mrs. bowden has met her burden of proof. because that is where it lies. she needs to prove that smoking was the legal cause. so you have heard plaintiffs. they are resting on statistical data that is -- that 99.5 percent of the cases are caused by smoking. i want to look at the bigger picture, all of the evidence. and i'm going to submit to you that on this issue, you have not heard from two doctors; you have actually heard from three doctors. and so as i get through this, i'm going to tell you what those three doctors said. first, there is dr. wolfe. he was the treating physician. his deposition was read to you, and 3398 you have seen his medical record. let us just go back and look at his medical record for a minute. this is what he noted back in 1994: "two siblings have died of lung cancer, and the third has active lung cancer at the time." next slide. "the patient's mother died of cancer and cardiac disease. "seven siblings with cancer history, as listed in hpi." and, finally, "strong family history of lung cancer." that is what was noted in 1994 when no one was thinking about a lawsuit, and all they were thinking about is the treatment of mr. bowden. you will have that document. it has other evidence about smoking history and cardiac disease. it will be back in the jury room with you. it is part of ans-8081. take a look at it for yourself. so you saw dr. wolfe's record. let us look at some of his trial testimony. let us start with his recognition that 5 percent of squamous cell lung cancers are related to genetic predisposition -- this is what he testified to -- and the other percent are made up of what, please? it can also relate to genetic predisposition. 3399 so you can say to yourself, well, that is just percent. that is a small number. you know, it is just 5 percent. forget about it. you could say that. but some group of people are contained in that 5 percent. for some, it is the 5 percent. so the question is, does it make sense to conclude that mr. bowden and his family was among the 5 percent? let us see the next testimony from dr. wolfe. "and when you reference -- when you reference the strong family history of lung cancer here, what do you mean? "more than one member. "okay." answer: "more than one other member." so he is talking about two. dr. wolfe is saying, if there is two members with lung cancer, that is a strong family history. well, let us look at the bowden family again. siblings with lung cancer, it is not two. it is four of them. four out of eight. that is half. four out of eight. siblings with other cancer, there is two. parents with cancers, there is both of them. it is four out of eight here. let us look at the next piece of testimony from 3400 dr. wolfe, please. "and, based upon your understanding in that regard, given the history that you have discussed or you have related here from the chart would" -- "in your estimation, would" -- "in your estimation would" -- lot of "would"s -- "mr. bowden's family history of cancer have increased the risk of his developing, for example, carcinoma of the lung, a twofold increase in that risk, based upon what you know about his family history? "yes, sir." he acknowledges mr. bowden's risk was known from the family history. next slide, please. and can you say that his smoking history, that that risk factor was the predominant risk factor in his developing -- oh, i'm sorry. i misread it. "and you cannot say" -- cannot say -- "that his smoking history, that that risk factor was the predominant risk factor in him developing that disease; correct?" he says, "correct." he cannot say -- it may be 95 to 5, but he cannot say -- dr. wolfe, the treating physician -- that smoking was the predominant risk factor. that is 3401 dr. wolfe's testimony. so let us turn to yvonne tillman. that is mr. bowden's sister. her deposition was read to you. and i know sometimes it can be harder to follow read deposition testimony, but it was her third question and answer where it immediately came out. "tell me about this." she had mentioned her medical problems. she said, "i just recently had a lobe of my lung removed." so let us see what she said about that later on as the deposition was read. it was towards the end. "what was the reason for the lower lobe of your lung being removed? "answer: they took a cat scan. they took an mri and they did a pet scan and all of it came back inconclusive." let us stop for a second. inconclusive; they do not know if she has cancer. "it showed a shadow. so the doctor suggested, since it was in the very lower spot of the lung, it was best to go ahead, since my family had such a history of lung cancer." that is her doctor. that is her doctor talking 3402 about the family history of lung cancer. just suspicious, who is not even doing a biopsy. "okay. so i agreed to it. "question: so there was not a definite diagnosis of lung cancer but the doctor was suspicious it could be lung cancer? "answer: yes. "and as a precautionary" -- manner -- "measure, recommended that surgery that you underwent? "answer: yes." that is how real the genetic predisposition is in the bowden family. it is not just four because yvonne was not on that list. it is not just four siblings out of eight having lung cancer. it is a woman, mr. bowden's sister, having something suspicious. they do not even biopsy, they remove a lobe of the -- of the lung. think about it. we talked about common sense. is that something that ordinarily would happen, that a person -- a lobe of someone's lung is removed? that is the medical. that is what is going on in this family. so i said you heard from three doctors. you heard from dr. burns -- and by the way, with dr. burns, he did not touch yvonne tillman's -- what 3403 happened to her. he did not talk about it. he did not review any of the medical records of the sibling. he is just ruled out genetic predisposition as the cause. maybe you will agree. but he did not consider those things. if he did, he did not talk about them. so i think you have heard, really, from three doctors: you have heard from dr. burns; you have heard from dr. wolfe and i just showed you his testimony; and, i think in the realest way possible, you have heard from yvonne tillman's doctor. you do not know his name, but he was not testifying in a courtroom. he was caring for a patient. he was trying to save the patient's life. he was concerned she had lung cancer. he was acting on his experience, knowledge, skill, and training. he did not say it for a lawsuit. it is just how he treated a patient with this history. so if dr. burns suggests there is no real proof that family history is a risk, let him explain yvonne tillman to you. let him explain how it is four out of eight. and when dr. wolfe testifies that 5 percent of lung cancers are related to genetics, ask yourself, if the bowden family is not among the 5 percent with four lung cancers -- two 3404 other siblings with cancer, two parents with cancer -- if the bowden family is not among the 5 percent, then whose family is? ask yourself those questions. consider that when you consider -- consider the medical case. so mr. reilly showed you, with his boards, that issue on the medical case is really going to come in two places. on the issue of class membership, mr. reilly showed you how there is three questions. the third question was whether smoking caused the lung cancer. that is the third question. but you also have to answer -- and if i can have the elmo, please. -- so you will have to answer it here in the first question on class membership. for the reasons mr. reilly said or the reasons that i've given you, we suggest that you answer the question "no," but you will decide. and if you get past the question, we -- we do not believe you should, but if you get to the second question here, negligence and strict liability, we think, for both defendants, you should check "no." because they need to demonstrate that smoking cig- -- cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of mr. bowden's lung cancer and death. and if you look at the instruction on legal 3405 cause, this is the instruction for negligence and strict liability. again, you have to show cigarettes were a legal cause of his death. and let us look at that following instruction. and again, you are going to have these back there. you do not have to take notes on it or try to write it down quickly. this is instruction 13. "smoking philip morris' and r.j. reynolds tobacco company's cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of mr. bowden's death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing mr. bowden's death so that it can reasonably be said that, but for that smoking, his death would [sic] have occurred." that is the question you are going to have to answer. was it -- but for his smoking, can you say, given his genetic predisposition, that if he did not smoke he was not going to develop the cancer and die? was he among the 5 percent, given all the evidence you have? and has plaintiff proved that it was the smoking and, but for the smoking, he would not have developed the disease. that is the medical cause question that you have to answer on these facts. before i move from medical cause, i want to 3406 discuss a very specific part of dr. burns' testimony. dr. burns testified that if mr. bowden had stopped smoking 15 years before his lung cancer diagnosis -- that is by 1979 -- more likely than not, he would not have developed lung cancer in 1994. it is a very important point. i'm going to try to -- i'm going to say it once more because i think it bears repeating. dr. burns testified that if mr. bowden had stopped smoking 15 years before his lung cancer -- so that is by 1979 -- more likely than not, he would not have developed his lung cancer in 1994. so i'm going to highlight for you -- given that testimony from dr. burns, i want to highlight for you some of the specific knowledge regarding the dangers of smoke- -- smoking that mr. bowden possessed by 1979. and just for context, make sure we are all in the same place, 1979, mr. bowden was already a 50-year -- a 54-year-old man. i think, in fact, he was already a grandfather by 1979. ted had already had children. so let us look at this demonstrative. you have -- i know you have heard about some of this from 3407 mr. reilly, but i now want to put it in -- into context of dr. burns' testimony about what would have happened or what, more specifically, from dr. burns' perspective, what would not have happened if he had stopped by 1979. so you have heard from mrs. bowden that around the time she stopped smoking in 1954 she was talking all the time to mr. bowden to stop smoking. so that is 25 years of that. by 1975 -- '-9, 25 years of his best friend telling him, "stop smoking for your health." you know that cigarette packs started with these warnings in 1966. that is 13 years of warnings and not a single quit attempt by 1979. you know that ted bowden, born in 1951, he got -- in the mid-'60s, he is learning about the dangers of smoking from his football coach and he testified he shared that information with his dad. you know from ted's perspective, in terms of when ted is aware, that his dad is aware of the risks. he testified that, by the late '60s, the early 1970s ted certainly thought that mr. bowden knew that cigarettes caused cancer. that is as many as ten years before, if he had stopped, he would not have gotten the disease. 3408 in 1970, you know tammy gets caught smoking and mr. bowden tells her that cigarettes are dangerous. by the 1970s, ted is encouraging his dad to quit for health reasons. now, no witness, not a single fact witness in this case, has told you that mr. bowden was unaware of the risks in the '60s and the '70s. you have not heard that from anyone. they could have brought you a witness to tell you that. you did not hear it from anyone. yet all of that time, he is getting all of this information, everything i just showed you on the board, and he never once tried to quit during that period. instead, he just did what he wanted to do. and you heard from mrs. bowden herself, that is who he was. he did not want to be fussed with. and again, i'm not criticizing. that was his choice and his right. he was allowed to do that. but had he quit by 1979, according to dr. burns, he is medically -- more likely than not, he would not have developed his lung cancer. mr. bowden is, i submit, a hundred percent responsible for not even trying to quit smoking before 1979. therefore, mr. bowden alone is a hundred percent responsible for his injuries. so let us spend a few minutes now talking about 3409 brand history and the brands that mr. bowden smoked. the first thing i want to address is dr. kyriakoudes, who spent 30 hours reviewing deposition testimonies, apparently -- and i think if you multiply that out by the rate, he probably earned more than $12,000 to do it. i hope it is clear by now, now that you have heard the fact witnesses since he testified, that he was not even close when it came to brand history. so i want to review it. i'll try to do it quickly. let us start with the 1940s. for most of the 1940s, mr. bowden is in the military and you heard that you get what you get. you do not choose. and, in fact, we do not know what brands he smoked in the military. we do know that around 1946, for a period less than a year, yvonne tillman said she saw him smoking lucky strikes and occasionally pall mall. so you do know that. but we do not know -- he then goes back into the military. he smokes. he gets what he gets. and the next thing we know is 1953 and that is when he meets mrs. bowden. and you heard from mrs. bowden that he was smoking camels and lucky strikes. okay? and mrs. bowden said, at some point, he switches. but she, in her testimony, never told you 3410 when he switched. so where does the next testimony come? i think if you look at the witnesses in terms of their age, it is ted bowden. he was born in 1951. and ted bowden testified about brand history, and he never mentioned camels or lucky strikes. what he remembered were marlboros and winstons. so -- and i'm going to get to that -- but what does that mean? he is born in 1951. we do not know when his memory starts. is it as a six-year old in '57? is it as an eight-year old in '59? ten-year old in '61? we do not know. okay? what we do know, he is not seeing camels and lucky strikes. so unless mr. bowden switched on the first day he remembers, sometime, let us say nine -- before 1959 -- you will decide what the year is -- sometime before 1959, mr. bowden switched and he was not smoking camels and lucky strikes. and then what did you hear from ted bowden? he said -- i want to focus on winston now. that is one of the first two brands he remembers. he talked about winston all the way through 1977. and what he said was winston was never his father's primary brand. okay? winston was never his father's primary brand. 3411 and think about mrs. bowden's testimony. remember, i showed her the deposition cheat sheet and i asked her about marlboro and winston, and what did she say? she really said, "you know what? other people mentioned winston. i do not really remember winston at all." then she asked me about the packs and finally she said, "i think there were some winstons in the 1980s." well, i know it is confusing. what does it all really mean? i'll give you my perspective; you can form your own judgments. i think it means that, in 1946, for some period of time, some part of the year, he was smoking lucky strike and pall mall. then in 1953, he is smoking camel and lucky strike. and i think sometime, we do not know when, in the 1950s, he stops. what that really means is that sometime after -- in the 1950s till the end of his smoking history, rjr cigarettes are no longer his main brand. does he smoke some of them throughout the time? does he switch around? absolutely. the testimony is clear; he is not brand loyal. but after the 1950s, is there evidence that rjr was ever his main brand? i think the record is, there is not. so what does all this mean? i think in terms 3412 of class membership, you never have to get to that issue. you never have to think about it. but on the verdict sheet -- can i have the elmo, please? we do not think -- let me be clear, and this is question 5, we do not think you ever need to reach question 5. we think you should say "no" to class membership. but if you say "yes," we think, as to questions 2, 3 and 4, which relate to claims in the case and legal theories, we think you say "no" to those on both defendants and you never get to it. but if you get to the question of comparative fault, ultimately, i think that is where you think about brand history. and if you ultimately agree reynolds was not his main brand, i think that is where you can account for it. so that is brand history. okay. i want to now talk to you about punitive damages a little bit and some of the issues of concealment. and i hope, by now, it is clear: i do not think you should get to the fault question. i certainly do not think you should ever get to the question of punitive damages. but as mr. reilly mentioned, we cannot know what you -- what you are thinking. we -- we do not know how you are going to answer it, so i 3413 have to address it. so let me address it. this is the question where you have to decide whether you had clear and convincing evidence. so that is a different standard that mr. -- see if you can straighten that out. clear and convincing evidence is going to be the standard. it is no longer greater weight of the evidence. mr. reilly read you the standard. it is clear and convincing evidence. it is that firm belief. it is not, well, maybe there were a lot of people. it is that firm belief that this is harm caused to mr. bowden. clear and convince- -- convincing evidence differs from greater weight of the evidence and it is more compelling and persuasive. greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matters at issue. frankly, given all the things i've mentioned about what the fact witnesses did not say in this 3414 case, about marketing and other issues, i'd submit there will not be clear and convincing evidence that would allow you to find an entitlement to punitive damages. but you will ultimately have to decide that question. there are a few important things you should know about punitive damages. first, if you decide there is an entitlement, it is an entitlement for mrs. bowden. it is not for the american cancer society. it is not for an anti-smoking group. punitive damages, in this case, are damages that are awarded to mrs. bowden. and they are damages -- again, this is only if you get there. if you get to this point, you will already have decided the amount of compensatory damages. and, as mr. avera said, that would be the amount entitled to make mrs. bowden whole to the extent money can do that; right? so punitive damages are not compensatory. they are money on top of compensatory damages. they are additional monies. and again, they do not go to the american cancer society. they would go to mrs. bowden. so in talking about punitive damages, the thing that i'd ask you to understand, it is in the 3415 instructions, they are supposed to be there to punish and deter. so i want to talk about the allegations of conduct a little bit, which, they believe -- which plaintiff submits -- justified punishment and deterrence and ask whether those allegations really have anything to do about mr. bowden and what happened here. let us talk about evidence that relates to concealment. i referred to this a little bit. dr. burns talked on direct about that 1956 memo from dr. rodgman which identified carcin- -- carcinogens in smoke. and on direct exam, he suggested the surgeon general did not know about it. he admitted on cross all of those carcinogens had been reported by tirc, and reynolds was a member of tirc. and you cannot just be responsible for their bad acts; you get their good acts, too. tirc had reported all those constituents to the surgeon general, all of them. there was no secret. dr. burns acknowledged directly that the surgeon general was aware of every single one of them that was in dr. rodgman's memo. so there was no concealment of that. and you also learned, separate and apart from what reynolds knew, that eight or nine of those 3416 carcinogens had been published about in two different reader's digests in the 1950s. this was not a great big secret at all. but that is what you were led to believe on direct examination. dr. burns suggested that the tirc or ctr was a big public relations gesture. that is what he told you. but they funded 300 -- this is what you learned on cross -- they funded $300 million of research. over 190 different institutions received that funding, including several institutions right here in the state of florida. they funded -- dr. burns admitted they funded excellent scientists, some of whom would even go on to win the nobel prize. and if it was a research -- if it was just a publicity gesture, why, year after year after year, in over 30-plus surgeon general's reports, are these articles that ctr's funding, why are they being cited? surgeon general's reports, it is everything about smoking and health. if this -- this research that was funded had nothing to do with smoking and health, why is it repeatedly being cited by the surgeon general? does that make sense? it is not a public relations gesture. they funded $300 million in research. 3417 let us talk about the green monster for a second. dr. burns acknowledged -- dr. burns acknowledged, with respect to the green monster, it was funded by tobacco companies and it ended up in the publication in 1961. this is what dr. burns said about the green monster. he said, "everything that is been published, good, bad, and ugly on tobacco in the world's literature." it is not concealment. everything that is been published, the good, the bad, and the ugly, funded by the tobacco companies. and he said, "...in the world's literature." i want to make one point about that. there was a document, a reynolds' document in 1953 by claude teague, it was a survey of literature about smoking and health in the world. and you know what dr. burns -- when i said to dr. burns, "well, this is just publicly available information." he said, "well, yes. some of it was in foreign language and it would be difficult for people to know." 1961, they are supplying the surgeon general's committee with everything that is known in the world. so if it was hard to find in 1953, thanks to the tobacco companies, by 1961 it was not, and the surgeon 3418 general had that resource. and ultimately as relates to the green monster, this is what dr. burns said. he said it was certainly a very valuable resource and it was acknowledged as such in the surgeon general's report. that is not concealment. that is disclosure. dr. burns told you about a frank statement in 1954, three or four years before there was even a consensus, according to dr. burns, that smoking caused lung cancer. let me ask you another question about the frank statement and witnesses in this case. did you ever hear from any witness in this case that mr. bowden saw a frank statement, talked about a frank statement, relied on it? did you ever hear from a fact witness that mr. bowden was waiting for information from a tobacco company? did you ever hear from a witness mr. bowden said, "they will" -- "they will not" -- "they will stop selling this when they know it is dangerous"? i did not hear any of that. he did not know anything about a frank statement. if he did, you can be sure they would have asked the fact witnesses about it. he never heard about any single statement from a tobacco company, from ti, from ctr, from 3419 anyone that a fact witness told you mr. bowden heard, relied upon, considered. there was nothing. there was no such statement. there was no evidence of it. can i have the next demonstrative? none of the fact witnesses testified that mr. bowden had any doubts about the health risks of smoking. you simply did not hear that from any of the fact witnesses. no fact witness testified that mr. bowden was aware of the tobacco industry's position on whether smoking caused disease. you did not hear it from a single witness. how could he be misled? he had not heard anything. no witness testified that mr. bowden was aware of the tobacco industry's position on whether cigarettes was addictive. in fact, let us go back to the first one. no witness testified mr. bowden had any doubt about the health risks of cigarette smoking. it is the opposite. he was calling cigarettes "cancer sticks." he knew. did he know they were addictive? you heard from fact witnesses, he was saying, i'm addicted. 3420 he did not need any statement from a tobacco company to know that. he said, i'm addicted. now, when it comes to information, the defendants should not be published [sic] for not publish- -- not publicizing risks that were already being well publicized; especially when it had no effect on the smoker, in this case, mr. bowden. it had no effect. let us look. dr. burns acknowledged that throughout the 1950s the message regarding the dangers of smoking was getting out to the public. i asked him this towards the end of my cross-examination. he acknowledged the public health community was getting out the message. public health organizations, the american cancer society, the american lung association, the u.s. public health service, state health organizations, and surgeon general burney, all in the 1950s, getting out the message. mr. reilly showed you, but it is worth looking at once more, what dr. horn said in 1968. "you could stand on a rooftop and shout, 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." 3421 that is what dr. horn said in 1968. 1975, dr. burns said he personally agreed with dr. horn. and then there is the statement from 1981 from dr. burns. this is what dr. burns was saying in 1981, not when he was getting ready to testify in a tobacco trial saying, we did not know the risks. this is what he was saying contemporaneously in 1981. he said, "95 percent of the people are thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking, and ninety percent of them realize their own health could be affected." that is just the plain facts, and it came from dr. burns himself. despite what dr. burns and dr. hurt have told you, reynolds has contributed to the scientific knowledge of the risks of smoking. showed you about ctr on the slide. we talked about the green monster. and then in more recent times, 1988, it published publicly -- for anyone who wanted to see it, it published this monograph on technology and research it had done on a cigarette that heats rather than burns tobacco. dr. burns agreed it is possible that heating, 3422 rather than burning, tobacco could lead to a less hazardous cigarettes -- cigarette. reynolds published it for the world to see so they could help develop a safer cigarette -- or a less hazardous cigarette. i asked dr. hurt about this book. i showed it to you yesterday. dr. hurt was telling you that all the way through 1994 reynolds never said a thing about nicotine. he did not even read a book that two of his science -- scientists edited. he knew about the book. he never read it. how does he know what reynolds shared? he has not even tried to find out. eleven different reynolds scientists are authors of chapters in this book. 1982. that was the biology of nicotine. you heard dr. burns tell you whatever he may have thought of the tobacco institute. you heard that by the year 2000, the tobacco institute was dissolved. you heard that tirc, ctr dissolved in 2000. and you have heard that smoking rates have decreased. and dr. hurt told you -- in terms of today, he told you that starting three years ago, the fda is 3423 regulating tobacco products. that is today. so i covered a lot. i tried not to repeat too much of what mr. reilly said. for all those reasons, i suggest that if you reach the issue of the punitive damages and the question of entitlement on your verdict form -- i submit, for all these reasons, you ought to check "no." and, more importantly, i do not think you should ever get to that question. i think you should say no to class membership. i think you should say no -- if you get past that, i think you should say no on the issue of claims. i think your verdict should be for philip morris and r.j. reynolds. so like mr. reilly said, mr. smith gets to go next. scribbling a lot of notes. i'm sure he is going to have a lot of things he wants to say. one thing i'd ask you to remember is mr. reilly -- we do not get a chance to respond. plaintiff gets to have the last word. what i'd ask you to do -- mr. reilly and i have given you our thinking about it, our thoughts, our arguments. what i'd ask you to do when mr. smith gets to have the last word, and he will get to rebut, think to yourselves, what would reilly and seiden 3424 say in response to this? think to yourself, what does it have to do with mr. bowden? again, i want to thank you for your service and your time and your attention. i know it is been a long morning. thank you all very much.