mr. reid: may it please the court? morning. the jurors: good morning. mr. reid: let me say the most important thing first, and that is all the counsel, all the parties, everybody connected with this case really appreciates what you do, what you are doing and what you are going to do in this case. lawyers typically are not on juries so i have not been on one. but i'm told that -- that jurors are amazed when they go back into the room. you have heard the word synergy a few times over the last week or two. the synergy among the jurors, one will remember one point; one will remember another and you will remember everything. that is why this is the best way to resolve our dispute. 1 and i asked you about that in voir dire, if any of you minded coming and thought that perhaps we should settle the case, and we should not have taken two or three weeks of your time. i think you now understand why we had to because there are serious disputes in this case that only you can resolve. excuse me. this case, first and foremost, is about mr. bowman. it is about the choices he made in his life and the results of those choices. and it is not surprising really, if you think about it, that -- that choice is closely associated with the whole idea of smoking. you know, the -- the surgeon general of the united states in 1977 called cigarette smoking a health -- that it could be called a personal choice health behavior. and he said it again in 1982, talking about smoking behavior, personal choice behavior. and then again in 1986, he said cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue. so when -- when i stand up in front of you at the beginning and throughout the trial and today and talk about choice, it is not something ben reid made up or r. j. reynolds made up. it is been a -- it is been a major concern or issue for the surgeon general and for the entire community of people who have thought about these problems throughout. now, plaintiff must prove in this case, as you have heard, that addiction was the cause. i suggest the evidence suggests -- the evidence is that choice was the cause. the plaintiff must prove in this case that smoking was the cause of esophageal cancer. i suggest to you that it was alcohol. that is the evidence. and finally the plaintiff must prove that some concealment, something that reynolds concealed about smoking and health that was not otherwise known to the plaintiff, was the cause of mr. bowman making smoking decisions. i suggest the evidence is that he was actually aware of the risks, and there was really nothing that the plaintiffs have been able to demonstrate that mr. bowman was not aware of regarding smoking and health. now, i wanted to -- i was thinking about this idea of cause because while choice is an important word, so is cause in this case. and i can -- and i was driving over the bridge. there are a lot of bridges around here as we know. and if you imagine two bodies of land -- and let us imagine that this is mr. bowman on this side (indicating), and let us imagine that these are all the various claims that are made in this case, the -- the claims of addiction and the claims of defect and the punitive damages claims and all that. it is the plaintiff's burden to somehow connect these two. and how do they do that? well, i'm going to call it -- i'm not a great drawer. i'm going to call it the bridge of causation because that is really what it amounts to. there has to be a connection in this case. for every single claim that -- that you will consider, there has to be a connection between mr. bowman and the claims that are made. there has to be a causal relationship. and that to me captures the -- the burden that the plaintiff has in this case. now, burden of proof, you have heard that, and you have heard it and you have heard it from both lawyers. you will hear it from the judge. i'm going to talk just briefly about it. the plaintiffs have to demonstrate something that nicotine or cigarettes containing nicotine or something related to my client's action was the legal cause. and legal cause means it has to produce, and in our case, where we have multiple possibilities, it has to substantially -- contribute substantially to producing. and the -- this is from the charge that you just heard the judge read a couple of hours ago, directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produce or contributed substantially. and then but for the smoking, his death would not have occurred. now, "but for" really means without, if you just substitute it. that is the language that the supreme court of florida has said we are supposed to use in jury trials, but you can substitute without the smoking, his death would not have occurred. a -- so your determination in this case has to be based on the causation as the judge pointed out. now, it comes up two ways here. if mr. bowman smoked for other reasons besides addiction, for instance, as a result of his choice, your decision would be that addiction is not the substantial contributing cause. if you decide that something else besides smoking was the substantial contributing cause, that is, alcohol, your decision, again, would be that smoking is not the substantial contributing cause. and as mr. shields told you, mr. bowman -- ms. bowman, on behalf of the estate, has admitted to mr. bowman's contribution here, and this is from the pleading that -- the answer that was filed in this case to the complaint. i'm sorry. it is from -- it is in the complaint that was filed before the answer, and it 2 basically says that mr. bowman bears some fault, less than one hundred percent, and they say it is because of the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking. well, we now know that there were none. there were no serious attempts to quit except the time mr. bowman quit. now, if he would ever tried to quit, if he had tried a couple times and he -- he went for two or three days or a week or a month and then relapsed and it happened again and again, that might make some sense in terms of saying it is a percentage or whatever mr. shields was talking to you about a minute ago. but the fact is mr. bowman, by his -- by his admission, ms. bowman is conceding that mr. bowman's decisions about smoking, his choice, is the cause of his smoking and subsequently his injury. if his continued smoking was really due to addiction, as you have heard argued this morning, why would you even make that admission? it is been admitted by number 18 that smoking is a direct, substantial, contributing cause to mr. bowman and that is the definition of cause, and that is because there were no attempts to quit. now, i want to talk to you a few minutes in the beginning about the findings. let me think. you will remember, we talked about them the day after labor day -- or the day after the day after labor day, i think, is when we first talked, and the two most significant findings that bear on this case are that smoking causes esophageal cancer and that is it is addictive. and you did not hear a single witness come in or by video or any testimony or any cross examination questioned by the lawyers. no one on our side of the case has -- has disputed those two facts, not at all. reynolds admits them and you will see them on their websites -- if you have not already, you will see them today; i'm going to show them to you later -- for the past decade at least. and we talked about that. the problem is that none of those findings answers the question that you are going to be asked to answer in this case. because this case is about mr. bowman, and those findings had nothing to do. the plaintiff must establish, must prove, must show the causal connection that mr. bowman's a member of the class. and to do that, they have to show that mr. bowman was addicted and that the addiction was the cause of his smoking which led to his illness. and you have to decide that without thinking about the findings. the findings do not deal with whether mr. bowman is in the class or not. mr. bowman has -- ms. bowman has to prove that mr. bowman would have been in the class, meaning he -- that he was addicted. and so you have to look at the facts of this case about mr. bowman. and that is why we are here. now, if you think about it, the findings do not mention mr. bowman. i think we have made a slide of this. that jury that decided the case, that counsel said numerous times that we are required to agree and you are required -- well, that is absolutely true. the findings you have to follow, but the findings, that jury did not hear any evidence about mr. bowman. they do not mention him. they did not decide issues relating to him. they did not decide whether he relied on anything that my client did or said or did not do or say. they did not decide he was injured. they did not establish whether or not i was responsible -- whether i, meaning my client, was responsible at all. you will need to decide those issues. in fact, if -- if the findings decided any of those issues, you would not need to be here. you -- you would not -- the -- the system would not ask you to come in and sit for two or three weeks to decide issues about mr. bowman's case if the findings resolved it all. so that is why i started by saying this case is about mr. bowman. and that is the evidence i'd like to talk about today. now, the plaintiff in this case, you can sort of group the complaints or the -- the things that the plaintiff points out as problems in this case or -- or blocks, you might say, that support the claim. there are really four kind of general categories that i'd like to talk about as we proceed this morning. there are the findings. i've already talked a little bit about those. there are the advertising that you have heard about. there are documents that my company produced over the years. and then there are what i -- there are things that i would consider to be half-truths, where you were told half of the information and only later found the full. now, as to the findings, i've already told you about those. the findings just do not decide the case. as to advertisements, they spent a lot of time with mr. gold- -- dr. goldberg showing you print ads, showing you tv ads, but dr. goldberg admitted that he could not tie any of these ads to mr. bowman. there was no evidence to connect any advertisement that you saw in this case to mr. bowman. every family member that testified -- every time the family members -- whether you heard it or whether they told dr. werner or dr. hoge and they relied on it in their deposition, every single person that knew dr. -- mr. bowman, not a single person ever said that mr. bowman smoked because of anything 3 having to do with advertising. he did not start smoking because of ads. he did not continue to smoke because of ads. he did not make decisions not to quit because of ads, nothing. there is no connection between the ads. the third area, the findings -- the ads -- are the documents and we will talk more in detail later about those. but you remember the documents that were used were about -- there were about of 60 -- i counted them. there were about 65 documents that were related to the three -- the companies that -- reynolds, american and brown & williamson. of all the documents in evidence, that is how many were internal company documents. and i'd ask you to consider, as -- as counsel himself argued just a few minutes ago, these documents were written in a different world, in a different time, in a different context. there were press releases but you never saw a newspaper article where they actually appeared. and you did not see what the newspaper article said. there was a planning document that you could never -- you would never know if anybody ever did anything about it or not. there were internal documents that there were drafts, and you do not know what happened with the final document. and there were public statements that were talked about, and there is no evidence in this case that mr. bowman ever was aware of any statement made by the tobacco industry about smoking and health. and then finally -- and we will talk in more detail about each of those. finally here, though, what i call the half-truths, and i think the best example of that is ctr. i realize some lawyer, 50 years ago or 40 years ago or whatever, used the word front to describe ctr and tobacco institute. but the good news is you do not have to rely on what some lawyer -- how some lawyer described it 40 years ago because you have evidence now of what ctr actually did, the 6,000 articles, cited by the surgeon general of the united states numerous times. now, we will talk about this more later. but ask yourself this -- dr. proctor said -- and mr. shields argued -- that none of that research had anything at all to do with smoking and health. dr. proctor said it was -- he called it distraction research. well, ask yourself this question: why would the surgeon general of the united states include so many of those articles in reports that are -- the subject of which is smoking and health? they obviously have something to do with smoking and health, or the surgeon general would not have put them in. that is the principal problem there. and we went through those and we talked about them and we will talk about them some more. the simple fact is you heard a lot of evidence. i tried to count it up again today. i did it in opening. i did it today. there was virtually -- there was a small amount of evidence about mr. bowman, and there was massive evidence about everything else. and i submit to you that in all of that other evidence, this bridge is never built. there was never a causal relationship, and every one of the charges, jury questions that you have to answer, that the judge -- that counsel went through, every one has that word legal cause in there. every single finding that you have to make in this case is connected to a legal cause requirement, and that is why i'm talking about that. now, i want to sort of divide what i want to talk about, the evidence, into -- into three areas. the first is mr. -- the plaintiffs did not prove that addiction was the cause of mr. bowman's smoking. secondly -- and actually, before i go there, that is because the evidence is that mr. bowman made the choice to smoke. he was fully informed of the risks and choice, therefore, growing his behavior. secondly, there is no evidence -- the evidence does not establish -- the burden is on the plaintiff. if it is equal, the plaintiff does not prevail. the burden is on the plaintiff to establish that smoking caused or substantially contributed to cause the esophageal cancer. and you -- you have heard the evidence about alcohol and we will talk about that. the third area i'd like to talk to you about is concealment, and the evidence -- the plaintiffs have not proved that mr. bowman was unaware of any fact associated with -- the risks associated with smoking. the fact that it was addictive or it was hard to quit or it was risky or it could cause injury or death, mr. bowman knew all that and that is the evidence there. and then after i talk about -- those are the claims against reynolds. i'm going to talk about reynolds' conduct because it relates to this claim that they have for punitive or exceptional damages beyond compensatory damages. so i'd like to start with addiction. there -- the verdict form says this: was michael bowman addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was cigarette smoking, because of such addiction, a legal cause of his esophageal cancer? that is the question you are being asked. that is the question. is mr. bowman in the class? if you answer that no, that would be -- your decision would be that mr. bowman does not qualify for 4 the class. now, there really -- embedded in that sentence, there are really three questions. there are three sets of evidence. the first question is you have to -- you have to decide if mr. bowman was addicted by your definition and we will talk about that. secondly, you have to prove -- they have to prove and you have to decide that the addiction was the cause of his smoking; it was not a choice or some other cause. that is the second question. and the third question is you have to say -- you have to decide that the smoking was the legal cause of his cancer and that is the alcohol versus tobacco. three different questions are really -- we could have asked that by asking you three questions. you have to say yes to all three. you have to say yes to all three in order to answer that question yes. and so i'm going to talk about those. on the question of addiction, the -- the uncontroverted evidence, there is -- there is no dispute in the evidence about mr. bowman's personality and about the choices that he makes. the evidence unequivocally establishes that mr. bowman smoked because he chose to smoke, not because of some captivity in which he suffered from addiction and from nicotine. he smoked because he chose to smoke. and what is the best evidence of that? the best evidence of that is he quit. he quit cold turkey, 1985, at dinner. his -- his wife asked him the next morning, "i noticed you have not smoked in the last few hours." he said, "i quit." he did it without any help for that first so many hours. no withdrawal symptoms were identified during the first day of his quit over -- over into the next day. does that sound like someone who was -- who was so captured by nicotine, a person who just had no control over their decisions? it does not sound like that person. that is the person that plaintiffs have asked you to accept, that mr. bowman had no choice, that he was so controlled by nicotine. that is not the person who was he described by ms. bowman and others on the night in which he quit. in fact, one of his daughters testified that he told her he did not want to quit. and remember during the redirect examination of ms. bowman, mr. kalil said -- i had asked her whether he had ever used any of -- any of the techniques -- nicotine patches, drugs, going to doctors, medication, all that. she said, "no." he said, "well, were nicotine patches even invented then?" and she gave very telling answer to that. she said she did not know, but then she added, "but if they had been, mr. bowman would not have used them." that is a very telling admission that mr. bowman did not want to stop smoking. and finally, you now know that he was finally motivated on new year's eve 1985. now, that ought to end the case. that -- that answers the first question. how can you say that someone is addicted if that individual never tried to quit, seriously? now, mr. coyle said that there was some -- they used to bet and they used to joke about it. they never threw away cigarettes. they never went a whole day. but there was never a serious quit attempt, and even if you give that to mr. coyle, you are talking about from then on. you are talking about before and after his family all said, never tried to quit ever. how can a person say i'm addicted; i'm controlled by nicotine if they did not try to quit? now, if they came in and said, i tried a bunch of times and it did not work, that would be one thing, but if you never tried to quit, how can you ever say, i was addicted; i could not quit because of the nicotine in cigarettes? so we start with mr. bowman did quit. we then move through the point that he never tried to quit, so how could anybody say he was addicted? he told his sister-in-law that he enjoyed smoking. he was exposed to facts about the risks of smoking from lots and lot of different ways, different sources. you can -- you will be able to decide from evidence whether mr. bowman controlled smoking or smoking controlled mr. bowman. and that is really the bottom line when we talk about addiction. remember his personality traits. remember his personality traits. there was no dispute. no one ever said that he did not -- these were not good, objective, true characterizations of mr. bowman. again, we are talking about is a person a captive of nicotine, or is a person making an independent choice? when he made up his mind, he stuck to it. and he did not make up his mind to quit until december 1985. and we have some evidence that you heard about his views about when people would raise the question of smoking. and, for instance, he told his wife, when she told him the cough -- they talked about his cough, his answer was, "leave me alone." when his daughter urged him to stop smoking, he said, "yeah, yeah, i do not want to quit." and when his other daughter told him that he was going to end up on oxygen or with cancer, he said, "i'm all right." 5 is that a person who is striving to quit and who is unable to quit? i do not believe so. so how does the plaintiff try to convince you? what evidence have you heard in an attempt to convince you that not withstanding all that i've just gone through, mr. bowman was addicted? well, first, they claim essentially that anybody who smokes a certain number of cigarettes over a certain period of time must be addicted. and you have heard testimony that -- that is just not the case. so experts came in. now -- now, we -- we had experts in this case. everybody had experts. everybody paid a fee to the expert for their time. but you will get an instruction -- or you have had an instruction from the judge that it is up to you to decide what credit to give to each expert's testimony. and so i want to talk to you about the addiction experts. and i want -- i want to raise this question. in evaluating the expert, did the expert reach a conclusion and then go around and try to put together pieces of information that somehow support a little -- a piece of information from this deposition, a piece from this witness and so forth to try to support the conclusion, or did the expert review every single piece of paper that was available -- depositions, medical records and so forth -- and then arrive at a conclusion? now, we have two experts in this case. dr. werner did the former. dr. hoge did the latter. now, dr. werner had a couple of principal points. she said that -- on which she based her opinion. one is that mr. bowman made numerous quit attempts and, number two, that he had significant withdrawal symptoms. now, remember she read about four depositions, family -- and that was it -- at the point in time when she decided mr. bowman was addicted. that is all she read. and when you look at those depositions -- you have heard the testimony -- at the time, not what was said later because there was a change. at the time, those conclusions were not supported. as to the irritability, we know that -- you know now from evidence that that was a long-standing problem. sometimes it was alcohol-related. it is hard to know how -- it is hard to parse it out. but mr. bowman was oftentimes an irritable person. so if the irritability started before he quit smoking, does not have anything -- it is not because of smoking. and the second was the weight gain. and you saw the photographs. you saw an '82 photograph with a group from the ship. then you saw the '84 photograph when -- when he was -- had just stopped drinking but he had not stopped smoking. and then you can see that he had gained weight. mr. bowman had a weight issue. it is not surprising that he would gain weight because once you get out of the navy and you get out of that regimented environment, it is not surprising that he gained weight. counsel -- plaintiffs want you to believe that he never gained any weight until the day after he stopped smoking and then he started eating candy and he gained weight. well, you know -- you now know more about the case than you did before and you saw the photographs. now, in ms. bowman's deposition, she never said that there was any withdrawal symptoms except for one; mr. bowman ate hard candy. that is all she said. and on that basis, dr. werner reached her conclusion. then dr. werner called her up, and they had a telephone conversation, about 20 minutes. and after the telephone conversation, ms. bowman came into court and testified. when she was asked the question, were there any withdrawal symptoms, she immediately named five. well, that seemed odd because laypeople do not think about things that way. maybe the psychiatrists do. so when i asked about it, she said, "oh, well, dr. werner told -- asked me if i -- there were withdrawal symptoms, and then she give me about five of the withdrawal symptoms. and driving home, i said to my daughter, 'oh, yeah, i bet those apply to your dad.'" so dr. werner suggested the withdrawal symptoms and then mrs. bowman came in. and i read her testimony to you from before. i said -- the testimony was any behavioral changes, eating candy, anything else? "no," under oath, before she talked to dr. -- before dr. werner had that conversation with her and suggested. and dr. werner said, "well, lawyers ask the wrong questions. you cannot ask open-ended questions." well, if you remember, there were some questions about mr. bowman's alcohol use and changes in his personality after he stopped drinking. no problem answering those with an open-ended question. but dr. werner needed somebody to say, for her opinion that she had already reached, that mr. bowman was -- was -- had these withdrawal symptoms. and -- and let me say this about withdrawal symptoms: people do have them. i do not mean to suggest that maybe he did not have some withdrawal symptoms. maybe he was a little irritable, headache. but you have heard the testimony about that, that they are gone in a week or ten days so maybe he had those. that is not a suggestion that a person is addicted because they have mild withdrawal symptoms. dr. werner says it is but -- but common sense tells you that that is just ordinary. 6 and there is no evidence other than a couple of these things. now, as to all of these quit attempts that dr. werner relied on, that would be important testimony if it were true. if you had serious quit attempts -- and dr. werner agreed that the surgeon general of the united states said to -- to count, to be considered as a -- as a real quit attempt, a person needs to stop smoking for 24 hours. if somebody says, i'm -- at 10:00 o'clock, well, i'm not going to smoke anymore and then they -- at 2:00 o'clock, they decide to have a cigarette, that is not considered by the scientists. and dr. hoge says that and dr. werner agreed with that. and it is in the surgeon general reports if you want to thumb through them and find them. the point is the only evidence about quit attempt before new year's eve 1985 is mr. coyle. and you saw mr. coyle. and mr. coyle said, "we used to joke about it. we used to see who could go the longest." and every comment mr. coyle made about mr. bowman's smoking was always couched in. "well, i smoked thus and so and he smoked the same." it was always, "we smoked," over and over, if you remember that deposition. there was no evidence of a serious quit attempt. but that is the testimony that dr. werner latched onto. she latched onto the withdrawal, the symptoms that she had suggested and she latched onto mr. coyle. now, you heard from dr. hoge that there was another witness that all the experts had the opportunity to read depositions of. that was mr. charlie ball. he was also on the ship with mr. bowman at various times and more importantly had remained a friend of his for the next 20 years. you saw a picture of the four -- the two couples at a party. charlie ball says, "i do not ever remember mr. bowman trying to quit." that is what he told -- that is what dr. hoge told you was in his deposition. the family member said, "i do not" -- every daughter said, ms. bowman said, everybody said, "i do not remember mr. bowman ever." so even if you -- even if you want to call what happened to mr. coyle, that they joked about it and they bet and they went a few hours, they never threw away the cigarettes. they did not throw away the ashtrays, which is what experts tell you you need to do. even if you give them that, from back in the '70s on, there is no evidence from any witness in this case that mr. bowman ever tried to quit until the day he decided to quit. now, dr. werner used something called the fagerstrom test, and you -- you saw the -- an example of how that can be used. you can assume somebody smokes three cigarettes in a day and get the same answers, find out that someone's dependent because of when you smoke and so forth. fagerstrom, it is a test used by researchers. it is not used to diagnose. and -- and you remember, the surgeon general's report was up, and it said researchers use this for -- for research, not to diagnose. and dr. hoge three times said, "could we see the slide again; could we see the slide again; could we see the slide again?" he never saw it again until we got a chance to show it to him again. so the point is that does not do it. and then dr. -- dr. werner attempted to use the dsm. and the dsm, as you remember from when you saw the actual language -- and we will look at it in a minute -- says it is not to be used as a cookie cutter. you see, it says you have to -- you have to apply your clinical experience. now, in the ordinary case, if a doctor is -- is treating someone and is going to use those guidelines, the doctor would take a history and find out about the individual's condition and then look at the guidelines and then compare them. so, in this case, obviously dr. werner could not do that. so what is the next best thing? it is to read every piece of paper that exists about mr. bowman, all the depositions, all the medical records, anything that you can find and then apply that using your clinical judgment. she did not do that. she used it as a cookie cutter, that -- she went down that list. yep, yep, yep, yep, yep and that was it. she did it exactly the way you are not supposed to. perhaps the best example, though, of dr. werner being an expert who had a -- had a conclusion and then went out and looked for something to support it was her testimony that she said mr. bowman was addicted by 1960, 1960, when they first met, before or about the time they first met. and ask yourself this: what possible evidence did dr. werner have about mr. bowman's smoking before 1960? the answer is none. you have not -- you have not heard -- other than he started when he was about 12, you have not heard anything about how much or how long or you have not -- you have heard nothing about it. so -- and yet dr. werner was -- was able to say to you -- she was comfortable giving the opinion that he was addicted in 1960, no basis for that and no basis for her later opinion as well. it was a manufactured basis, i should say. now, even she admitted that people smoke for a lot of reasons besides nicotine. she calls the definition of addiction the lack of control. mr. bowman 7 certainly had control, as you know from the evidence. and -- and she said mr. bowman always had the ability to quit. she said he had the ability in the '60s and the '70s and in the '80s, up until he finally did quit. now, you also heard from dr. hoge. and counsel suggested dr. hoge was not qualified to talk about addiction and i will -- i will say this: i think there was some confusion. he did say he had only treated people or diagnosed people as addicted to cigarettes when it was the only complaint, one -- six times. but he said he had a lot of people who have other problems and cigarettes. dr. hoge -- dr. werner's the same. that is really not any different. people typically do not go in to be treated just for cigarette addiction. it usually -- all the doctors that do this, it is usually both but that is -- that is just a minor point. dr. hoge, you do not have to decide if he -- how competent he is and how to give his opinions, and you have to decide what did he base them on? now, remember, he drafted portions of the dsm, so you could hardly have a better expert to talk to you about what the dsm means than dr. hoge. and more importantly, he spent the necessary time to get the clinical information to learn about mr. bowman. he showed you all the depositions that he read. he showed you the education. he even went back and looked at his military records. he looked at his employment records, and he looked at his medical records. because a lot of times there will be comments made, nurses notes or interviews with the doctor, that might bear on subjects other than the actual medical treatment or the -- or the employment or the military service. he looked at every single piece of information that he could find, so. and by the way, just so it is clear, when mr. shields went through those -- the cookie cutter list with dr. hoge, he did not agree. he did not agree that those, that -- dr. werner, that every one of those cookie cutter list things were met in this case. but he did not go through them that way because he was not doing it as a cookie cutter. and let us look exactly how it is to be applied. and this is in the book itself. the specific diagnostic criteria included in dsm-iv are meant to serve as guidelines to be informed by clinical judgment. that means talking to the patient or in our case, reading everything you can find about the patient and are not meant to be used in a cookbook fashion. that is probably the clearest example of what dr. werner did and what dr. hoge did not do because he looked at all the evidence. and slide 17, there is a lot of talk about where the comma goes, the clinically significant impairment, modify whatever. but in all that conversation, nobody ever talked about this, a maladaptive pattern of substance use. dr. -- dr. hoge found in mr. bowman's case there was not a maladaptive pattern of substance abuse. let us go to the next definition. this has to do with the nicotine withdrawals. you just saw it a minute ago. you have the got to show that the -- those symptoms caused clinically significant distress or impairment -- and i should have underlined the rest -- in social, occupational or other important areas of functioning. there is not a bit of evidence in this case that smoking falls anywhere close to that description. smoking did not interfere with mr. bowman's social, occupational or other important areas of functioning. they just do not apply to mr. bowman. there was no effect on his family, his person. he did not get fired because he was smoking. he did not violate the smoking policies. he had no problem at all because of his smoking. and as a way to sort of help you understand or consider this, you actually have evidence in this case of exactly what they are talking about in these and that is the alcohol use, the alcohol use. before but i get to that, let me -- let us go back to the night of quitting and -- and talk about that specific night and see if these definitions apply. he went to dinner. he looked down and saw the seven cigarettes. now, the dinner was to go to a movie. you heard some testimony earlier that he never went to movies, but at least on this night, they were going to a long movie, out of africa, while he was still smoking, by the way. they made the decision to go to the movie. so he finished dinner, did not have a cigarette. he went to the movie, two hours and 40 minutes. it was so boring, you heard ms. bowman say they fell asleep. now, if -- if he were captured by nicotine and he is in this boring movie, why would not he step out and have a cigarette? he went home, did not have one before bed. he woke up in the morning; he did not have one when he first got up. he did not have one after he showered. he did not have one when he went into the kitchen, and finally ms. bowman noticed that he did not have one and he said, "i quit." so after 30 years of smoking, his wife did not even notice until the next day and he had quit. if there had been significant withdrawal symptoms -- even dr. werner said it had to happen in 24 hours. you saw that on that definition a minute ago. counsel did not talk to you 8 about it. but it says all that had to happen in 24 hours. would not she have remembered if it is suddenly, within the next day, right after quitting? in fact, she had to ask him, what -- what happened? mr. bowman clearly did not meet the dsm-iv -- go back, two back, please. mr. bowman clearly did not meet dsm-iv, which if you consider the way it is supposed to be used, served as guidelines to be informed by clinical judgment, that is what dr. hoge did. that is what dr. werner -- and i do not want to tell you that dr. werner's a bad person or a bad doctor or bad psychiatrist, but it just -- in this case, she just did not have the facts. and -- and sometimes you want to try to help, and you want to try to do a little more, and she just crossed over that line. and then she tried to go back and confirm what she had already decided based on the four depositions. now, the alcohol abuse, however, you have seen that, and -- and that gives you an example of what maladaptive behavior and clinically significant impairment and distress. and i'm not going to go through all that. you know, i -- mr. bowman drank and he drank heavily and i'll talk about it later, about his cancer. but as far as the social aspect, you heard all that evidence. and dr. werner, by the way, agreed that all of that evidence about mr. bowman's behavior while drinking, she agreed that every one of those would be considered clinically significant. so it is -- it is the rare case where you have two sets of facts. you are trying to decide what does the dsm mean? how do you apply it? and you have two sets of facts, and it becomes very clear when you compare what the dsm means. it clearly is talking about something similar to the alcohol abuse and not smoking cigarettes. and so what i think happened here is that dr. werner just combed through all the cases she could find. she took a look. she found mr. coyle, a couple of comments there. she suggested a few withdrawal symptoms. she looked at other things and then she -- all to support the conclusions she reached before she had read anything except for a couple -- or, i guess, four of the family depositions. if you think about whether or not tobacco is -- whether addiction to tobacco caused mr. bowman's smoking, consider that 60 million people have quit. ninety percent of those people quit cold turkey. that means without any aids. and these people smoked the same kind of cigarettes. some smoked longer. some smoked shorter. no difference in advertising. they were citizens in the country. there is nothing special except for one fact about mr. bowman, and you heard the testimony that when people quit, oftentimes they relapse the first time, and then they have to try a few more times. well, mr. bowman was in that 5 percent who quit cold turkey, without aids, the very first time he tried, another suggestion that mr. bowman does not fall under some definition of addiction. now, they also put on proof that nicotine has -- affects the brain. and you saw the slide this morning about the receptors and -- and you heard testimony about that. well, number one, that was not a surprise or a secret. people have known that for 100 years, the effects of nicotine on the brain. it is in the plant. god put it there. it was not something that some tobacco scientist put into the cigarette. and most importantly -- and this morning you -- you heard some talk about that there was manipulation of nicotine. well, if you consider reducing the amount of nicotine in the cigarette from nature or if you consider continuing to reduce the nicotine over the years, then i guess you could call that manipulation. i think counsel meant it a different way. i think he meant we were doing something with the nicotine to help people get hooked. well, the fact is nicotine, from the plant to the cigarette and then over the years, has gone down, down, down. there is no manipulation of nicotine that -- for which my client should be punished, as counsel says. and then the other thing they told you to try to prevail on this point was that nicotine's the same as heroin. he told you that this morning again. well, even dr. werner said you cannot compare nicotine to heroin. now, you might say they are similar, and the surgeon general said they were similar. but that means they are similar because they -- they have the same mechanism. they have -- they work with dopamine. they talk about they work on the receptors. in other words, they -- they get their effect by the same vehicle, you might say. there is -- there is some difference. but common sense, you get to -- you get to keep your common sense. you know, we talked in voir dire about jurors should not know anything about the case, and you should be a blank slate and then just hear what you hear. the one exception to that, what you get to take into the jury room that you brought here with you is common sense. consider someone who is withdrawing from hard drugs or alcohol compared to someone who is withdrawing from using nicotine. consider the effects on people's lives, the criminality, the effect on the families. 9 compare the difference of the dts. cocaine, heroin have life-threatening withdrawals sometimes. common sense tells you that nicotine is not the same, and you might consider the possibility that the reason you are told that is to try to suggest to you that my client's doing something bad. and -- but you have some science. you have some science. dr. hoge, you did not hear any science about this. you heard from dr. werner, well, you cannot really compare them but they are the same. well, this is actually science. remember? because the dopamine, that is the key. the -- the -- it is the pleasure part of the brain. you saw the slide earlier. it is -- it is anything you do that is pleasurable. if you have been sweating and working outside on a hot day, you drink cold water, dopamine. if you like being on the jury, dopamine. dopamine -- and this shows that -- they did this with animals obviously. they do not do it with people. but dopamine -- that is the level of dopamine with cocaine, alcohol, morphine, nicotine and caffeine. that is scientific evidence that nicotine does not affect the brain the same way that those hard drugs -- and the suggestion to you that cigarettes and heroin are the same frankly is an attempt to get you mad at r. j. reynolds. that is -- that is the reason for that. no other reason because the science does not support that. further, you have heard -- you heard more scientific evidence. when you stop smoking cigarettes, every bit of the nicotine is out of your body in 48 hours. remember, they talked about half-lives. in 3 to 14 days, if you have minor withdrawal symptoms, they are gone. and there is an effect on the brain receptors. as dr. werner explained, they -- they change while you are using a certain drug. within a matter of weeks, they are back to normal. and dr. hoge told you that nicotine does not create any permanent change or effect on the brain, on the physiologic -- physiology of the brain. that may explain why mr. bowman, in his case, was able to quit so easily. based on all of this evidence that we submitted and based on the evidence that they did not submit, i will ask you at the end to answer that first question no, that mr. bowman's -- mr. bowman was not addicted, that the cigarette smoking was not the cause of -- the cigarette -- nicotine in cigarettes was not the cause of his smoking, and he is, therefore, not a member of the class. now, the third question about the class is the medical question, was whether smoking caused or substantially contributed to causing the esophageal cancer. and once again, the plaintiff has that burden to show. when there are multiple possible causes, they have to show that it was a substantial cause. now, this is where you can consider the level of the alcohol. ms. bowman testified that when they got married, mr. bowman was smoking [sic] six beers every day. and she testified that after their marriage, the level of smoking went up. and you heard testimony about the effect, regularly falling asleep, multiple times in the month. and you know about all the effects on the life, so you know what alcohol is doing in this case. taking that into account, i would suggest that but for, without, smoking, does not work here. now, dr. levy came in and dr. levy is -- is an epidemiologist and -- and he does a good job as an epidemiologist. and what that means is that he looks at statistics, and he decides based on statistical correlation if there is a causal relationship. he does not prove that anybody -- actually any injury is actually caused or any illness is actually caused by the substance. he just looks at a whole population and says, well, more people got it who use the substance than did not get it so there is a statistical relationship there. and he -- and the points he made, really most -- most of what he told you nobody really disputes. smoking can cause -- causes esophageal cancer. alcohol causes esophageal cancer. if you combine them, the risk is greater than just -- just adding them together. but one really significant thing dr. levy said and -- is that if mr. bowman had quit smoking in 1975 -- now, remember, that is -- that is a number of years after the warnings were on the packs. if he quit in 1975, that in 1996, when he was diagnosed, '95, '96 period, his risk would have been the same as someone who never smoked, if he would quit in 1975. he chose not to but if he had, dr. levy admits that he would have been the same as a nonsmoker. but the most amazing thing dr. levy said, dr. levy said that without smoking that alcohol would not have caused the cancer in this case. there was not enough alcohol to cause the cancer in this case. now, i admit he, other times, said it did; it was contributing. and he sort of went back and forth, but he clearly said -- you know, we have the transcripts and we get to read them and so forth. he clearly said that without the smoking, the alcohol would not have been enough. now, that means you have to consider how much 10 alcohol a person drank. and the testimony from the witnesses was unequivocal. for the whole time, from 1960 until 1984, the average amount consumed was a six-pack a day and more. so dr. levy had to decide if a -- if you have a six-pack-a-day smoker, what are the chances. and for the first time ever, he came in and said actually mr. bowman only smoked [sic] two beers a day on average. and why -- "how do you say that, dr. levy?" "well, he was at sea a lot," and that was his only answer. you did not hear a single other witness who knew mr. bowman, who -- and when ms. bowman was on the stand, i asked her the same question because i did not know what she was going to say now. she said six-pack when it started, and it went up after that over the time. nobody else in this case said that mr. bowman only smoked two beers (sic) a day. see, dr. levy wanted to get it down so he could then say, see, alcohol really did not have any effect, two beers a day. can you really believe that all of the problems that mr. bowman suffered in his life as a result of drinking happened because he had two beers a day? does that make sense to you at all? nobody supported that but dr. levy, and he did it so that he could look at statistics and say, ah, here, remember, 21 beers a week versus six -- 42 beers a week. that -- that is a big difference. and that is how he can say alcohol did not cause it because he was -- suddenly said it was two beers a day. you get to use common sense. not only does the testimony not support it but common sense does not either. now, you heard from dr. harris, and counsel points out that he does not spend his life doing epidemiology. but he understands it and you remember his testimony. you decide if you think dr. harris, yesterday, when he was on the stand and he was asked all these questions about look at this study, look at that study and so forth, did he seem to understand, at least, the area of epidemiology? he was able to answer all the questions about all the studies. the difference is dr. -- dr. harris treats real cancer patients. so he has the unique ability to look at the epidemiology. in other words, what happens when you look at groups of populations and apply it to real people to see how that might play out in his office when he is treating real cancer patients? his opinions are very straightforward. probably means more likely than not. the judge actually -- it is probable. he said the alcohol -- he thought the alcohol had a greater effect, that the alcohol alone, contrary to what mr. -- dr. levy said, the alcohol alone was enough at that level. the cancer would have happened if he would never smoked, and you -- therefore, you cannot say smoking was the -- was the substantial contributing cause. those were his opinions. now, the interesting thing is you remember dr. levy talked about -- and you saw the slide this morning -- smoking is four to nine times. and alcohol is less, i think about five. and when you combine them, it is 20. well, i do not know if you noticed this or not, but those numbers do not have anything to do with this case. here's why. those numbers are looking at studies where people are actually continuing to smoke and drink, and if you are an active smoker, that nine times, if you are an active drinker, nine times, and if you are an active smoker and drinker, 20 or 30 or whatever. that is not our case. it has no application because mr. bowman was not drinking and he was not smoking. that is why you have to look at what the doctors talked about as declining risks. when you stop doing something over time, you have less of a chance of being sick or -- or getting whatever disease is associated. the longer you go, the less the risk is that you can -- you can get that. and there are those studies for people who smoke, who quit smoking, and there is those studies for people who quit drinking. and you can look at those lines. and dr. -- dr. harris brought you six studies. now, counsel said he did not bring in the thousands or hundreds or whatever. well, these are the studies that relate to this case. unlike dr. -- dr. levy, who had studies of people who still drink and still smoke, these are where people stopped. and you can see there are different -- different things, different findings. but dr. harris looks at the epidemiology, considers the -- the clinical experience that he is had, and he came up with the conclusion that because of that, smoking declines at a different rate from alcohol. and he drew a little map for you. you know, i drew a map for you, and i'm embarrassed to show you mine. that was one i drew in opening, if you may remember. but dr. harris drew a better map. and there it is. you can see the difference in the two over time and they do not come together. smoking declines faster than alcohol. so at ten years out, you are -- the greater risk is alcohol, not smoking. and -- and nobody -- nobody argued about that. nobody argued. you see the studies. you see how the -- that is a summary of the studies that he did. 11 and so his conclusions after all this was that he had a history of both. there was both primary risk factors. ten years after he stopped, risk of cancer drops after quitting faster than drinking -- i mean -- yeah, cancer from smoking faster than for drinking, and the cancer would not have happened, even if he had never smoked, because of that. that is the medical case. so now we have finished talking about class. addiction, that question you are going to have to answer. addiction, did addiction cause and did it cause a -- an illness that mr. bowman had? and the answer to that first question ought to be no, and with that, that should end your deliberation. now, i would not dare to presume what you are going to do, so i need to talk about some more evidence that you have heard in this case. and the third area i want to talk to you about is awareness. remember, the finding -- the finding said otherwise -- let us look at that slide. this is the finding that -- it is a piece of the finding that you saw this morning, all those different findings. this is the one about concealment, and the important language is whether you concealed it or it is not otherwise known or available. that means that if you -- if mr. bowman knew a fact or had the ability to know the fact and just for whatever reason, he chose to not go and pay attention to it, it cannot be concealed. what that means is there is no causal relationship. mr. bowman's smoking decisions were not based on the fact that he did not know something that he should have known. now, the awareness, you have heard a lot of evidence about that. and there is a -- there will be a question. we will look at the verdict form later, but there will be a question on concealment. and the answer to that question, i submit, based on the fact that mr. bowman had full and complete knowledge, should be no. mr. bowman had full and complete knowledge about the risks associated with smoking. ms. bowman testified that when he quit in 1985, his reason for quitting, she believed, was health. so we start at that point. mr. bowman's actual quit related to health considerations. that is substantial evidence that he believed there was an association between his smoking and his health. but mr. bowman learned of the association in a lot of ways. aside from that, he learned from his own body. he learned from his close family members and he learned from outside sources. start with his own body. mr. -- mr. bowman had this terrific -- this very serious cough for years. and you have heard the testimony. he was throwing up. his wife said, though, when she mentioned it to him, he said, "leave me alone. i" -- he did not want to be nagged about smoking. he told one daughter he was coughing up a lung. he used the word cancer stick and nicotine fit. you do not use those terms unless you understand that those terms suggest that there is a health problem associated with smoking. you saw some of the movies and things. it is a common way to describe the risk. you know, frank sinatra, when he came into the bar in from here to eternity, he said, "give me a nail." well, he meant give me a coffin nail. rhett butler -- not rhett butler. i'm sorry. what is his name? who played rhett butler? the clerk: clark gable. mr. reid: clark gable. clark gable said, "i'm not doing suicide," or something like that to lee j. cobb. so he had heard this. his wife -- his wife's sister told -- he told his wife's sister -- he told her that it was from coughing. there were lots of family discussions about smoking in this family that we have heard, among the parents and the daughters over the years. when his daughter, who became a nurse, as early as elementary school, 10, 12 years old, she came home and told her dad it was bad for smoking, he said, "yeah, yeah, but i do not want to quit." she told him again in high school. she told him again in nursing school. she told him he should never have started. she told him smoking's addictive. she told her sister that you can die from smoking so the family's talking about it. she made fact statements and she told her father that they caused cancer and that they would end up on oxygen. the second daughter that you heard from was kellie, and she said she was told throughout her lifetime that many smoking caused -- smoking was harmful. she understood it, that it could lead to lung cancer, as early as 1984. she felt that everybody knew that it was bad for you. she associated her dad's cough with smoking in the '70s, and she believed that her dad was aware of the warnings. the other daughter did not testify but she gave her statements and -- and dr. hoge and dr. werner saw them and she said the same thing. ms. bowman stopped smoking in 1970 because of -- she was concerned she was having a heart attack. she had pains in her chest and he -- and he knew about that. mr. -- mr. bowman told her it is a hard habit to break; it is addictive. he knew that. both of ms. bowman's 12 parents passed away because of smoking -- what the family believed to be smoking-related conditions, lung cancer and emphysema. mr. bowman had to know that. and there was talk that his wife and his sister -- sister-in-law compared his cough to the cough of their father who had lung cancer. so we talked about mr. bowman's body. we have talked about the family, very close family. he was also exposed to substantial information throughout his life. you heard evidence about that. we saw his high school yearbook. he was in high school in iowa. then you saw some of the textbooks that were used in iowa. now, we cannot -- we do not know that mr. bowman actually used this particular textbook but you saw several. and there is some evidence to indicate that excessive smoking is a contributory cause cancer of the lip, mouth and tongue. recent experiments indicate use of tobacco may result in real harm to the respiratory system. some evidence it may cause cancer of the lung. this is in 1946. mr. bowman went all the way through school out there in iowa with these kind of textbooks. you heard that mr. bowman liked to keep up with current events. you heard that he regularly read reader's digest and a number of other magazines. and you have heard a lot of talk about reader's digest. there were -- it started in the '20s. these are the ones in the '60s. started in the '20s, goes all the way up. they were given an award by the cancer society for helping to stamp out smoking, 30-some articles over that period of time. mr. bowman was a -- religiously read reader's digest. you heard that testimony. he read the local newspaper seven days a week back-to-back. those are the places where he lived. he went -- he -- at some point in his life, he went to movies. he went -- he watched tv shows. remember, dr. proctor said the surgeon general's report was the health story of the decade. and that was in stars and stripes. and we know he read that. that was the military magazine or newspaper. and finally, since 1966, every package of cigarettes mr. bowman picked up had a warning, and you have seen the warnings, the one in '66 and in '70. remember, dr. levy said if he quit smoking in '75 when these warnings had been on the pack, first that and then this, he would have been -- he would have had the same risk of cancer as a nonsmoker, a never smoker. but he chose not to. so there can be little debate in this case that mr. bowman was fully informed about the risks associated with smoking. so those are the -- those are the three areas i was interested in talking to you about, the claims against reynolds. if we could put that slide up, three issues back up, just to remind us where we have been. i talked about addiction versus choice. i talked about alcohol versus smoking, and i've just finished talking about awareness. at this point, there is no evidence to support the claim that mr. bowman is a member of this class. and your answer to that first question should be no. if you get to the concealment question, it should be no as well because there was nothing concealed about smoking and health from mr. bowman. remember, it is not enough to prove that something was concealed from somebody else or some other part of the world. it has to have been concealed from mr. bowman, and if mr. bowman knew it, it cannot be concealed. and, therefore, if he knew it, the concealment claim should go away by your answering no to that question, if you get to that question. now, i want to talk a little bit about my client and what we did and what we said. but before i do that, i want you to consider, given this problem with the evidence that i've been describing, that the plaintiff cannot prove the causal relationship, they tried one more way to do it. and they tried to do it by bringing in dr. marvin goldberg. and you have heard talk about dr. goldberg a good bit this morning, about the ads that he showed you and the papers and so forth and so on. they are using dr. goldberg in this case to try to build this bridge, the bridge of causation. they want to bring in dr. goldberg and have him talk about all these advertisements and documents and so forth to try to demonstrate that something that reynolds did to mr. bowman was related to the claims in this case. so i need to talk about dr. goldberg a little bit. before i talk about it specifically, i want you to keep a couple of facts in mind. most of the -- most of the testimony -- well, dr. goldberg did not know anything about mr. bowman. but if you look at the testimony that he gave and the documents, most of the material and the ads and the things that he relied upon, even from a timing point of view, had nothing to do with mr. bowman. he showed you ads before mr. bowman ever smoked, back in the '40s, the doctors. remember, he showed you ads about youth marketing after he became an adult. he showed you material after he stopped smoking. he showed you material after he passed away. and he showed you material when there was a serious debate among scientists about whether the cause had actually been 13 proved or not. so a lot of what dr. goldberg showed you, just -- just based on that alone, has nothing to do with this case. but with that in mind, i'd like to turn to his specific opinions. he did not know anything about mr. bowman. he cannot contribute any evidence that would be helpful to you in deciding why mr. bowman smoked, what he knew about the risks, why he only chose to quit one time in his whole life. basically dr. goldberg spent several hours demonstrating to you that he has very negative views about the tobacco industry. the -- the judge read to you the charge about credibility and about believability, and you are entitled to evaluate witnesses to determine if they have an ulterior motive or if they have a bias that is shading their testimony or not. and that is -- that is why we ask some of the questions that we ask. now, i would say as a starting point, it was difficult to get a handle on exactly what dr. goldberg's position was. i went back and read it. and the very first question i asked right out of the box was -- i said: "are you here to tell the jury that ads are so overwhelming -- ads of public relations are so overwhelming that they overwhelm everything else in deciding whether to buy a product or not?" and his answer was: "no." okay. so then i asked him the opposite question. the second question i asked him: "well, would you agree there are people who are not affected by these overwhelming ads who can resist it and not buy products?" and his answer was: "no." so i do not know -- i'm not sure what -- what he means by that. but i think what he means, if you look at all of his testimony, i think dr. goldberg is of the opinion that marketing and public relations and advertising is so overwhelming that really nobody can withstand it, that that -- that there is no other connection that they are -- they cannot prove anything about mr. bowman, so they are going to say, well, there were a lot of ads out there, so mr. bowman must have been affected by them. so let us -- let us test that a little bit. let us -- let us -- let us look at it. by the way, if dr. goldberg does believe that certain people can resist -- and he did say that sometimes. he said it is multiple things. and, well, if he did, then it really -- his opinions have no -- offer no help to you because he did not know anything about mr. bowman's intelligence or his strong personality, his ability to withstand advertising. he did not know that dr. -- that mr. bowman was fully aware of the risks of smoking. he did not know that every single witness who testified about it -- and this is where the bridge comes in -- not a single witness told you that mr. bowman saw a particular ad and that is why he smoked. now, there -- there could be cases. there could be situations where people say, well, i saw such and such an ad on such and such tv show, and that gave me the idea that this was a pretty good product. or maybe an ad said menthol is cool or something and they decided to get that. none in this case. there is not a single -- every single witness, every family member said, when they are asked, "did your father ever tell you that he bought cigarettes -- did you ever talk about advertising? did you ever -- did he ever tell you that he bought cigarettes based on advertising?" and the answer uniformly was no. that is why dr. goldberg does not help you build that bridge -- help the plaintiff build that bridge in this case. and, in fact, you heard this morning that -- that -- in a summary of dr. goldberg's opinions, that basically -- what he really said was there is all this advertising. the company spent billions of dollars over the years. they killed stories. they -- they misrepresented stories. they did all these things and the result of all this is that the people just could not resist it and that is why people smoke. that is what he told you. counsel told you that this morning. that is what dr. goldberg. well, dr. goldberg, first of all, his testimony, his actual testimony, refutes that because he told you that in the '50s, about half the people smoked, fifty percent smoked. now, starting out, thinking about that, for some -- in some amazing way, those other fifty percent were able to withstand this onslaught and overwhelming advertising that he told you about. so right there we have got a problem with saying that it is so overwhelming that people cannot resist. but then he told you going forward, he said now only twenty percent smoke. so i asked: "well, has there been a change in the advertising or what is the story there?" he said: "well, in 1971, when it -- when they went off the air, they continued to do other things." and he said after '71, it was not on tv anymore, but it is -- but it was even more pervasive, you know, race cars and thing like that. so -- so there is been no, like, drop-off in advertising in his mind. in his mind, the advertising's continued a pace throughout the whole period, and yet another thirty percent have now stopped 14 smoking. they made the choice, not withstanding what he said is this tremendous pressure in the press to stop, twenty percent now smoke. he cannot explain that. and, of course, you already know about the 60 million who quit. somehow they were able to withstand this onslaught, this billion dollars of ads. and then, of course, all the people who just chose never to start smoking in the first place. everybody in the country -- see, that is why you cannot take everybody in the country sort of stuff and apply it to this case because now we are down to twenty percent who smoked, and then we have the people who never even tried to smoke. we have all the people that quit. that is why you get to decide where does mr. bowman fall based on mr. bowman's evidence in this case, the evidence about his case. that is why dr. goldberg does not really help build this bridge of causation at all. he just does not think a lot of the advertising and does not think a lot of the -- the company. so -- so his testimony does -- refutes this. but there is more evidence that -- that establishes that what he said just is not accurate, that people are not overwhelmed. for instance, in 19 -- let us see the next slide, 33. -- in 1954 -- and this was -- have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer? ninety percent have heard that. now, look at the next slide. remember, we showed this to just give you an idea of what -- what it means to say that ninety percent of the people believe anything. it is amazing. did not know that al gore was vice president. did not know that people were called ms. instead of mrs. or miss, 90 percent. so that message is getting through. so then they say, okay, people have heard about it but they really do not believe it. well, then we see the next poll, in '54. do you think it is harmful? so this is what they call a belief poll. well, seventy percent believe that smoking cause -- is harmful. dr. goldberg, that does not jive with his testimony that the company is so controlling the flow of information in the media that people have no choice. and then he said it was drowned out, you know, the fulcrum and all that. well, you saw this document used by the plaintiff. it says the accumulative evidence from all of these questions is that awareness of antismoking reports and commercials is high and that a sizeable portion of the public accepts them as authoritative. that was in 1970, i believe. it is hard to read, but i think -- so the message is getting through. and furthermore, we also have -- we also have the roper surveys. and dr. goldberg admitted that, well, the credibility of the speaker is important. so they asked about this. and it is clear that people do not accept the tobacco industry as somebody that -- who would say there is no connection between smoking and cigarettes. let us look at the next one. in 68, it is the same. now it is the tobacco companies. next one, 70, tobacco companies, and then the next one, tobacco companies, again, and then tobacco companies and the tobacco institute. so that -- that refutes what dr. goldberg told you, that -- that the message was being so controlled by the industry that nobody knew that the message was getting out. there was another difference between dr. goldberg and the other witnesses that you heard in this case, which i think you can consider for whatever it is worth as to bias. dr. goldberg, i think, clearly has a bias, and i think he tries to hide it. and the first way was about his involvement in programs helping lawyers learn how to try lawsuits against tobacco companies. for some reason, he was not very forthcoming about that. the first time -- and i looked it up. the first time i asked the question, i said: "you have attended conferences put on by plaintiffs' lawyers for other lawyers." he said: "no." so then i asked him a few more questions. and then he said: "oh, yeah, yeah. i did go to one in boston. it was -- it was sponsored by a lawyer who represents plaintiffs in tobacco litigation, and i was the only lawyer there." he remembered that one. then i asked him about another one, and then he said: "oh, yeah, there was another one." another one. and then he -- the one he did not remember, he now remembered, well, i was not there. he was on the program and so forth, but he did not make it to that one. then i asked him the one about -- this is telling, i think. i asked him one about san diego, and he said he did not remember that. and then i read his testimony from another case some months ago in this very courtroom -- courthouse. and the same question was asked: "did you go to a program in san diego about teaching lawyers and so forth?" and he -- and in that case, he said: "yeah, i did." 15 now, he told you he did not remember that one. and then the other thing he did not remember was whether he signed an affidavit. imagine if you sign an affidavit and you saw the affidavit where it limits your ability to be a consultant for some period of time, if you signed that, you would remember it. dr. goldberg did not remember whether he signed it or not. so for some reason, there is a reason that he is trying to keep you from knowing the full extent of his involvement in -- in the antitobacco work that he had done. and, you know, this is another little thing. as counsel said, everybody has to pay the expert for their time. and most experts know that and the juries will know it and the courts know it. and you remember dr. burns on the tape, they said: "now, how much have you made in your 20-something years? and he said a million point-something, million one. he did not quibble around about it. dr. proctor, i asked him on the stand. he said he thought he was about 7- or 800. i said: "is it to a million yet?" he said: "no, it was not to a million." dr. harris said he received over the years, over ten years, about 200,000, all that. but when i asked dr. goldberg, he said: "well, it is about" -- i forget the number he said, 600 or 800, maybe 800,000. but then he said he would never really tried to find out. it would be too hard. he lost his tax returns. that is sort of like the dog ate my homework when he was moving, does not have the ability to find out. he said one time he did it by estimating a per charge and so forth, and then he said he would given different amounts to different juries because he never really looked it up and it is always an estimate. that -- you can consider that. was there some reason that -- that dr. goldberg did not want to just come right out admit what every other expert in the case admitted? dr. goldberg is a -- is in a world where every single product that has risks -- fast food, alcohol and so forth -- every single product can advertise freely except tobacco. now, alcohol has warnings now but back when he was thinking about this, he believes that only tobacco should have the warnings, no other warnings. he believes that consumers basically are robots, dumber than pigeons. you remember, he said it in one of these lectures. but basically his point was that they go and buy the stuff without really knowing what they are doing. but you know the case -- the facts of this case, and that is that mr. bowman did not live in dr. goldberg's world. he was intelligent, decisive. he smoked because he chose to smoke. he was not a robot. he quit because he chose not to smoke. and finally, dr. goldberg's testimony has nothing to do with this case, nothing to do. now, mr. shields -- oh, i did want to mention one other thing to you and i'll just mention it. dr. goldberg talked about youth marketing and -- and you saw some documents. and i told you there would be documents that nobody can today explain in the reading of today's context. but -- but as late as 1984, which is the last date that you saw -- and you saw a formal document that reynolds produced to talk about planning for its marketing and so forth. and during direct, they put that on the board, and they found a chart that -- where it said 12 years old. and dr. goldberg said, oh, there it is, the definition. it is -- they are defining younger adults as 12 years old. so i went back to dr. goldberg on cross, and i said, well, look at the first, when it says the definition of younger adults is 18 to 24, legal smokers, in other words. he said, well, it says that there but not on that other page. and then when i went through the document, every chart, every -- almost every reference was talking about 18 to 24. and then he went back to that 12-year-old page. and then when we looked at, what we found out was, it was not reynolds that was doing that. it was the government. those were hew statistics that they made on how much anybody smokes and that is why they were there. they were not -- dr. goldberg kept saying because the number 12 appears, that means that that document -- reynolds is saying 12 years old. now, i realize there were problems before and there is no doubt. and we will talk about going forward. but that is an example of trying to give you a half-truth, show you a document, tell you what it says, because the number 12 appears on it and then deny, deny, deny the rest of it. so i just wanted to mention that in passing because it was mentioned -- it was shown on the screen today. but i want to talk to you now about the punitive damage question that mr. -- mr. shields -- and this is the question that you will have to answer. under the circumstances in this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warrant- -- are warranted against the defendants. now, you will only get to this point if you have awarded -- if you have answered yes to the other questions and you have awarded compensatory damages. punitive damages are different from compensatory damages. 16 punitive damages are not designed to put somebody back where they were before the incident or to pay medical bills or to do any kinds -- there is no claim for that here. but any kind of compensatory award, it is different. it is on top of that. it is on top of that. and these damages do not go to the government. they do not go to cancer prevention organizations or anything. they go to -- to -- to the plaintiff in the case, to ms. bowman. and if you decide that there is -- that -- in this phase, you are going to just decide if conduct warrants it, and then if you say yes, we would have another -- another trial that the judge told you about yesterday. there is some differences, though. the standard of proof is different now. the judge told you that it is a matter of the greater weight of the evidence for the rest of the case, which you know is different from the criminal. well, punitive is by clear and convincing evidence. and there is criteria that the judge has instructed you this morning. this is what you have to find. you have to find that reynolds' conduct was gross and flagrant, that it was -- that there was a reckless disregard for the rights of mr. bowman, that there was an entire lack of care; there was conscious indifference to mr. bowman; there was wanton or reckless disregard for the safety and welfare, reckless indifference, intentional violations. it is a pretty big standard but the bridge of causation still applies. you still have to show that mr. bowman was injured by this conduct, and the judge will tell that you that you cannot -- and has already told you actually that you cannot award damages for harm to somebody else. those people get -- if they have a lawsuit, they get to bring it someday. it has to be harm to mr. bowman, so you have to show that -- something about the punitive behavior, the conduct that they say warrants it, goes over that bridge to the claims made here. and that is the -- that is the standard that you will use. now, there is a lot of talk. in fact, the case started by mr. shields standing up and telling you about this meeting at the plaza hotel, about the secret meeting which he said begins the conspiracy. well, as you now know from the evidence, the justice department was advised of that meeting. the -- the justice department received the documents about the formation of the groups, the tirc and the gold and what they were going to be doing. it was reported in the new york times. it is hardly the way to start a secret conspiracy. but you do not have to accept dr. proctor's testimony that it was a secret conspiracy that began a 50-year conspiracy because you now have substantial evidence about what reynolds did or did not do over the 50 years. and he put up the frank statement. and dr. proctor said that is the statement. that is the thing that describes the conspiracy, the falsehoods. it is the misleading parts of that. and from that point on -- so i thought it would be helpful to think about the evidence that you have heard about my client in the context of the frank statement. so -- now, counsel said it does not matter whether the frank statement's true or not. that is the remarkable admission at this point in the trial, when they have been talking about this the whole trial. and dr. proctor said it is the -- sort of the magna carta of the conspiracy, i think he may have said. but i want to talk to you about the frank statement in the context, and i made a board here so we could keep it up and talk about it. now, what i've done, you see these things in yellow? those are the ones that dr. proctor agreed to. he said those are true. "recent reports on experiments with mice have given a lot of publicity to the theory that cigarette smoking is somehow linked to lung cancer. at the same time, we, the industry, feels it is in the public interest to call attention to the fact that eminent doctors and research scientists have publicly questioned the significance." he said that was true. "medical research of recent years indicates many possible causes of cancer." he said that was true. we have believe the products we make are not injurious." he said that is what the companies believed at that point. "for more than 300 years, tobacco has given solace, relaxation and enjoyment. at one time or another during the years, they have been held responsible for every disease." he agreed with that. one by one, these charges have been abandoned. cannot say whether he agreed or disagreed because he did not say what these other charges were. so that -- that is -- if they were tobacco-related, he said it was not true, he said they were something else. "regardless of the past, the fact that cigarette smoking today should even be suspected as cause of disease is a matter of deep concern." he said that was true. "many people asked us what we were doing." he said that was true. 17 and number 2, "for this purpose we are establishing a joint industry group consisting initially of the undersigned. this group will be known as the tirc." that was true. now, i want to look at those other things in the context of some evidence that you have seen in this case. starting with recent reports on experiments with mice that he says is true, obviously that is the epidemiology. and you saw the list before and it was the mouse skin painting that was done that you heard about. then number 2 he disagrees with. "although conducted by doctors of professional standing, these experiments are not regarded as conclusive in the field of cancer research. however, we do not believe that any serious medical research, even though its results are inconclusive, should be disregarded." now, what evidence did you hear about that? well, you heard about the four tests, the four epic studies, dr. doll, levin, schrek and wynder. but you know what dr. levin said about it? let us look at slide 51, please. dr. levin, who did one of the tests, said there is still a question. "the published literature on the use of tobacco and its possible association fails to show clear-cut, consistent observations. reviews of the literature from the past 20 years reveal that it was often conflicting, and it consisted for the most part of studies which are inconclusive, lack of adequate samples" -- and so forth and so on. so even though he is one of the tests, he thought there was a question. in other words, doctors. in other words, there is a -- there is a disagreement. let us see slide 52, dr. schrek. dr. schrek said the same thing. he wrote one of the -- one of the studies. and he cited some. "for every expert who blames tobacco for cancer, there is another expert who says tobacco is not the cause." so dr. schrek thought there was a question. and then you also heard testimony about dr. -- dr. wynder with the mouse skin painting, saying that -- saying that what happens on the back of a mouse is different from a lung, and so we have got to do more research and so forth. so you heard evidence that this one is actually true, and the -- the two best examples are the very two people who did the study, plus the other evidence that you heard. the next one at the same time he agrees is true. so let us go down to the -- to number 2, that "there is no agreement among the authorities regarding what the cause is," and then the next one says "there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes." and it goes on to say: "the statistics purporting to link cigarette smoking" -- i'm just reading from the small one here but it is number 4 there -- "the statistics purported to link cigarette smoking with the disease could apply with equal force to one of many other aspects of modern life. indeed the validity of the statistics is questioned by numerous scientists." well, what evidence did you hear about that? you heard that there was a substantial debate about this throughout the '50s and really into the '60s. over time, it expanded beyond just does smoking cause cancer to what is the effect on -- of nicotine addiction, whether the warning and -- and whether there should be warnings or not. let us look at slide 53. these names came from evidence that you have seen. you saw them through the testimony of dr. proctor. you saw them through one of the scientific-perspective documents. these are -- every one of these people at one time or another, during the period that we are talking about, raised questions, raised doubts about some aspect of the -- of the smoking and health controversy. now, that is not it say that they did not ultimately reach different conclusions. but during the time between 1942 and 1968, those are the -- that is the time frame, you have heard evidence that -- and most of it came through dr. proctor, and then some came through dr. figlar and dr. cook, the documents they looked at. those people have all been involved. these are people like the national cancer institute, the government, the public health service, major cancer centers, dr. wynder, american cancer society, mayo clinic, united states government. there was a debate going on. dr. proctor would have you ignore all of this and say, well, they might have said that, but you should have taken a different position, reynolds. let me give you some other examples that i think you saw. for instance, dr. heller and this is when he would gotten into whether there should be -- advertising should have warnings. dr. heller, the head of the national cancer institute, said: "newspapers, radio, tv have done an excellent job covering this problem, very objective. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." that was in 1957. let us see the next one. dr. burney, the surgeon 18 general, says the same thing. let us see the next one. "you can stand on the rooftop" -- this is daniel horn in 1968 -- "shout smoking dangerous at the top of your lungs and would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." so when you are deciding whether or not there was a dispute during this time period, at the time this was written, there was. and that -- that -- no agreement at this point would be true. no proof would be true because there was a disagreement. you have to -- they were still working it is way. this was not -- this is not today and that is the key. this is the '50s when this was going on, and the -- and the documents that you saw from my client were in the '50s, at the same time this was being published and at the same time all of this was going on. basically, plaintiffs are arguing that my client should be punished, should be punished for taking the same position that a lot of those scientists took during this same period of time. and remember, counsel talked about the ama, and he said there was some "foolduggery" that went on with the ama. well, you heard evidence from dr. proctor that not the ama but doctors in the field, in 1960, a third of those doctors accepted that there was a causal relationship. in other words, they believed the scientific epidemiology, but a third did not believe it, as late as 1960. that is not the ama because of something that some scientist did. that is the doctors out there in the field who would have an ability to know that. now, you -- you might argue that reynolds -- maybe we were too late. maybe -- maybe we should have -- maybe we should have jumped on one side or the other later. but you cannot say that what we were doing was wanton and reckless and complete disregard because we were taking, during this time, the same position, the same position that many, many leading scientists were taking in this country. the next one that he disagreed with -- and really number 4, i should put a t there because that is all part of the same. 2, 3 and 4 all relate to the same discussion that was going on. and there will be more about that in a few minutes. but the next one says "we accept an interest that when they" -- "we accept an interest in the people's health as a basic responsibility." well, what was r. j. reynolds -- while this debate was going on, what was r. j. reynolds doing internally? we start with the teague survey. now, dr. teague wrote several documents, and there seems to be some confusion about what each document was. the teague survey was done when dr. teague had first arrived at reynolds with his doctorate in -- in chemistry. and he was actually sent out in the world and said find every piece of paper you can find in the public records about this subject. and he did. and he wrote a report. and there is 76 -- you -- if you look at it back there, there is 76 items in the bibliography. every single one of those was available to any scientist or any person in the world who wanted to go to the various libraries and pull them down. it seems to me you can say that was a prudent thing -- when this debate was just beginning, that was a prudent thing to do for a company to see what the science is that is out there, and you saw a couple of pieces of summary. dr. teague was merely pointing out what these articles were saying, and a lot of the articles were showing the debate. some were showing -- some were on one side; some were on the other. but the part he did not show you is where dr. teague said these studies were inconclusive and that sometimes there was a -- they were theoretically giving rise to carcinogenic substances. he was just summarizing what was out there in the public domain. it -- it can hardly be said to be a punitive behavior when you send somebody out to find out what is going on. now, just as an aside, those planning documents that dr. teague -- let me make it clear what i said. i've been accused of saying some things today. he was a scientist and -- and he was a chemist. he was not in the marketing or the -- the department. and he -- i did not just say he was some scientist. i said what he did. but i said those were written as part of a master's program. he was getting a master's in business at a university nearby, and those were written as part of his schoolwork. and as you can see, they were not sent to and from, and they did not show you a single document to suggest that anything was ever done about those particular documents. and dr. proctor admitted that that is what dr. teague had said under oath about those. so i just wanted to clear up that i did not say that they were written by some scientist. i explained through dr. proctor -- he actually explained based on my questions. but it was not just what -- it was not just what dr. teague was finding. you heard about dr. rodgman and this is an example of the -- what i call maybe the half-truth or not showing you the whole thing. dr. rodgman was a scientist and he was -- while the 19 debate was going on -- see, dr. teague figured out what the debate was and told him. while the debate was going on, dr. rodgman was in the laboratory trying to get answers. let us look at 58, please. this is the document of dr. rodgman in 1956. he points out that "the interest in the presence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in cigarette smoke condensate is that many of these compounds are known to be carcinogenic" -- and he cites something that is known; in other words, that is a -- that is an article about somebody out there in the world -- "to various species of animals." you see, at that point, they were not sure. "the current controversy concerning the influence of cigarette smoking on the increasing incidence of cancer of the human male has not yet been settled." okay. so that -- that was the state of science then. and then -- but he said "it is recommended that investigations on the reduction of the content of the polycyclic aromatic carbohydrons [sic] in cigarette smoke be initiated." you have not seen that before. so he -- he acknowledges that people were out -- remember, this was the time it was hard to figure out what was in tobacco smoke because they did not have the -- the fancy machines they have now. but what did he say, let us -- let us do research to find out about it. then in nine -- and then in '59, he wrote another one that you saw, and this one describes what is going on. it is probably harder for you to see. he said "we confirmed earlier" -- "confirmed that extended earlier published findings about polycyclic hydrocarbons -- hydrocarbons initiated lengthy research to develop methods to lessen." they are trying to take the carcinogenic substances out. counsel keeps telling you that it is inappropriate for somebody from the tobacco industry to go on tv and say if we can find out what is in it, we can take it out if we can. well, that is what dr. rodgman was trying to do in 1959 and before. and they he went through whole series of approaches, extraction process, variations of filter tips, variations of paper, use of additives, use of cigarettes and so forth. and then he goes on to say that "the experimental variations were over 120 separate experiments involving almost a half million cigarettes. our experimental evidence indicated each of the approaches cited above have some merit." and dr. burns, remember dr. burns? he is no friend of tobacco. on the tv, when you heard him, he said that the research that dr. rodgman was doing was a great idea and he commended that. and dr. burns also told you they -- counsel makes it sound like this was a secret, that only reynolds knew that there was possible carcinogenic substances in smoke. the surgeon general knew about it. dr. burns told you that before he wrote the '64 report. so that is one of the things that r. j. reynolds was doing, trying to improve the product from a safety point of view. they also were involved in something called the tobacco working group. let us look at slide 60. the court: let us -- hold on just a second. let us take a ten-minute break. mr. reid: take a break? sure. the court: then we will come back and let you finish up before lunch. mr. reid: that is fine. the court: ladies and gentlemen, if you will step to the jury room. start back in ten minutes. and then we will let counsel finish, and then we will bring your lunch in around 12:30, 12:40. (short recess.) (jury present.) (the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) the court: okay. thank you, mr. reid. you may continue. mr. reid: no problem. thank you, your honor. we were talking about item number 4. "we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business." and i had been talking to you about what was going on in the early days at reynolds when the -- when the epidemiology first came out. but i wanted to say one thing. counsel said to you that the only scientific research that he thought would make sense and be worthwhile -- he was talking about the ctr and so forth -- was epidemiology. why did not we try to reproduce the epidemiology? well, there is no evidence one way or the other about that, but the point is epidemiology just gives you an association based on populations. the next step is to go into the laboratory and find out what is actually causing the relationship and that is what we did. i showed you the two, dr. rodgman's and -- and you will see others. and you will see lots of articles cited in the various surgeon general's reports written by reynolds' scientists. so that is one thing we 20 were doing. we were in the laboratory, trying to found out what is in smoke and how can you deal with it, and are there other scientific -- let me remind you of something. the -- some of the things that dr. rodgman was studying, polycyclic hydrocarbons, those were all mentioned in a reader's digest article. they were all laid out in the reader's -- so there was no secret about that. it was not something that the company was keeping from mr. bowman that would cause him to make smoking decisions. the next thing we did was something called the tobacco working group, and -- and this was a joint effort by the tobacco company scientists, the federal government, national institute of health scientists and the public health community scientists. and it went on for ten years, and its goal is to try to find a safer cigarette. and we work closely and we work on these areas jointly with all of these other groups. modifying the tobacco itself, working with farmers, expanded tobacco, filter designs, additives, reconstituted and paper porosity. now, i want to say something. there is -- there is a lot of talk about this reconstituted tobacco, and the suggestion was, well, you just did that to save money. well, the tobacco working group made up of all these groups looked at that carefully and studied it. and, in fact, the surgeon general commented on this and in '79 the report, it basically says that that reconstituted tobacco resulted in less tumorigenic -- that means pure tumors, pure -- less cancer than standard cigarettes. and then it also complimented -- or commented on the fact that the paper porosity had something -- was an improvement. so when they tell you they we did it just to save money, well, sometimes saving money also might have a health effect, and the surgeon general conceded that -- that reynolds did that. as you know, the tobacco working group is shut down, as dr. proctor told you, because it became politically untenable for the federal government to say they were working with the tobacco industry. so the search for a safer cigarette that went on ten years was cut off by the federal government. but reynolds did more over the years to work on the question of health. they reduced the tar and nicotine in all their cigarettes. you see, if you cannot take out specific things, then -- then let us -- let us reduce the tar because that is where all the -- the smoke comes from and that is the bad stuff. let us reduce that. they did that. they lowered the yield of carcinogenic substances in the smoke, that is helping. they worked -- dr. proctor told you they spent billions on something called premier and eclipse, those are cigarettes that heated tobacco, not burn, and the idea was to make a safer cigarette. because, remember, when you burn the tobacco, that is when you get the smoke that cause -- that has the carcinogenic. reynolds identified many, many, maybe more than half of the constituents in tobacco smoke. our scientists did that and we gave it to the surgeon general in the early '60s, before the '64 report even came out. and when counsel says we did not do anything about nicotine or less addictive or whatever, he forgot the testimony about a product called carlton, which reynolds developed and it was a very low nicotine cigarette. and it is out there, you can buy it even now. that is what reynolds was doing over the years. and as -- as to this question of did we remove enough of the carcin- -- why did not we remove things, remember dr. proctor's testimony. some of these constituents, there are 5,000 things, constituents in -- in smoke. and some of them are in -- in microgram or picograms, all that, some are so small you cannot even see it with a -- with a big scanning electronic microscope. and many of these you get when you burn hamburgers or when you burn lettuce, any -- any kind of vegetable kind of product, you get many of the same things. so it is very difficult to move -- to remove one little tiny thing out of the -- out of the smoke but reynolds was working on it all the way back into the '50s with dr. rodgman. so the fact is, if that is true, reynolds has done and continues to do many things over the years which try to make cigarettes safer, try to -- to -- to modify the cigarettes based on the science as it was developing. the next one, he agrees it is -- with the next one. the next one says, "we have cooperated with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health." well, i've already told you about the teague -- tobacco working group, that was a ten-year project where we worked with -- 62 -- you saw that already, that -- that was -- i told you about very premier and eclipse, that was another thing that we did in this thing. i told you about the constituents of smoke. look at slide 63. i'm sorry. did you get ahead of me or did i get ahead of you? let us look at -- let us go -- that is right. that is the one i meant. 21 this is the letter that was written by reynolds, the memo about the tobacco working group, and the boss, mr. sankus wrote down to mr. galloway, "in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning smoking and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with the government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper research on the subject. if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan." that was -- those were marching orders for people that were going to go into this tobacco working group and start working on developing a safer cigarette. if we look at 63, those are all the scientists and all the surgeon general's reports that cited multiple scientific research papers and tests and so forth done by reynolds' employees. the surgeon general felt that obviously that reynolds was making a contribution to the smoking and health, and obviously the surgeon general, you know what his view is about it, he thought that reynolds' scientists were making observa- -- were making contributions and those people's articles were cited by the surgeon general in his report. reynolds continues to publish papers in a variety of scien- -- you heard this from dr. cook and dr. figlar on the tape, if you remember, that was a long time ago, i realize, seems a lot longer ago than it was, but they continue to publish scientific papers in a variety of journals, they continue to make presentations to groups such as the fda, the ftc, the canadian government. you have heard substantial testimony that reynolds has been involved intimately over the years with the public health community and with the government and in the whole scientific. the next one is true, and i've told you that about the charges, we are not sure. the next two. so now we are -- now we are down to the pledge to aid -- pledging aid and assistance to the research effort into all phases of tobacco use and health. this joint financial aid will, of course, be in addition to what we are already contributing. he believed -- he agreed this is true, that we were going to establish tirc. and then the last one, "in charge of the research will be scientists of unimpeachable integrity and national refute. in addition, there will be an advisory board of scientists disinterested in the cigarette industry, a group of distinguished men from medicine science education will serve on the board." he says that is not true, and that gets us to the discussion of the ctr. even dr. proctor agreed that the research that ctr funded was good research. there were future nobel war aids. it was published in the top journals. it was done by the top medical schools and -- and another health, it was -- many times it was co-funded by the -- by the national cancer institute and it was included in many surgeon general's reports. now, dr. proctor, notwithstanding all of that, told you that nothing that they funded had anything to do with the real question of smoking and health. and he actually called it distraction research. so i say, okay, out of the 6,000 articles, how many have you actually looked at? and he could not remember exactly but he thought about 100. so then i pulled out about 7 -- about 10, i think, and we went through them and he has never -- he has never looked at any of those. and i -- this is a terrible slide, okay, it is got -- it is -- it is busy and it is got lots of big words, but these are the ones that i went through and he admitted that these do, in fact, deal with smoking and health. and you can -- you can tell from part, physiologic basic for prohibition against smoking, serum cholesterol in the administration of nicotine, ciliated mucous, he talked about the cilia and the lungs and so forth and the effect, on -- cigarette smoke's effect. bronchial epithelium, same thing, related to smoking, chronic nicotine administration, dietary nicotine, addictive aspects in heavy cigarette smoking and then something called depressed interferon synthesis, lung cancer patients. he admitted that he had not ever read any of those and all of those would be -- would not be distraction research, if you will. dr. proctor, for whatever, that is one area that he just has not done enough research in. he just said it is a distraction research and that is it. if you look at what the -- what resulted, the summary, $300 million, 1650 scientific projects, 1200 independent researchers, that is what the ctr funded. and the only criticism is dr. proctor coming in and saying, i've looked at 100 maybe, i have not looked at the ones that really relate to smoking but i think it -- it is all distraction research, it has nothing to do with smoking. but he could never explain then why does the surgeon general include them in a report on smoking and health? if they have nothing to do with smoking and health, why are they regularly cited in the -- in the 22 surgeon general's reports? the -- the industry also funded the -- the big thick green book. and it -- and it is called -- they were called the green monster. and right up front they acknowledged that it is funded in part by the tobacco industry research committee. there was nothing secret about who -- about receiving the funding. the surgeon general had a comment about this book. he referred to it as the book compiled from more than 6,000 articles, published in 1200 journals, a basic reference source. he did not say there was anything wrong with it. dr. proctor did not like it, as you remember. that is what the surgeon general said about it. and dr. burns, on his tv, said it was a non-discriminate -- non-discriminating collection of writings about tobacco, meaning that it -- meaning that it showed both sides. remember we had that whole discussion with dr. proctor, his only criticism was that they -- that they showed both sides. dr. proctor would only agree that the green monster was a worthwhile contribution that the tobacco -- ctr made to the science. he would only agree that it was worthwhile if you took out every single article that disagreed with him and you left only the ones that he agrees with and you said -- and you published the book, then he would say it is worthwhile. dr. proctor felt that it was inappropriate to put both sides of the story, as you have seen from those -- those lists of all those different articles and people that wrote the articles covering both sides. dr. proctor did not think that was worthwhile because it frankly did not agree with him. the -- down on number 3 now, so that is true, that tobacco -- all phases of tobacco. and as i said, i just showed you a handful of unpronounceable topics but that gives you a sense. if dr. proctor thought that this was distraction research, he should have brought in some articles and shown them to you and pointed out, look at this, it has nothing to do with smoking and health. look at this, it has nothing to do. he did not do any of that. we showed him articles. we talked to him about the articles. that is important in determining whether or not the -- the tobacco companies have been acting appropriately in -- in funding studies. now, the -- the next one talks about that -- that the head of the committee will be a scientist of unimpeachable integrity and it talks about the scientific advisory board. well, you heard evidence the head person was dr. clarence cook little. he was the president of the university of maine, he was the president of the university of michigan, he was the head of what became the american cancer society, so he is -- that is the person who was appointed that -- that they are talking about. and then you heard the scientific advisory board was made up of scientists at universities and medical schools all over the country. that is the board that made up the -- the scientific advisory board. so that is true. so counsel said you should not pay attention to whether anything in this is true or not. but now you have heard the substantial evidence in this case that validates each one of those paragraphs that -- that dr. proctor talked. so really i told you there were -- or the judge told you and i'll repeat it, there are two reasons for punitive damages. one is to punish people and one is to keep them from doing something in the future to change their behavior. well, i want you to ask yourself this question: the claim must be shown to be by clear and convincing evidence, would you -- do you really think the company who began research in the '50s and carried out -- carried on throughout, who worked with government and public health officials for all those years, who discovered or identified most of the constituents in -- in smoke, who provided that information to the surgeon general in as early as 1960, '61, who spent a billion dollars developing -- trying to develop a safer cigarette, the premier and the eclipse, who reduced the tar and nicotine of its products over the years substantially, who reduced the -- the effect or the -- the amount of the car- -- some of the carcinogenic substances, who -- and who agreed with the attorney general about the definition of addiction, that i'll talk about next, does that really warrant punishment? that would send clearly the wrong message that what the company was doing to try to solve this problem was inappropriate. and that is the answer -- that is the question you have to answer in this case. now, plaintiff also claims as part of its punitive claim that -- that reynolds took the wrong position about addiction. once again, you have heard testimony about that. over the years, there is no doubt, it is not disputed, reynolds took the position that smoking cigarettes was not addictive. and if you will look at slide 69, you will know why. in the 1700s, look -- let us put 69 up. go back to that one, please. in 1964, the surgeon general discussed addiction versus habituation. and the surgeon general made the 23 determination that cigarettes do not fall into the category of an addictive substance. that came out of the world health organization. that was the accepted view of people who thought about this problem for years. so in other words, they want to get punitive damages because reynolds agreed with the surgeon general of the united states. and as you know, that position was held by the surgeon general for about two decades. now, let us look at 68. and -- and this really gets to what you have to decide in this case. there is no definition of addiction that -- that binds a jury. in this case, it is really the behavior that you are talking about because the definition has changed. in the early days, you remember columbus and john quincy adams and all and before that it was called an addiction sometimes, it was called a habit sometimes, but in 1964, the surgeon general said, we are going to -- we are going to use the word "habit" because it does not meet the addiction criteria, it does not have intoxication, it does not have serious life-threatening withdrawals and so forth. so for two decades reynolds and the surgeon general were on exactly the same page. so when counsel says that we did not tell the truth because we have denied that our cigarettes were addictive, there it is. and you remember that clip of the -- of the chairman standing up and raising their hand on -- in congress, remember the one person who tried to explain this was mr. johnston, the chairman of reynolds, when he tried to explain that there was a definition and the congressman just said -- or the senator, i guess, it was, he just said, well, i'll take that as a yes and let us move on. that is what he was talking about, that and the other slide about what the attorney general -- surgeon general said. he was not allowed to say that. if an expert witness had come in in the '60s or the '70s and done an evaluation and had exactly the same behavior that you have heard today, her -- her conclusion would be the person's not addicted because it did not qualify under the definition accepted. but in 1988, the surgeon general changed the definition, decided to require that -- to get rid of the requirement of intoxication and reynolds did not change for about ten years. again, maybe we could have done it sooner, maybe we did -- did not do it soon enough, but the point is it is not reckless, wanton, punitive behavior, as the plaintiff suggests, to have said all those years that cigarette smoking is not an addictive behavior. it is not enough just to say that somebody's addicted. you have to look at the facts. and the punitive facts in this case are the same as the facts for all the other claims. you must show that something about the facts created this. that mr. bowman's knowledge, that something was concealed, that -- that some of these facts that they are arguing about now, the fact about addiction or about smoking being risky and all, if mr. bowman knew it cannot -- it cannot have been concealed. so all the discussion we had about what mr. bowman knew and how he made the decision applied the same to punitives as it does to the rest. you just have a higher standard of proof. now, it is not criminal but it is a higher standard of proof. so -- so that is kind of the punishment side. now, i want to talk about the deterrent side. the punitive damages also are designed, if they are needed, to cause companies to do something different going forward. and you have had evidence in this case about whether or not r. j. reynolds needs to be deterred. i believe the evidence is clear that it does not need to be punished. when you balance all of the things that were going on, it does not need to be punished. does it need to be deterred? there is no debate in this case, there can be no debate that reynolds is a different company today from the '50s or the '60s. and i told you i could not explain some of those documents and nobody can, that they were written in a different time, when there was a different view about this whole subject and even counsel conceded that this morning when he talked about his client smoking in a different era. the world's a lot different today than it was in the '50s and the '60s. most importantly, though, those documents that you saw have virtually nothing to do with mr. bowman. nothing to do with mr. bowman. mr. bowman had full knowledge of what he needed to know to qualify in this case. now, what -- what is different today? well, number one, there have been warnings on the packs since 1966 and they continue to be on the packs as we speak. everybody who wrote those memos and did those studies and -- and worked at reynolds back then and made decisions, they are all gone. they are all gone. they are not at reynolds anymore. and today you have heard evidence what of what reynolds is doing right now, premier and eclipse, trying to develop a safer cigarette. dr. burns -- dr. proctor said he thought a billion dollars had been spent. imagine -- imagine -- imagine what a tremendous 24 marketing advantage it would be if you could actually find the -- the answer to this and -- and create a safer cigarette that was different from all the other cigarettes. imagine, why would not a company want to do that? it is very difficult. but reynolds continues to work. i've told -- i've talked to you about what we are doing now in studying the constituents of tobacco smoke and that gets more and more sophisticated and we learn more and more about it as time passes. i've talked about the studies that reynolds is publishing and sharing its information with the public, with the scientific community, with the government and with the public health community. reynolds placed millions of its documents on the website so that people can access and read them. and the rest -- and reynolds now has a way of citing it and you can read this. "cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the united states. significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer, heart disease, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases." that is what reynolds -- now, the -- so you do not need to do something to make reynolds do this. what else does -- does reynolds say? "nicotine product is addictive. it is not considered a threat to health." and the last sentence, "the best course of action for tobacco users is to quit." there is a lot more. these are in evidence, you can look at the pages and you can see what we are telling customers. see, this second part, this deterrence means you have to look at reynolds today and decide do you need to award money to cause them to do something different going forward, to deter them from doing what was in the past? today they are doing nothing in any way, shape or form that looks like what you saw in documents in the '50s or the '60s. the court: mr. reid, you have got about 25 minutes left, would you like to save it for after lunch or would you -- mr. reid: no, i'm going to finish in -- the court: sure. mr. reid: i did not know i had that much. i do not have that much more to say. then everybody claps. i think it is clear that the plaintiff has failed to carry the burden by clear and convincing evidence that reynolds has worked in this wanton, reckless and intentional way toward mr. bowman. and it is you answer -- if you get to that point on the verdict form, should be -- should be no as to whether or not punitive damages. now, we will look at the verdict form and go through quickly. i've already talked about the first question. if you -- if you believe that they have to prove that mr. bowman was addicted, that the addiction was the cause of his smoking and that the esophageal cancer was caused by smoking, your answer would be no to that question. meaning mr. bowman is not in the class and the case would end. now, obviously i've talked about the whole verdict form. the negligence -- let us look at the next two -- i know you cannot get it on the page as all that, let us go to the next one. these two have to do with product defect. and there has been no evidence in this case that the -- you heard the findings, once again they -- they rely on the findings about the product, but there is been no finding in this case, no evidence in this case about what defect caused any injury to mr. bowman. you see, they still have to prove that the defect was the legal cause and the -- and the previous question, the negligence, the legal cause, that is the bridge. no -- no one has come in and given you testimony about is this particular -- this is what caused mr. bowman's cancer or something else. you heard no evidence about this at all. so i would say the answer to those questions would be no because they have not proved -- there is been no evidence about the cause of any defect, what the defect is and what the cause -- how it caused. the next question is the concealment. did r. j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a fact about the health effects or the addictive nature which was a legal cause. and that -- that is the same question i talked about. if mr. bowman knew it, if he otherwise knew it or could have known it. if he knew it, the answer has to be no to that question. and the evidence in this case, i would suggest to you, respectfully, is overwhelming that mr. bowman was fully aware of the risks associated with smoking and the fact that it was hard to quit and so forth. the next one, please. this -- this is -- this just mirrors the previous question. civil conspiracy. and it is the same, to conceal. they still have to show that something was concealed from mr. bowman in this case. it is not enough to say that maybe they made some agreement to conceal something from somebody, it has to be concealment from mr. bowman in order for you to answer that yes. and this is the percentage of fault. and you read 25 what they said in their answer, in their complaint, that -- that they said that his -- he accepts fault because of the duration and extent of quit attempts and there were none. so he has admitted that the answer to that question ought to be substantial, a high percentage on mr. bowman. plus when you consider he smoked for another -- let us see, '66, '76, a lot of years after the warnings were on the pack, he had full knowledge of the situation, he never tried to quit, those are all of the kinds of things that would go into this. and -- and also the question of whether the -- if you believe that smoking was -- that alcohol, rather, was more likely than smoking, all of that would go into deciding what percentage of fault, if you get to this question, would be assigned to mr. bowman. damages. i should say this. they have asked for a lot of money. and that is -- lawyers have nothing to do with what you decide but i know that -- i know that sometimes in cases if i did not say anything about it, you might hear a lawyer come back and say, well, ben reid must agree we are entitled to the millions of dollars because he did not say anything. so i want to make it perfectly clear that our position in this case is that reynolds, is this particular case, the facts do not support liability on the part of reynolds, for all the things i've been talking about, but most importantly, going all the way up to question number 1, mr. bowman cannot prove that addiction was the cause of his smoking. so i'm -- i'm -- i'm not going to give you some other number, an alternative or anything like that. i'm just going to say that -- and -- and when we talked about this during voir dire, everybody understood that the two sides had two positions here and that that is why you are having to decide this case. and -- and so now, you know, i could perhaps say that, you know, it is -- that is a lot of money when you consider like dr. goldberg's testimony, they are asking you for millions of dollars because of his testimony, which -- which has some real problems, but that is obviously for your decision. our -- my suggestion is that you will not get to this because the evidence in this case is clear that mr. bowman was aware and chose to smoke. i'll end where i started. this case is about mr. bowman. with everything that he knew, everything that he was told throughout his life, there is no reason to believe that anything reynolds said or did not say or did or did not do would have had any effect on mr. bowman's choice to smoke that would have made him stop smoking. if you think about it, the physical problems that he suffered, the coughing and the -- over his entire life, that was not enough, that could not cause him to quit. his wife's health scare. his wife's telling him about the risks of smoking, that could not cause him to quit. his daughters, all three daughters telling him regularly that he should quit, that could not cause him to quit. his friends could not cause him to quit. the direct warnings on the package could not cause him to quit. all the information you read in the media and all the different magazines and tv and -- and things that he read could not cause him to quit. mr. bowman quit when he made the decision to quit, and that is perfectly consistent with mr. bowman's personality that you have learned about through this case. mr. bowman smoked, he drank, when he chose to do those activities, and he stopped both the one time he decided that he was motivated to stop and that is when he stopped. he did not smoke because of any addiction that controlled his life. he smoked because he made the choice to smoke until he made the choice not to smoke in 1985. now, this is the last time that i get to talk to you. thought you might clap again. i will say this: counsel gets the chance, because he gets the burden, he gets to come back. i cannot imagine what he might say. i do not ever get a chance to respond. you can imagine a lawyer who is been involved in a case for all these weeks, who has to sit down and you can never stand up and -- and -- and say, wait a minute, that is not right or i did not say that or the evidence -- there is this other evidence. so i'm going to ask you to do this, i hope that you have listened to me in a critical way. when i've -- when i've suggested evidence, i hope you have thought about it and remember whether you think i've told you what the evidence would be. i've tried to tell you the evidence that -- that actually came in, exactly as i told you what would come in in the opening. i think it is pretty consistent. so you might just say to yourself as mr. shields gets up here, if ben reid had a chance to come back, what would his question be about that? i think that is a fair way to -- to think about it in a critical way because you do not have to do that to me because he gets to come back, so i'd ask you to do that. you know, the reason the jury system works here is -- is that we really have a pack between the jurors and the parties. and we each made -- you did not know you had entered into this agreement. but the agreement is this, jurors -- we -- the parties agree that when you go into that room after everything's over and you start deliberating, it is entirely up to you. no one will ever criticize you. no one will say how did you possibly reach that result? you have the total ability to make the decision in this case, that is -- we give you that as part of this. but you give us something. you agree that you will only decide it based on the evidence. you will not decide it based on -- on the fact that it is a big company or somebody does not like smoking or somebody does not like other things about the defendant. you will decide it on the evidence and that is the pack that we have with each other and that is why it works. and so i know that we each have our duties and our duty was to bring you the most evidence we could so that you would have a valid basis to decide. and now your duty is to go back and to decide the case based on that evidence. and i would -- the only thing i could ask you to do is to do your duty. and i know you will. and on behalf of my client and the folks that worked with me during this case that you have seen, thank you for your attention.