closing argument mr. shields: good morning. michael bowman was just 12 years old when he first started to smoke. most smokers then and now start as teenagers and probably for essentially the same reasons, peer pressure, wanting to appear to be an adult, rebellion, wanting to be cool. but in the 1950s it was a different time and a different culture in america, smoking was everywhere, it was pervasive. most of the ads on television were smoking commercials, billboards were covered with smoking commercials, all the print media, newspapers and magazines, were filled with smoking commercials and everybody from celebrities to major athletes to doctors to politicians endorsed smoking and advertised smoking for specific companies. by the time michael bowman joined the navy in 1959, he also entered another culture where smoking was persuasive. he spent six to eight months a year at sea and one of the principal pastimes was smoking. they had their own smoke shop on board ship. they their signaling for when it was 6 permissible to smoke, which was most of the time under the smoking law. and consequently his smoking started at about a pack a day and by the time he finished his navy career and went into civilian life, he moved up to about two-and-a-half to three packs a day. he left the navy, went into civilian life. but in a short period of time decided he needed to change some things about his life, and you have heard them about them and we will talk more about them in this closing argument. and he did, in a relatively short time. he quit drinking in early 1984; he quit smoking on new year's eve of 1985. but despite doing all of those helpful things and what he is been advised to do, within ten years he got esophageal cancer, terminal esophageal cancer at the young age of 56, and three years later, at age 59, died of cancer. john kalil and i are proud to be representing pat bowman in this action against r.j. reynolds company for their role in the death of her husband, mike bowman. we thank you for your attention and your participation. we know this has been a long trial and you probably never -- when you came to court that first day thought i would be involved in as much time and in such a complicated matter, and your task is just beginning. you have a lot of documents with a lot of evidence that you need to look at in order to reach conclusions in this case. so we thank you for your efforts and your time and your attention. in this closing argument, i intend to go through the major issues in this case and discuss the evidence as we believe we have presented it to you. of course, it is your decision as jurors as to what the evidence proves, and it is your collective judgment as to what the evidence proves. let me give you an overview of the case. as i told you in opening statement, there are four major issues to be decided. there is the question of class membership, the judge gave you some instructions on that a moment ago. there is a question of specific causation, the judge gave you instructions on that. there is the question of comparative fault, that is, allocating fault between the parties, if any. and, finally, damages, both compensatory and punitive damages. and what we contend the evidence shows in regard to each of these issues is that mike bowman was a member of the engle class because he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and his smoking, as a result of that addiction, was a cause of his esophageal cancer. not only was his smoking a cause of his esophageal cancer, but defendant r.j. reynolds' misconduct, as found in the engle findings, also was a substantial contributing factor in causing his esophageal cancer. so we accept as we said from the very beginning of the case that mike may bear some responsibility for not quitting sooner, but that has to be compared to the misconduct of r.j. reynolds over 50 years in which they concealed the evidence regarding smoking, in which they manipulated the levels of nicotine to create and sustain addiction among smokers, in which they denied the evidence and attempted to overwhelm the contrary public health message. so we suggest to you that the evidence establishes that the major responsibility is the responsibility of defendant r.j. reynolds. and, finally, we will talk to you about damages, what would be the appropriate amount of compensatory damages, and what would be the entitlement to punitive damages. so let us begin with the first issue, the issue of class membership. i assumed from the beginning of this case that everybody understood what a class action was. but let me tell you a little bit about class action and the engle class action. a class action is a suit on behalf of a larger group, brought by a few people in which they bring the claim on behalf of every member of the class. and so in connection with this, this action was brought on behalf of florida smokers who were addicted to smoking cigarettes. and as a result of that addiction, their smoking caused certain smoking-related diseases. so the first issue you have to decide is whether or not mike bowman was a member of the engle class; that is, was mike bowman addicted to smoking cigarettes and did his smoking, as a result of that addiction, cause or contribute to causing his esophageal cancer. and what is the evidence on those two issues? let us begin with the first issue, the addiction issue. one of your determinations is going to be whether or not michael bowman was addicted to smoking cigarettes because of the nicotine contained in them. we have already told you and 7 you have heard extensively about when he started smoking cigarettes at the relatively young age of 12. 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers start smoking at the age of teenagers and that fact has been known to defendant r.j. reynolds and the other tobacco companies for years and years and decades and decades. dr. werner told you about the developing brain and the impact of nicotine on the developing brain of a teenager and how it has more impact than it would for an adult. the result is that a teenager is more likely to become addicted and more likely to become addicted quickly as a result of nicotine than an adult would. the evidence, of course, is that mike bowman went to college for one year, had an appendectomy and could no longer afford to remain in college so he joined the navy. he originally started smoking and worked up to a pack a day. and when pat first met him in 1960, he was smoking about a pack a day. but that quickly expanded to a pack and a half and then two packs. and as mr. coyle told you, ultimately, two-and-a-half packs to three packs when he was in the navy. and when he quit the navy, testimony of the family was that he was smoking up to three packs a day. he smoked pall mall, he smoked camels, he smoked lucky strike. as the court has indicated, all three of those brands were manufactured, distributed, and sold by r.j. reynolds or one of the predecessor companies for whom they are liable and responsible in this action. now, what do we know about addiction generally? first, as the 1988 surgeon general's report noted, addiction is the result of nicotine. nicotine is a potent drug found in tobacco. this potent drug has an affect on the brain, and we will talk about that affect in more detail in a moment. the affect on the brain is similar and the addictive affects of nicotine are similar to those of heroin and cocaine. and although r.j. reynolds denied that its cigarettes were addictive and that nicotine was addictive for 45 or 50 years, they ultimately admitted that fact after the first engle trial in 2000. the most recent report of the surgeon general, the 2010 surgeon general's report, has a chapter on addiction. you will have that in evidence. you will have a copy of the 2010 surgeon general's report. and the important point out of the 2010 surgeon general's report is the beginning of the chapter on addiction. "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many of the diseases described in the report." what does that mean? what it means is that the reason people smoke is because of nicotine. without nicotine in cigarettes, people would not smoke. the evidence, and perhaps the best evidence of that, as you saw early in the trial from dr. figlar and dr. cook, was that when they took the nicotine out or brought nicotine low, nobody would buy their cigarettes, because that is why people smoke. and that is why people continue to smoke. and as the second half of the sentence indicates, "it is continuing to smoke that causes cancer and the other diseases associated with smoking." because it takes a long time for those diseases to develop, what we called the latency period yesterday in the cross-examination of dr. harris. it is that continuing to smoke as a result of the nicotine in the product, that is the reason we are here. that is the statement of the case here. all right. let us look now at the evidence, particularly, of michael bowman. you have got testimony of two experts and a lot of testimony of family and friends about michael bowman's addiction. the first is dr. werner. dr. werner is a professor at the university of florida. she has spent a lot of time dealing with addiction issues. she told you about the number of cases of addiction to nicotine that she has diagnosed and the amount of time she has spent dealing with that issue. and what she told you about addiction to nicotine was that the nicotine addiction is explained by what happens in the brain as a result of nicotine. there is this dopamine reward pathway system in the brain that results in activity at the brain with neurotransmitters, that is, what causes people to become addicted to nicotine. and she showed you this diagram of what happens to an addicted smoker in the neurons in the brain and how they act as a little key binding together. when you take away that nicotine, withdrawal symptoms occur as a result of the removal of those neuron transmitters. that slide is from the national institute of drug abuse, which describes what happens with nicotine addiction. 8 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com if we go to the next slide, dr. werner also said to you that what nicotine addiction means is that smoking cigarettes which contains nicotine becomes a fundamental part of the smoker's life and the addicted person's life, that nicotine is one of the most addicted substances in existence. more addictive than heroin, it is more addictive than cocaine, it has more impact. and, third, and, finally, that nicotine addiction is one of the most difficult addictions to break. now, you have heard from defense counsel that people can quit smoking. well, obviously, they can. mike bowman quit smoking here. but what does that mean in terms of addiction? people quit cocaine, people quit heroin. the fact that you can quit does not mean that you were not addicted. it does not mean it was not extremely difficult to quit smoking. it simply means that it is possible to quit. it does not change the question of whether or not michael bowman was addicted and, thus, whether or not he is a member of the engle class. now, dr. werner said you diagnose addiction in a couple of ways, one way is to use what is called the dsm, the diagnostic statistical manual, and she brought up for you the dsm's manual criteria for substance dependence and how it is applied to nicotine. what it provides is that if you meet three or more of the seven criteria, then that is regarded as clinically significant impairment and distress and you are diagnosed as addicted. and she walked you through those seven criteria, and the evidence of meeting the seven criteria here. there is little dispute about some of them. first, there is no dispute that he met the criteria of tolerance, all that means in the context of nicotine addiction is that the amount he ultimately smoked, he became tolerant to, because if he had started smoking that amount in the very beginning, it would have resulted in symptoms of toxicity and both experts agree on that, he met that requirement. so one of the three is already met. the second requirement is withdrawal symptoms. and there is a separate section of the dsm that sets forth what the withdrawal symptoms are. there are eight of them. and the requirement is that you meet four of the eight within a 24-hour period of time from cessation, and then you have met with the withdrawal symptoms. there is testimony from family to support each of those. depressed mood, two of the daughters and pat described the fact that he was depressed having quit. secondly, insomnia. two of the daughters described the fact that he had difficulty sleeping, insomnia. third, irritability, frustration, anger. all of the family members described that in connection when he quit smoking. fourth, anxiety. that was described both as restlessness and anxiety. you recall the description of him sitting in a chair and his legs were twitching, he could not sit still, he was constantly moving around. it is both an indication of restlessness and anxiety. and, finally, the most important, there was undisputed evidence that he gained 35 pounds when he quit smoking. that is a classic withdrawal symptom. he gained it because without the neurotransmitters in his brain hooked up to nicotine, he had to substitute with candy and sweets and constant eating to try and substitute for what was happening. and as a result he gained 35 pounds from quitting smoking. he clearly met the requirements for withdrawal symptoms, that is two of the three. third requirement is that he would take it in larger amounts over time. the evidence is undisputed there as well. he started out smoking less than a pack, ended up smoking about three packs. there is evidence from mr. coyle that he tried to cut back both because of financial reasons and because of attempts to quit, all of which indicates that he ended up smoking more than he ever intended to smoke and, thus, you have already met three of the requirements. that alone results in a diagnosis of addiction. but the other requirements, there is evidence to meet them as well. the requirement that there is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down. you remember the testimony of mr. coyle, one of his shipmates for a four-year period, describing how they would try and quit and they could rarely make it over a day or so. so there is evidence to support that as well. there is also evidence to support that he continued to smoke despite having knowledge of a consistent or recurrent physical problem. you heard in opening statement defense counsel say that he had a terrible cough, that it sounded like he was coughing up his lungs, that it reached the point of him almost vomiting, yet he continued www.veritext.com 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 to smoke. that meets the requirement of number seven. there is no doubt that the minimum requirements of three of the seven requirements are met under dsm. rjr's expert, dr. hoge, disagrees. and in evaluating whether you are going to believe him or dr. werner, let me bring a couple of points to your attention. first, he is not an expert on nicotine addiction. he works in a correctional facility at columbia. he teaches as part of a fellowship program there, forensic psychiatry, that has almost nothing to do with nicotine addiction. what did he say, over the entire course of his career he has diagnosed maybe six people with nicotine addiction, and that was only incidental to other things he was dealing with in the correctional context. he clearly is not on par with dr. werner as an expert on nicotine addiction. but, more importantly, although he told you on direct that -- that michael bowman did not meet the requirements of dsm, he never went through them. he never walked you through them and even discussed them. he just told you the conclusion. it had to come on cross for us to walk through them and get admissions from him about how he met the various requirements. and his way around admitting that mike bowman was addicted was to change the wording of the requirements, by claiming that this wording at the top about clinical significance meant that you had to go see a doctor or the need to go see a doctor for each of those symptoms before it would be clinically significant. that is not what it says. and dr. werner explained to you that that interpretation was, in her words, ridiculous. what it says is that -- it defines clinical significance as manifested by three or more of the following. if you meet three or more of the following, it says it is clinically significant. if it meant what dr. hoge wanted it to say, it would not be worded that way. instead, it would be worded by saying with each of them, that they had to result in clinically significant results. would that make any sense? what is clinically significant about tolerance? what are the symptoms of tolerance that would require you to go to a doctor? or look at the other requirements, clinically significance, if you are interpreting the way dr. hoge was trying to interpret, makes little or no sense. but you do not have to look just at the dsm. there is another prominent instrument, as the surgeon general's report in 2010 says, that is used to diagnose nicotine addiction. that is the fagerstrom test. and the fagerstrom test is a simple test that deals with the likelihood of relapse and when you start to smoke and why you smoke and how much. i walked dr. hoge through this. and using the fagerstrom test, mike bowman comes out as highly addictive. now, dr. hoge tries to dismiss that by saying, oh, that is just a test that researchers use. i do not understand. what is wrong with researchers using it? researchers are the ones that know the most about this issue. they are the scientists with the greatest acknowledge. you are not going rely on those with the greatest knowledge for determining addiction? and this is the instrument they use. this is the instrument dr. werner said is also used to screen for nicotine addiction and that dr. hoge has to admit would result in michael bowman being regarded as addicted. the question here is not whether michael bowman had a diagnosis of nicotine addiction. the question is whether he is a member of the engle class. and there is no requirement part of the engle class that you receive a diagnosis from the doctor. and, thus, the testimony of family and friends is equally important here. each of the family members described him as addicted to cigarettes. i do not think there is any question that he met the addiction requirement. the second major issue that comes out of this case and the second requirement for being a member of the engle class, is whether smoking caused his esophageal cancer. that is also tied up with the second issue of specific causation. so let us go to that fundamental issue. is cigarette smoking a cause, not the sole cause, but a cause of his esophageal cancer? now, the court has instructed you that this causation requirement does not mean that it is the only cause. one of the instructions dealt with what was called concurrent cause, that two or more things can come together. and the specific instruction that the court gave you is that cigarettes need not be the only cause, smoking r.j. reynolds' cigarettes may be a legal cause of death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as smoking and that smoking substantially -- www.veritext.com 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 contributes substantially to producing the death. that is the legal cause standard. substantial factor. and we know this from everyday life. think about things that happen. many things rarely are the result of one and one only cause. driving down the highway, rain-slick highway, and there is a puddle in the middle of the road, someone who is speeding reaches that puddle and hydroplanes out of control, and said, wait a minute, it is not my fault that i lost the control, it is the fault of that puddle. well, it is the combination of speeding and coming into a puddle of water that results in the loss of the control. it is the concurrence of those events that caused the result. and that is exactly what the evidence is here. the evidence is here that he smoked cigarettes for 33 years, up to three packs a day, but he also drank beer on occasion in excess, and we do not deny that, although there has been an attempt to make that sound much greater than it was. he spent long periods of time at sea, six to eight months a year during a 20-year period of time in which there is no alcohol on board the vessel, and so you know he cannot be drinking six packs a day, day in and day out, year in and year out. it is for occasional periods of time, and there is no doubt that on those occasional periods of time his drinking was and could be to excess. so our testimony, our evidence is that it is the combination of the two. and the evidence to support that is as follows: remember the videotaped deposition of dr. langfitt. dr. langfitt was his attending physician. he is the doctor that diagnosed him as having esophageal cancer in the first place. somebody that deals day in and day out with esophageal cancer. and he was just unequivocal, the smoking was the predominant cause of his esophageal cancer, according to dr. langfitt. and why? based on his training, based upon his knowledge of the literature, based on the fact that in all his years of being a gastroenterologist he is never seen anybody with esophageal cancer who was not a smoker. and that, of course, is consistent with the statistical evidence we showed you and we will get to in a moment with dr. levy. dr. levy was the second person that gave you evidence that smoking was a cause, in combination with drinking, of his esophageal cancer. now, the fact that smoking is a cause of esophageal cancer is beyond dispute in this case. it is a fact conceded by the defendant. it is part of the engle findings in the case. it is been known since at least 1964 in the first surgeon general's report. and by 1979 it was undeniable as the report from the surgeon general said that cigarette smoking is a causal factor in the development of cancer of the esophagus and the risk of it increases with the amount. undenied. and dr. levy said to you that if you look at all the studies across the board, literally hundreds of them, that dr. harris admitted yesterday, instead of trying to cherry pick one here and there, you see that the chance of getting esophageal cancer from smoking alone is about four to ninefold higher than somebody that never smoked. that is how epidemiologists like dr. levy determined the likelihood of causation. four to nine increased risk. but he also said that when it is combined with a consumption of alcohol, that the risk multiplies, it is what is called as synergism. and i think he showed that you not only 78 percent of all causes of esophageal cancer, statistically, are the result of smoking, when you combine it with drinking, it is about ninety percent. and he gave you the risk data in the form of a bar graph of when you combine the two. and this bar graph really represents what the evidence amounts to on causation; that is, the average of this four to nine range for smoking is about five or so, conservatively, increased probability as a result of smoking. well, what that means is that your chance of getting esophageal cancer is five times higher than a nonsmoker. similarly, with drinking it is in the same general range, although a little bit lower, with an average of about four. but when you combine the two, it is at least 20. and as we saw yesterday in talking to dr. harris, there are studies out there that say it is 50 times higher, that it is 100 times higher, that it is a 150 times higher when you combine the two. that synergistic effect, dr. levy said, it is absolutely clear under these circumstances, to say that the two, smoking in combination with some drinking at a heavy level, was the cause. now, not all drinking is associated with esophageal cancer. it is only heavy drinking and 11 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com it is primarily hard liquor. there are studies as pointed out both on my cross-examination of dr. harris and dr. levy's testimony that do not show that beer has any affect whatsoever. but, in any event, even if you assume it has an affect, it would be a combined affect between the two. now, dr. harris, the defendant's expert, also yesterday appeared to say he disagreed. dr. harris is not an epidemiologist like dr. levy. he is not someone that is done studies in the area. he is not someone who has written, as dr. levy has, about these issues. and the studies that he picked and told you about did not even support what he was claiming. now, i quoted to you and read to him from the various studies he was quoting and we walked you through them. take those examples and each of those studies, the authors of the studies, as opposed to dr. harris trying to manipulate the data, concluded that smoking was the predominant cause of esophageal cancer, although the combination of the two dramatically increased the risk. i think it is absolutely clear from the testimony, even of dr. harris, that it is the combination of the two that caused his esophageal cancer. the question is was one more predominant than the other? dr. levy and i think that the evidence establishes here that smoking was more predominant as dr. langfitt said. even dr. harris had to admit that they both contributed, although he thought alcohol was more predominant. but there is one important factor that came out yesterday and that is the following: recall when i was walking him through the damage to the cell and it goes to the next generation and how long of a time period it takes? the ultimate point of all that was to say to you, as he admitted, that the cause of his esophageal cancer had to occur while he was still smoking and drinking. the damage occurred while he was being exposed, not later. it is consequently irrelevant what happens after you quit, the damage has already occurred. he is not one of those who quit and avoided it. whatever caused it had already occurred by the time he quit and, thus, as dr. harris, himself, admitted, if you looked at the evidence at the time he quit, you would have to conclude that both of them contributed. so, ladies and gentlemen, i do not think there is any question that as a result of addiction and specific causation, that michael bowman was a member of the engle class and is entitled to the engle findings. that is going to lead us to the third issue of comparative fault. and let us talk about the engle findings and comparative fault. the judge has instructed you on the engle findings, and i told you about them in opening statement. let us cover them again. the engle jury found the following, and most importantly you, this jury, is bound as the court instructed you by those findings if you find that mike bowman was a member of the engle class. what it comes down to is these issues have already been tried for members of the engle class and they lost. they denied all of this at the engle trial and they lost. they do not get to come in to a new jury and now claim that they are not true. you are bound by these results. and what they are is that, first, smoking cigarettes causes esophageal cancer. finding one called "general causation," you are bound by that result; two, nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. finding two, the addictiveness of cigarettes. three, that all defendants, and that included r.j. reynolds in the engle trial, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. now, let us stop for a moment. that is what is called a strict liability claim, and you will see on the verdict form that there is a count for strict liability. what strict liability means is that if a product is placed on the market which is defective and unreasonably dangerous, the defendant is strictly liable for the damage that it causes. now, it is already been found that their products were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and the evidence that you have seen is that the reason they were defective and unreasonably dangerous is really twofold: one is they contain carcinogens, cancer-causing substances and two was that because of the nicotine they were addictive. that is what made them defective and unreasonably dangerous, and it is the presence of nicotine which causes people to start smoking, continue smoking. and it is the presence of the carcinogens which causes the cancer. so that finding, along with the clear, causative relationship between the presence of carcinogens and nicotine, establishes the strict liability account and makes them strictly liable for michael bowman's death. the next finding is that all defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact telling the health effects or the addictive nature smoking cigarettes or both. that is what was called the fraud by concealment count in engle. and we have covered a lot of that evidence, and i'm going to talk about it in a moment in this case. and i'll tell you why even though you are bound by it and even though it is already been determined, why we brought that evidence out to you again. but there is abundant evidence that you have seen of the fraud by concealment. the next finding was that all the defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature. the civil conspiracy to fraud -- fraudulently conceal the information is what this finding deals with. and, finally, there is the negligence finding, that the defendants were negligent. that r.j. reynolds was negligent. it was negligent because they manufactured, distributed, and sold products that were addictive, products that contained cancer-causing substances and made no attempt to see if it could remove the addictive nature of it. you recall dr. figlar's testimony, they have never researched and they are still not researching how to make a less-addictive cigarette because they know if it is less addictive, people will not smoke. that is what it comes down to. all right. those are the engle findings, you are bound by those findings. let us talk about comparative fault. that is the third major issue here. fault is not an all-or-nothing proposition. rather, under florida law somebody can be at fault and still recover against a defendant who was also at fault. you allow the recovery under florida law, as judge arnold instructed you. what you do, however, is allocate the fault of the two parties. that is what is known as comparative fault. you compare the fault of one to the fault of the other. now, in order to compare the fault, you have to look at the conduct of both. and so let us start by looking at the conduct of r.j. reynolds because we need to compare that to the conduct of michael bowman. we spent a lot of time at the beginning of this case talking about the conduct of r.j. reynolds. we started with a videotaped deposition of two of their principal executives, dr. figlar and dr. cook. the purpose of doing that was to walk you through what the historic documents show about their conduct and to put them in the context of what is demonstrated. we followed that by the testimony of a nationally prominent historian who has written about tobacco and the conduct of the industry for years, long before he was ever involved in any litigation, has published extensively on it and is clearly one of the leading authorities in the country, dr. proctor. what he told you in overview and what was confirmed out of the mouths of their own executives, dr. figlar and dr. cook, was, one, that they knew by at least the mid to late '50s that cigarette smoking was a major cause of death and disease. 440,000 people in this country alone die every year as a result of this defective product. and the documents and the testimony show they knew that going back to the mid to late '50s. secondly, dr. proctor said that despite that knowledge, they entered into an elaborate and coordinated campaign to deny the truth of that, to conceal the information about the hazards of their products, and to misrepresent in an attempt to continue to sell their product. third, and, finally, he told you that they knew for decades before they admitted it in 2000 that their products were addictive. and that what they did with their addiction, was that they designed their cigarettes so that they created an addiction in the first place in those teenagers that started to smoke and that thereafter they sustained the addiction by manipulating the level of nicotine in cigarettes to begin with. those conclusions were also confirmed by dr. burns. and dr. burns truly is the leading authority on these issues. he is the author of, what did he say, 19 or 20 of the surgeon general's reports. he has spent his entire career dealing with these issues, and you saw him by videotape testifying much like dr. proctor did about when the scientific evidence became available, what was known and what they did. finally, we had the testimony of dr. goldberg, who also started writing about these issues long 13 before anybody brought him into litigation. you have seen on cross-examination a lot of attempts to say, well, you are doing this for the money of testifying. the reality is each of these experts became experts on the subject and then were hired to testify because they were experts. that is why they were brought in here. unlike the defendant's experts, who have no background, no knowledge, and no expertise and were simply hired to come in here and give you an opinion to support the defendant's claim. what dr. goldberg told you was that there was an extensive advertising and marketing campaign that created a kind of acceptance for smoking that assuaged the fears of smokers and sustained continued smoking over the years and that counterbalanced whatever effort was being made publicly to say to the contrary by the public health community. all right. what is the evidence, then, of their misconduct? well, we have talked about this in opening statement and i walked dr. figlar and dr. cook through it, but it starts before 1950, when there were developing evidence that cigarette smoking was related to an epidemic of lung cancer, and there were studies going back into the '20s, and '30s and '40s in which doctors looked at that and said, it looks to us like it is related to smoking. but the major breakthrough came in 1950. in 1950 there were four studies published in major medical journals, in the journal of the american medical association, the british medical journal, and another journal of the american medical association, and in the cancer journal, cancer research. those four systematic studies were the first attempts to put together large amounts of information to show that cigarette smoking was related to cancer causation. they were followed shortly thereafter by another study in which the experimenters looked at what smoking did to animals, whether they produced cancer in animals, and the simple study and experimental study was taking smoking condensate and paint it on the skin of the animal to see if a tumor resulted. and they found that it did that, that that is exactly what happened, much like what is happening to your lungs when you smoke cigarettes, literally that smoking condensate gets painted on your lungs and over time will produce tumors just like it did in the animals. but the result of that, of those studies, was it created a panic in the industry. they were concerned with this information out there, that people were all going to quit smoking immediately, and they needed to do something about it. so the president of the american tobacco company, a company that later became part of r.j. reynolds, called a meeting of all of the presidents of the other tobacco companies, what we refer to as the plaza hotel meeting in new york city in december of 1953. and at that meeting, instead of saying, gee, we manufacture products that may be killing people, what are we going to do about that? we need to get some researchers, we need to get some doctors, we need to figure out something to do about it. that was not something they came together to do. what they came together to do was, how do we persuade the people who buy our products not to believe what the scientists are saying? and so they decided to hire public relations counsel to claim that the scientific evidence was invalid, to claim that it was insufficient, and to assert that there were other causes of cancer totally unrelated to cigarette smoking and that people should continue to smoke. so they hired the most prominent, biggest public relations firm in the country, hill & knowlton, to undergo the campaign. you can see from the notes of their meeting that that is all they were interested in. they were not talking about, what are we going to do to protect our customers? they were talking about: how do we persuade our customers to continue smoking in light of this new information that is coming out? and the first thing they did was they issued what has become known as the frank statement. now, we can argue a lot about how truthful this statement is, whether it is accurate and misleading. dr. proctor told you it was misleading in several respects, it did not accurately set forth what the scientific evidence was but, mainly, it was misleading in its attempt to create doubt that there was a scientific issue here and what they were going to do about it. do not get caught up in the details of whether the frank statement is true or false or how much of it is true or false. the point of all this is, and the point of the 14 plaza meeting is, it was the beginning of a 50-year conspiracy to deny that cigarettes caused disease. it was the beginning of a 50-year conspiracy to try to persuade smokers to continue to smoke because of, quote, open controversy, doubt, insufficient scientific evidence, and, most importantly, the theme they had throughout that entire 50 years that we saw over and over again was the following: if there is anything in cigarettes that are harmful, we will take them out. now, think about that for a minute. what does that mean, if there is anything in cigarettes that are harmful, we will take it out? it is saying, first, that there is nothing in cigarettes that is harmful that we know about, which we will see in a moment that is an out-and-out lie. it is saying, secondly, whatever's in there, we can remove it so there is no reason for you to continue to be concerned about it. and, third, and perhaps most importantly, what it is saying to smokers is, continue smoking, because we will solve the problem before you ever get any disease as a result of it. so you should continue smoking. and that was the theme for the next 50 years. now, what happened after the issuance of the frank statement was that they then created two front organizations to institute this campaign. one was called the tobacco industry research committee, which is supposedly a scientific group doing fundamental, important research to answer the question. dr. proctor tells you they spent a vast fortune. they did a lot of good scientific research. but none of it was directed at trying to determine that cigarettes cause cancer. now, there is one fundamental concept of science, and particularly of epidemiology, and that fundamental concept is, if there is a study that comes out and it says, it appears that this substance causes this problem, and you want to know whether that study is right or not, you want to ask a question whether it, in fact, does, what scientists do is replicate the study to see if they get the same result. what does that mean? they do it again. they do a similar study to see if they keep getting the same results, because one of the principles that dr. levy told you of epidemiology is you look at the consistency of the results to see if you get them from the same studies time in and time out. the tobacco industry research committee, up until it was required to be disbanded in 1999, never attempted to replicate any of the studies from which the conclusions by the scientists were being reached that cigarettes cause cancer. they did not attempt to replicate the studies done by wynder. they did not attempt to replicate the studies by doll and hill. they did not attempt to replicate the studies of the american cancer society. they spent all of that money over all of those years and never once directly addressed the fundamental issue. instead, they created a smoke screen in which they spent hundreds of millions of dollars addressing all these other scientific questions so they could say, we cannot find the answer, without ever looking for the answer in the fundamental research in the first place. the second thing they did was create a group called the tobacco institute, which was basically a lobbying group, a group designed to deny whenever anybody said there was something caused by cigarettes, that it was truthful (sic) and to attack the scientists that said it and to attack the people that made the message. now, over the next few years after the frank statement, after this initial controversy, after the commencement of this conspiracy, what occurred was the development of the scientific evidence. and as dr. proctor told you, there was little or no doubt by the mid to late '50s that cigarette smoking caused cancer. there are major new studies, the evidence kept growing, the medical publications kept developing during that time. and that is what dr. burns told you as well. he told you that by the mid to late '50s it was absolutely clear, the surgeon general of the united states issued a statement. the american cancer society issued a statement. statements from the health organizations around the world by that point in time concluded that the weight of the evidence was that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. and that was known to r.j. reynolds. one of the most important documents you will see is a document by claude teague. it is important because it occurred right in the middle of all this and, in fact, before they even issued the frank statement. in february of 1953, claude teague, as part of the formation of the new research and development group at r.j. reynolds, was assigned the task of 15 researching what the scientific evidence was and he created this report. now, mr. reid told you in opening statement that claude teague was just some student that had some student assignment. there is absolutely no evidence to support that. to the contrary, dr. figlar on that videotaped deposition on the first day of trial, specifically testified that claude teague was a scientist in the research and development department who was assigned the task of doing this research and prepared this report for distribution in a newly created department at r.j. reynolds that dealt with the issue to begin with. what did this report do? it walked through the various scientific evidence for cigarette smoking causing cancer. and you have heard the evidence. it is basically, one, what does the epidemiological study show, like hill and doll and other studies? secondly, what does the experimental animal studies show, like the skin painting that was going on in that study. third, what does the pathology show? that is, when you look on autopsy at lungs of smokers, what do you see? and, fourth, and, finally, what chemicals are in these compound -- in smoking that we already know cause cancer? that fourth one is probably the most important issue. if you already know something causes cancer and you do the research and find it is in your product, that ought to be awfully strong evidence that your product will cause cancer. and that is exactly what claude teague did. he walked through all the chemical carcinogens, he looked at the scientific evidence in total, and he reached the conclusion, from his review, that the studies, clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidents of cancer of the lung. that is february of 1953, before they ever had the meeting at the plaza hotel, before they ever issued the frank statement saying that there was no evidence that cigarettes caused lung cancer, before they started issuing all their press releases and other documents saying that there was no evidence that cigarettes cause lung cancer, their internal scientific research department had already concluded to the contrary. and, most importantly, think about that chemical-constituent thing we talked a moment ago in which claude teague identified the carcinogens known to be in cigarette smoke as of that point in time and compare that to their statement time and time again. if there is anything in our product that is hazardous, we will take it out. they already knew there were things in their product that were hazardous. there were carcinogens in their product. they already knew you could not take them out, but they were making that statement to keep people smoking, to keep selling their product. that is not the only evidence. the next evidence that confirms what they really knew comes from an internal document previously secret as to a meeting with various researchers from around the country done by the british american tobacco company, then the owner of brown & williamson, which is now part of r.j. reynolds. and what that report showed was that in 1958 they went to all of the american tobacco companies and talked to their top scientists. they went to r.j. reynolds and talked to their top scientists. they went to the american tobacco company. they went to all the companies and talked to them. and they went back to england and reported on what they were told. and what they reported, that was with one exception, hsn greene, who was at yale, not, in fact, employed by the tobacco companies, "the individuals whom we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer. if by causation we mean a chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer in which involves smoking as an indispensable link." you know that has a remarkable similarity to what the judge instructed you causation meant. a chain of events that ultimately leads to cancer. and then they point out that the -- in the united states only berkson actually contested the statistical information. and you heard dr. figlar and dr. cook reference dr. berkson on several occasions. but as this document indicates, nobody believed berkson, everybody at the time thought he was wrong about it. they thought he was wrong about it. consequently, it is another important piece of evidence of what they actually knew. there is a third important piece of evidence, another previously secret document and that comes from dr. rodgman, another one of their top executives, who in 1959 -- 1962 was again assigned the task, according to dr. figlar, to look in the scientific evidence and report back to the company as to what the scientific evidence showed at that point. and like dr. teague before him, he walked through all the evidence, the epidemiological evidence, the experimental animal evidence, the chemical constituents, the pathology, and then he summarized at the end by saying, "obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging this indictment is scant." that is what they truly believed. and perhaps the best evidence of what they truly believed is what they were doing secretly internally. they were spending tens of millions of dollars seeing if they could reduce the carcinogens that they had already identified in cigarette smoke. why do you do that? you do that only if you recognize that they are hazardous and that it will likely cause lung cancer. they spent all of that money at the same time that they were publicly saying to everybody, if there is anything hazardous in our products, we will take it out. not once did they say, we know, customers, that our product is full of carcinogens and that the evidence indicates that they cause lung cancer. not once did they say, we have researched trying to take them out and it is not possible. not once did they say to their customers during that 50-year time period, you should not be smoking our products. they said to the contrary for close to 50 years. if there was any doubt about what the scientific evidence was, it was resolved in the 1964 surgeon general's report. now, remember what you heard about the '64 surgeon general's report, president kennedy who, incidentally, was a smoker, and in 1962 was asked at a press conference about this, and he was taken aback. he did not even know what they were talking about, and yet michael bowman is supposed to. and the president, as a result of being embarrassed at that news conference, created -- and asked the surgeon general to create a special committee to look into this issue. so this first report is not actually a report of the surgeon general, it is a report of a special committee of experts to the surgeon general. a committee that they had the right to veto any member on. so the members of that committee were acceptable to the tobacco industry, had no prior commitments or statements about the issue, and spent close to two years researching, hearing from people, gathering the data before they ultimately issued a report in 1964 that said, first and foremost, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. it also said it is associated with causing esophageal cancer and certain other cancers and disease. 1964. any doubt gone by that point in time. what did they do to respond? they sent out their spokesman to the news programs to assert the position that the evidence was insufficient. and you saw one of those news programs, "cbs news." and it was mr. cullman on behalf the tobacco institute came out and said, you know, the evidence is not there, the surgeon general's wrong, and he repeated that mantra that they said over and over again, you know, if there is anything harmful in cigarettes, i am confident we will take out. the point of all of that was, keep smoking. and for the next 35 to 40 years they continued. surgeon general report after surgeon general report they attacked the reports and denied the information. they continued to issue press release after press release denying the information and asserting there was no causation. now, dr. proctor told you, for example, that in one year alone, 1975, the american tobacco company alone issued over 700 press releases denying that cigarette smoking caused disease. year in and year out. and hill & knowlton's job was to make sure those press releases resulted in news stories, was to make sure that those press releases were reported on in magazines, to make sure those press releases got on television so that the atmosphere of smoking continued. in addition to issuing press release after press release during that period of time, they continued to issue phony white papers that appeared to be scientific journals. we have shown you some of those. you will have some of those out in evidence. let us bring up a couple of them to show you an example. the first was called "a scientific perspective on cigarette smoking," in which they asserted that the science did not establish that cigarette smoking caused any disease. thereafter in the years from '70s on through the '80s they issued white paper after white paper, making the claim that there was not adequate evidence to prove that cigarettes caused any harm or disease. and they distributed those white papers to all 17 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com the doctors in the country to the deans of the medical schools, to editorial writers, to magazine publishers, to all the members of the united states house of representatives and senators and to other opinion leaders. now, why did they do that? why did they send them to the doctors? because doctors were the frontline in dealing with patients who were smokers. they were trying to convince the doctors not to tell the patients to quit smoking. and for years they succeeded. the american medical association would not issue a statement that said that cigarettes caused cancer. you saw one of the documents in which their representative, dr. hoge, from the medical college of virginia made sure that the committee of the american medical association that was to deal with the issue, did not pass a resolution by telling them that he had spent his life researching this and the evidence just was not there. it was very, very, very late before the american medical association finally got around to telling doctors that there really was a relationship between cigarette smoking and causing cancer. and the reason that was so important to them is because when all of us went to the doctor, if your doctor continued to smoke, if your doctor did not think cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, he was less likely to say anything to you and less likely you would quit smoking and quit buying their product. in addition to all of those phony white papers, medically appearing journals, they continued their massive expenditures on advertising. and dr. goldberg told you about how much money they spent on advertising, what the advertising was designed to do. we showed you some of the commercials from the early '50s and we showed you some of the ads from later periods of time. the purpose of those ads was to keep people smoking despite their knowledge. now, let us also talk about what r.j. reynolds knew about addiction because, fundamentally, this case is about addiction because that is the reason people smoke, continuing to smoke is what causes injury. r.j. reynolds knew and understood about addiction very early on. going back to the '50s, '60s and the '70s, they studied addiction. and what they discovered was, and what we now know, most smokers start as teenagers. fundamental fact known to them throughout that time period. secondly, what they knew, in addition to the fact that most smokers start as teenagers, is that they knew the reasons they started smoking had nothing to do with nicotine. they are what is called psychosocial reasons, peer pressure, wanting to fit in, wanting to be rebellious, wanting to be more adultlike, wanting to be cool. those are the reasons that a teenager first picks up a cigarette. but they continue to smoke because they quickly become addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. and r.j. reynolds knew that. you will see a document from claude teague, we keep hearing about claude teague, because he was one of the principal scientists they had had, and this document perhaps is one of the crucial ones that you will see. it is a confidential document written by mr. teague on the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine in the tobacco business. and in that document dr. teague recognizes, to begin with, that the tobacco industry is a highly specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. it is a drug company is the truth of the matter. it is selling nicotine. and dr. teague recognized that tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. dr. teague then noted that a tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for the delivery of nicotine, designed to deliver nicotine in a generally accepted and attractive form. our industry then is based upon the design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. it was, as he recognized, in the business of selling a drug. but it denied throughout all those years that nicotine was addictive because there were implications if you were selling a drug, including regulations and what you could do. these documents that you will see recognize from their studies that nicotine was the fundamental reason people smoked and without it people would not smoke, and it recognized that the principal way of dealing with the hazard, would be to deal with nicotine, whether it is dr. figlar, dr. cook, both conceded in the first two days of this trial, they have never done anything to try and make cigarettes less addictive. they have not researched it, they are not currently researching, they have made no attempt to deal with 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com the fundamental problem of nicotine. instead, they deny that cigarettes were addictive. instead, they attempted to create an issue about whether there was any problem. the surgeon general's report in 1964 did not conclude that nicotine was addictive because they did not have the evidence that the companies had. one of the documents you will see is a document in which a fundamental study called the hippo study, which is a document in which they studied the addictiveness of nicotine, was withheld from the surgeon general. and you will see a table which said, "do not disclose this document to the surgeon general." so it was no surprise then that that first report did not understand, as the company did, the truly addictive nature of cigarettes. what the evidence is is that they have manipulated the levels of nicotine in their cigarettes for this entire period of time. and what is that evidence? we showed you the evidence that despite the fact that the levels in nicotine naturally in tobacco vary from crop to crop to location to location, if you just make a cigarette, you will not have the same amount of nicotine. yet, remarkably, all of their products have essentially the same amount of nicotine. why is that? why is it that cigarettes across the board have the amount of nicotine that the research shows is the amount necessary to keep people addicted? because they have designed their cigarettes, they have manipulated the nicotine levels in cigarettes to create addiction in the first place and to sustain an addiction over time. all of this conduct was intentional. it was on purpose. it was knowing. it was motivated by the desire to continue to sell cigarettes. now, that is their conduct. compare that to mike bowman. mike bowman started smoking as a kid. he did not know anything about cigarettes at that point in time. none of us did back then and when we were 12, 13 years of age. we were doing it, peer pressure, to be more like an adult, to be cool. he did not understand that he would quickly become addicted and that his developing brain would want him to continue to sustain that addiction by continuing to smoke. and when he joined the navy and spent 20 years in the navy, he was saturated in a culture of smoking in which everybody around him smoked. they had a separate smoke shop on the ship, in which the smoking light came on the minute you got up and you put your feet on the floor and started to smoke, and it continued throughout the day except on certain occasions like when you were refueling, when you were not supposed to be able to smoke, and the light would go out. that was the culture he grew up in. so if you want to judge mike bowman, judge him in the context of that culture. a culture in which it was totally acceptable for him to smoke, all the way up through when he retired from the navy in 1979. his conduct, unlike theirs, was not fully informed, not known, not motivated by money, and so that is what you need to be comparing between their conduct and his. you also need to think about the information climate, and that was the whole point of putting dr. goldberg on. it was kind of nice to look at some of the old commercials and to see some of the print ads and so forth, but the point of dr. goldberg was the fulcrum that he showed you, in which he said, let us look at the balance of information about smoking in this time period. it is like a seesaw. understand tobacco industry's heavy, sophisticated advertising and promotion program, pushing down in one direction. and you will have some documents, not just from us, but documents that are consensus documents of the experts in the field on this issue of their sophisticated program. you will have the 1967 report of the federal trade commission that deals with their heavy expenditures on advertising, how persuasive it was. you will have the 1981 report of the federal trade commission that goes into that even more detail in the effects of it. you will have the 1994 report of the surgeon general that talks about youth marketing. a major part of that, is how much money they were spending and how their ads were directed at young people. we will talk about that in a moment. and, finally, you will have the report of the national cancer institute in 2008 dealing with their heavy expenditures and sophisticated advertising and promotion program. dr. goldberg was one of the authors of that national cancer institute publication in 2008, and he showed you a chart that showed how much money they spent over the period of time, hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars. over the entire period of 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com time, billions of dollars, on comprehensive advertising from back in the '50s in which they saturated the airwaves on television with their commercials in prime time, to all of their ads in all of the newspapers and magazines and so forth during that time period. now, dr. goldberg said, well, you have to compare that with the public health community's reports, and he included in this, not just the reports them-self, because there are not that many of them. but what the reports do, are they reported in the newspaper, are they reported in magazines, are they on the news? he put all of that in this category over here. and mr. reid could try and slice and dice by putting up a bunch stickies all over, but the reality is he was talking about all of that together. and what did he say about all of that together? well, to begin with, it was infrequent, not very expensive, and, most importantly, as a result of the work of hill & knowlton, every time somebody said in a magazine or newspaper article that cigarettes caused cancer, hill & knowlton made sure that the journal said, but there is a dispute and there is this other evidence that says they do not. it is an open controversy. that played right into their argument, their argument to assuage smokers to continue smoking by saying the evidence is not conclusive, it is not adequate. you should continue smoking while we try and figure all of this out. now, you were shown and probably will have in the evidence various documents, reports from newspapers, from magazines during the time period that said something about smoking. ask yourself when you see those, one, how many ads were in that newspaper and magazine for smoking, in addition to this one little article? two, what was the overall culture at the time as to whether this is a news item or whether somebody is believing at the time and, particularly, in michael bowman's case, was it during the six to eight months he was out to sea, in which everybody around him was smoking and the smoking lamp was constantly on? and, three, ask yourself, is there any evidence to show the frequency of this sort of information? dr. goldberg told you that there was a brief period of time under the fairness doctrine in which these messages were more frequent. but then when cigarette ads were banned from television, the fairness doctrine no longer required that they be shown, even in the middle of the night. and as a result, all of those ads essentially disappeared from television. well, they were occasionally out there, but it is only been in recent times as a result of a lot of events that have occurred in the engle trial, in which television has again started showing public service announcements and billboards that show public service announcements, and the culture has now changed. put yourself back at the time, not in 2011, when you are judging michael bowman. so that even when the public health commission community's efforts, you have to weigh that against the tobacco industry's public relations disinformation campaign. but there are also warnings on the pack starting in the late '60s, on every pack. one of the documents you will have is the federal trade commission report from 1967 in which they conducted scientific surveys to see the effectiveness of the warnings and concluded and that the warnings were totally ineffective. they literally blended into the packs and very seldom would people even notice. they had absolutely no impact on what smokers thought or did. so you need to compare, you need to compare their conduct with michael bowman's conduct. that is what comparative fault is all about. and we suggest to you that when you make that comparison between the knowing misconduct of the industry, between the intentional conduct of the industry, conduct motivated by the desire to continue selling cigarettes, with the conduct of michael bowman, that up until the late '70s and early '80s the balance is heavily on their side in terms of fault. we admit, we have said from the beginning, that after he gets out of the navy, then probably should have tried to quit smoking sooner. but he quit relatively early. 1984 he first quit drinking, 1985 he quit smoking. that is part of the comparative fault. finally, let us turn to the damages. the fourth issue, the damage, it is two things really, compensatory damages and punitive damages. now, compensatory damages means what amount of money that you, as a jury, think would be fair and appropriate to award pat for the loss of michael bowman based upon the instructions of the court as to what the measure of damages table. and you heard the instructions. basically it is an instruction that deals with her pain and suffering for the loss of her husband. to understand that you have to understand their life together. it had its highs, it had its lows. the lows, obviously, were related to drinking issues and he resolved those. he quit drinking. for that, we should give him a lot of credit. and after he quit drinking and after he quit smoking, their lives together were mostly highs, not lows. and you saw some photographs of them and the family talked about those that give you some indication of their life together, their 25th wedding anniversary, that is after he quit smoking, their trips. there was discussion of all of that. as pat said, he was the love of her life. now, they were separated from time to time related to drinking issues on two occasions, and he stepped up, quit drinking, they got back together and stayed together. but you need to determine what amount of money would be fair to compensate. we suggest to you that the range is millions of dollars, that in the circumstances of this case, any compensatory damage verdict that does not amount to several million dollars is understating her loss and understating in the context of the facts of this case. but it is your determination as to what that amount should be. you also need to determine whether there is an entitlement to punitive damages. and i'm going to spend the remaining time of my first argument dealing with that question. you will be given a jury verdict form that has you determine whether or not there is entitlement to punitive damages. i want to focus on three things. the entitlement to punitive damages is essentially the result of three different strong points. one is addiction. that is the theme throughout all of this. the reality is that they do not produce a less-addictive cigarette even though a less-addictive cigarette would reduce substantially the likelihood of people getting cancer, because if they did, people would not continue to smoke. you would not have 440,000 people dying every year in this country if they produced a less-addictive cigarette. and that is a principal basis for punitive damages. the second basis, we have talked about at length, was their 50-year campaign of concealing both the addictive nature of their product and how hazardous it was. you have heard a lot, for example, about the dramatic increase in hazard if you smoke and drink together in terms of getting esophageal cancer. not once during the entire 50-year time period did r.j. reynolds ever reveal that scientific fact. most people who smoke also drink, not once did they say, if you smoke and drink together, your risk may be 20, 50, or 150 times greater of getting certain cancers. that is the basis for punitive damages as well. but, finally, and, most importantly, because it is a theme from beginning to end, from when he started smoking through his entire career in which he smoked, of youth marketing. the truth is that r.j. reynolds has always targeted children as their principal clients for starting smoking. at about the time mike was starting to smoke, their ads clearly were focused on kids. we showed you one of them. bring that up. this is an ad on the very year that he started to smoke. that ad clearly shows a teenager, not an adult smoker, it is obvious from the prom ticket that is being held, she looks to be maybe 15 or 16 years of age. it is focused on getting teenagers to start smoking in the first place by glamorizing it, by creating buzz and peer pressure, by getting someone to first pick up the cigarette and for their developing brain to quickly get hooked and become addicted. that is evident not only looking at those kind of ads as dr. goldberg showed you but also from their own internal documents. we showed you a document going as far back as 1927, a long time ago, in which they said, "school days are here and that is good for tobacco business," and they talked about going to the local preparatory school and finding the student leaders and attempting to get them to smoke because that is peer pressure that creates other children to smoking. but it is recognized more recently by a strategic research memorandum. you will have in evidence a strategic research report written in 1984, about the time just before he quit smoking. and in that strategic memorandum dealing with younger, quote, adult smokers, they recognize that they have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. they will continue to be just as important. now, there is a great amount of cynicism in that point because they know and this document shows that almost all new smokers are teenagers, not adults. they know when they refer to younger adults as beginning smokers who they are really referring to are 12-year-olds and 14-years-olds and 16-year-olds. as the charts in attachment b show, they are not talking about 21-year-olds or 25-year-olds. and if there is any doubt about that, look at the memorandum written by claude teague on the market, once again, another confidential memorandum from dr. teague on thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for the youth market in which he uncategorically recognizes that if our company is to survive and prosper over the long run, we must get our share of the youth market. it will require new brands tailored to the youth market." and some of the documents we will show you are documents in which they discuss creating new brands which they make sure have enough nicotine in them to get people addicted and what would appear and appeal to children to get them to smoke in the first place. even more important is a document from their board of directors. we are not talking about some scientist which is what mr. reid would prefer to call dr. teague even though he was one of the principal scientists in the company. but here is a document you will have that is a presentation by the director of marketing for the entire company to the board of directors of r.j. reynolds in 1974 at the meeting in hilton, in which they again use that cynical language about a young adult franchise, but throughout the document they make it clear that what they are talking about is a range in age that goes down to 14 years age. the 14- to 24-year-old age group throughout that document. every time they reference a young adult franchise, they qualify it by the reference to 14 to 24 year olds. but, finally, and, most importantly, in terms of punitive damages is what is called the replacement smoker. people quit smoking. a lot of the customers die from smoking, 440,000 a year. if their market is going to continue they have to replace them. how do you replace the people that quit and the people that die? one principal source, teenagers, because they know that is the market, the only way they are going to replace them is to replace them with the age group. and that strategic response memo that we saw specifically discusses replacement smokers for the smokers they are losing because they quit, because of the smokers who are dying. if there was any basis for punitive damages, any entitlement for punitive damages as there is here, it is based on that fact and that fact alone, that this company, as late as the '80s, if not today, specifically recognized that to continue its business, it had to replace the people who were quitting, it had to replace those who were dying by getting children to smoke. and, thus, you had campaigns like the joe camel cartoon character. let me conclude this introductory section by walking through with you the verdict form that you will have to deal with and i'll reserve some of my time to talk to you after mr. reid to respond what he has to say. you will have a verdict form which pretty much follows what i have just told you were the issues in the case. the first thing on the verdict form that you are going to have to deal with is whether mr. michael bowman was a member of the engle class. and that first question deals with his membership in the engle class; that is, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and, if so, was cigarette smoking, because of his addiction, the legal cause of his esophageal cancer? two issues i talked to you about at the beginning. and then when you go from that question, the next question deals with the negligence issue and, that is, whether r.j. reynolds' negligence was a legal cause of michael bowman's death. now, think about that for a moment. it is not asking you whether they were negligent, because that is already been determined in the engle findings. he was a member of the class, then you have already determined under legal finding they were negligent. so that the only remaining issue is whether smoking caused his esophageal cancer so that the carcinogens that they negligently allowed to remain in their product, so that the nicotine that they negligently allowed to remain and addicted the smokers is related to his death. that is all that means. similarly, you will be asked whether under the strict liability count of whether the defective or unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by r.j. reynolds were a legal cause of his www.veritext.com 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 death. that is the easiest question to answer here. the evidence is unequivocal that the unreasonably dangerous part of cigarettes, the defective part of cigarettes, which results in strict liability, is the presence of cancer-causing substances and nicotine that causes addiction. that is what makes them defective, that is what makes them unreasonably dangerous. obviously, those two factors are a legal cause of michael bowman's death because, regardless of his motivation for smoking, had there not been carcinogens in those cigarettes, he would not have gotten cancer. had there not been nicotine in those cigarettes, he would not have been addicted. and as the evidence shows, without nicotine people do not smoke, he would not smoke. it is the presence of that defect, nicotine carcinogens, which clearly is the cause of his death, regardless of reasons he smoked or did not smoke or whether he could not quit, and they are strictly liable under the law for causing his death as a result. similarly, you will have to answer questions about fraudulent concealment. we have discussed that at length. and you will have to answer questions regarding their civil conspiracy to fraudulently conceal. and the only question with both, since you are bound by the legal finding -- the findings in the engle case, is the relationship between those events and him continuing to smoke. and there is more than enough evidence to support that conclusion. so having made those determinations, you will then need to determine on the verdict form the fault to be assigned each. we have told you we believe the principal fault lies with r.j. reynolds, although we recognize that you can assign some fault and we accept some fault on behalf of michael bowman, which will then lead you to a determination of damages. let me conclude this section by simply saying, we have said from the very beginning that we accept that michael bowman bears some responsibility for not quitting sooner. we are here because they refuse to accept any responsibility. they may talk about we made some admission that he is at fault. we have not made an admission other than the fact that we recognize he should have quit sooner, but the injury is the result of their product. it is the result of their misconduct. and his contribution is minor in comparison to theirs. so at the end of this case, we are going to ask you to return a verdict for the estate of michael bowman, in a significant amount of compensatory damages, and we are going to seek to have you return a verdict that will entitle to punitive damages, to punish them and deter them from their conduct over the last 50 years. thank you. and i'm pretty much on schedule. i've reserved some of my time, because i want to have the opportunity to respond to mr. reid and tell you what we would have to say instead of having to speculate as to what we might have to say about what mr. reid says, and i will turn it over to him. mr. shields: thank you, your honor. i know it is been a long trial. you have been here i guess in total more than two weeks at this point in time. i suspect you are anxious to get on with it to make a decision. so i'm not going to try and go through and respond to everything that mr. reid said. i think we have done that throughout the trial. you have heard what we have got to say. what i do want to do is address some fundamental things which i think i'm compelled to respond to because, quite candidly, i think mr. reid misstates the issues in many respects. he certainly misstates what our position is on the issues. and he is not entirely candid with you about what the evidence is. of course, it is your responsibility as the jurors to take your collective memory and determine what the evidence happened to be. but there are certain fundamental facts, certain fundamental truths that seem to me are beyond dispute at this point in time, and they are overriding in terms of the overall case. they include the fact that the fundamental reason people continue to smoke is because of addiction to nicotine. the conclusion of the surgeon general, the conclusion of their internal documents as well. and the best evidence of it is if they do not have sufficient nicotine in the cigarettes, people will not smoke them. without nicotine, people do not continue to smoke. the second fundamental fact is that, yes, it is true smokers can quit smoking, but that does not mean they were not addicted. if it did, then the estimates of addiction by the surgeon general of the united states and every other expert would be totally wrong, and they are not. the undisputed evidence from all of those sources is that 80 to 90 percent of smokers are addicted. yes, they may be able to quit, but that does not change the fact that they were addicted. and the issue in this case on addiction is not, as mr. reid says, was he compelled to smoke. the issue is whether he was a member of the engle class, and addiction is the question of whether he was a member of the engle class. the third fundamental fact that really cannot be disputed, and that is that cigarette smoking causes esophogeal cancer. it is been known since the early '60s. it is beyond dispute at this point in time that it is the leading cause of esophogeal cancer. 78 percent of all esophogeal cancers are the result of smoking. you heard the testimony of dr. langfitt and dr. harris as well. of the cases of esophogeal cancer they see, they are all smokers, because it is the principal predominant cause of esophogeal cancer. fourth, it is beyond dispute that they engaged in a conspiracy for almost 50 years to deny that cigarettes caused cancer, to deny that cigarettes were addictive. fifth, that is, although they engaged in that conspiracy, they now admit, as you saw in the testimony of dr. figlar and dr. cook, that it was perfectly reasonable for their customers to rely on their representations and to continue to smoke. they could hardly contend otherwise. if they think it was appropriate for them to make the statements they made, how can they turn around and say, "it was inappropriate for our customers to believe the statements we made"? and finally, and perhaps most importantly as we get to the punitive damages, another issue is, this is the one product that, when it is used as intended and directed, as dr. burns testified to earlier in this case, will kill forty percent of its customers. think about that. forty percent of smokers are going to die as a result of smoking, a fact that has been known to them for decades. now, with those fundamental facts in mind, i want to talk about some of their overriding themes and respond to them. obviously the most overriding theme is this choice versus responsibility issue. i said from the beginning of this case we do not deny that choice is an issue. but there is an important point to be made here. choice in and of itself is not a defense. you could not say, if you bought an automobile and it had defective brakes, that you chose to drive and, therefore, that is a defense to the product defect. of course it is not a defense. for it to be a defense it has to amount to what is called comparative fault, and the conduct in comparison to the party -- other party at fault has to be unreasonable. well, that is what you need to do. you need to compare the conduct of both. 212-279-9424 veritext reporting company www.veritext.com df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419 and here's the comparison. first of all, they made a knowing, fully informed and willing choice to misrepresent the scientific evidence, to deny that cigarettes caused cancer, to deny that cigarettes were addictive, to make public statements which they know are untrue and to conceal what they internally knew about the number of carcinogens, the addictive nature and what they were internally doing. that was a knowing, fully informed choice they made on purpose, motivated by wanting to continue to sell cigarettes and continue to have their customers buy their cigarettes. in comparing the choices as well, it is important to know that they made the choice to design their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction by maintaining a nicotine level that they knew would do that. and even more importantly, they made that choice knowing that most new smokers are children, so that they knew that in making the choice they were going to be addicting a new generation of smokers. that is the only way they can replace the smokers that are quitting and the smokers that are dying. yet despite all of that, they come into court and deny any responsibility for the death of this smoker or any other smoker. instead, they continue to defend it, say it is all the smoker's fault; it is their choice. well, michael did make certain choices. but keep in mind, when he started to smoke he was 12 years old. he started to smoke at a time when the culture was of acceptance of smoking, when smoking was everywhere, when everyone around him appeared to be smoking, when the ads were like wallpaper, on television, magazines, newspapers and everything else. keep in mind that he started to smoke and became addicted to smoking before there were warnings on the package, before there was public knowledge. there may have been knowledge that the defendants had, but it was before the public knowledge. he did not make a fully informed, knowing choice. he did not on purpose, as they did, undertake the misconduct that they contend. but despite that we are here and saying we accept some responsibility, when you compare the two, something they simply refuse to do. next let us talk about the engle findings. now, you were told by mr. reid in regard to the engle findings that they did not decide anything in connection with this case. that is absolutely untrue. if you decide that mr. bowman was a member of this class, the court has instructed you you are bound by those findings. they have decided the conduct elements in this case. they have decided that r.j. reynolds was negligent. they have decided that r.j. reynolds sold a defective, unreasonably dangerous product. they have decided that r.j. reynolds engaged in a civil conspiracy to defraud. they have decided that r.j. reynolds in fact is responsible for having committed fraud by concealment. those conduct elements have been decided, and they are applicable to this case as a member of the class. but also keep in mind something you heard on the first day of this case when we played the videotaped deposition of dr. figlar, and that was his admission that those findings were correct. you recall i walked him through each and every one of the engle findings and said, "do you dispute that?" "do you dispute that?" and time after time he agreed r.j. reynolds -- because he was speaking on behalf of r.j. reynolds -- did not dispute that they were negligent, did not dispute that they were engaged in a civil conspiracy, did not dispute that they had committed fraud by concealment, did not dispute that their product was defective and unreasonably dangerous. so those findings have great applicability here. of course, the issues here amount to two principal ones and a third very important one. the first one, of course, is class membership. we have talked a great deal about addiction. i'm not going to continue to go through it and respond point by point to everything mr. reid said, but i would point out to you that he misstated what the issue is on the jury verdict. the issue, unlike what he said, is not whether addiction caused the disease. it is not whether addiction compelled mr. bowman to smoke. read the clause that you are asked to begin with. what it says is whether he was addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine and smoking caused by that addiction was the cause of his disease. now, it does not mean he was compelled to smoke. it means that the reason he smoked because -- was www.veritext.com df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419 because he was addicted and that smoking is the cause of the disease. and i do not think there is any evidence whatsoever that realistically can be believed that smoking was not a cause, a contributing factor to his disease. in terms of whether or not he was addicted, you are going to have to decide whether you believe dr. werner or whether you believe dr. hoge. dr. werner walked you through the dsm. you heard the testimony about each of the elements and how they were met. but i think most importantly in making that decision, keep in mind that it is not just the dsm. it was also this other prominent test that even dr. hoge admitted under which michael bowman would have been classified as highly addicted. now, beyond question of then class membership is the question of comparative fault and causation. we have talked a great deal about smoking versus alcohol in terms of causation, and let me just summarize that for you one last time. the position is our assertion that it is the result of both versus their assertion that it is only alcohol. not only do you have the fact that 78 percent of all esophogeal cancers are caused by smoking, not only do you have the fact that the surgeon general says smoking causes esophogeal cancer, but you have the data that all the experts agree to, and that is that the risk of alcohol versus the combination of alcohol and smoking is the difference between 4 and at least 20 but more likely 50 to a hundred. just think about that. if you took the mid range of 50 and said the increased risk from the combination of the two is fifty-fold, which study after study has found, and you compare that only to alcohol, that says to you that there is over a ninety percent chance that it is the combination of the two and not just alcohol. over a ninety percent chance. that is why dr. levy and that is why dr. langfitt said smoking is the predominant cause under these facts. now, mr. reid says, well, you have all of this alcohol and you have to keep that in mind, and he talked at length about how many beers a day he drank. he ignored one important fact, and that is from mr. coyle's testimony, from the past testimony, six to eight months a year during the 20 years he was in the navy he was out to sea. there is no alcohol allowed on board those vessels. that does not mean he did not come in from time to time and have a drink when they were at shore, but it meant the vast majority of that time he was not able to drink anything. so that in comparing smoking levels for those 33 years, as the number of packs increased from one to three packs a day, to alcohol consumption, think about the fact that that alcohol consumption was primarily in the later years and there were large points in time in which there could have been very little, if any, alcohol consumption. in terms of comparative fault, we have talked a lot about comparing the two. we have talked about choice versus responsibility and the choices that each made. i just want to say this about it. basically their argument on comparative fault and choice comes down to the question of whether mike was aware. ask yourself one question: was he aware to the same extent that they were of what they internally knew? do you realistically think that mike understood that, as they internally knew, there were 40 to 60 carcinogens, cancer-causing substances, in cigarettes, particularly going back in the '50s, '60s and '70s up to the point in time he quit? do you realistically think that he understood what it was doing to his brain? do you realistically think that he knew, as they knew, that they were misrepresenting the scientific evidence when they claimed that there was this continuing controversy? the fundamental fact here is they claim it was reasonable for them to make all these assertions over the time period but it was unreasonable for him to believe them because he should have been aware from other things that were being said not to believe them. i think it comes down to this: there are some inherent contradictions in their arguments. there is the contradiction between, on the one hand, them saying, "there really was not adequate proof. therefore, it was reasonable for us to say that cigarette smoking did not cause cancer," and then turn around and say, "he knew, and therefore it is his fault because he was aware." both cannot be true. it is inherently contradictory for them to say it really was not understood that it was addictive and to turn around and say that he should have understood that, or to point to a 1948 article in 212-279-9424 veritext reporting company www.veritext.com df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419 lancet magazine when some scientist in britain called it an addictive drug. the fact of the matter is that the arguments they make throughout this case fall over themselves and contradict each other from one witness to the next, but it does not prevent them from continuing to assert this. it comes down, i think, to one fundamental fact, best summarized by the surgeon general in 1979. i showed this to you early in the case. let me show it to you again. in 1979, in the introduction to the surgeon general's report on smoking and health, the following was written: "this document is significant for another reason. it demolishes the claims made by cigarette manufacturers and a few others 15 years ago today" -- that is when the surgeon general's report of 1964 first came out -- "that scientific evidence was sketchy, that no link between smoking and cancer was proven. those claims, empty then, are utterly vacuous now. fifteen years of additional research overwhelmingly ratify the original scientific indictment of smoking as a contributor to disease and premature death." overwhelmingly ratify it. that was 1979. they did not admit it until 2000, 21 years later. after they lost the engle trial and the jury found to the contrary was the first time they ultimately admitted the truth of what cigarettes do. let us turn, finally, to the punitive damage issue. you were shown a demonstrative where they listed what they claim the charge on punitive damages required us to prove, and it made it appear like there was this long list of things that we had to prove before you could award punitive damages. it is a misrepresentation of the charge. you will have the charge out with you, so you can see what it says. but what it says is, "here are a list of things that would justify punitive damages," and there is an "or" in between each of them. unlike what mr. reid contended, it is not that we have to prove each and every element. you just have to find one of them. and the evidence is overwhelming, is clear and convincing, that punitive damages are justified here. mr. reid told you that they had changed, that they had not the same company. really? they are making the same arguments in this trial in 2011 -- mr. reid: objection, your honor. the court: wait a minute. do not say what you are fixing to say. mr. shields: they continue to assert that they made no misrepresentations in the 1950s. they continue to assert that they -- their conduct in the '60s was reasonable and that they did not misrepresent the evidence. they continue to assert that their conduct in the '70s was reasonable and appropriate. and you heard it in the closing argument. they continue to manipulate the levels of nicotine. the evidence in this case is they have done nothing to reduce the addictiveness of smoking cigarettes. they continue to assert that nicotine, while it may be addictive, is of no public health significance. think about that. the surgeon general says the fundamental reason people continue to smoke is nicotine addiction and that that continuing to smoke causes the diseases, diseases which will kill forty percent of smokers. no public health significance? if there was ever a justification for punitive damages, that alone is the justification. i want to conclude by showing you one final thing, which you need to think about when you are thinking about what they said and did and whether michael bowman or anyone else could reasonably rely on it over the time period. this is the video of the president of rjr on nightline, a couple of years before michael bowman quit smoking. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) ted koppel: "... does not cause cancer, yes or no?" mr. horrigan: "it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer." ted koppel: "all right, sir." mr. horrigan: "it has not been causally established." ted koppel: "cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?" mr. horrigan: "despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established." ted koppel: "no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?" mr. horrigan: "no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that -- while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been 212-279-9424 veritext reporting company www.veritext.com df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419 studies conducted over ten years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces." ted koppel: "does it stain your teeth?" mr. horrigan: "there are people who say it does. i guess, depending on the human being's own, let us say, physical makeup, it may well stain your teeth." (the video clip was ended.) mr. shields: that was in the early 1980s. that is the justification for punitive damages in this case. thank you for your attention. the court: thank you, mr. shields. anything before i give final instructions to the jury? mr. reid: no, sir. the court: members of the jury, you have now heard all of the evidence, my instructions on the law and the arguments of the attorneys. you will shortly retire to the jury room to decide this case, and before you do so i have a few last-minute instructions. during deliberations, you must not communicate about the case to anyone outside of the jury room. you only communicate with each other. you will have in the jury room all of the evidence in this case. and, in fact, there were some dvds shown, and there will be a -- something to play it on set up in there, which i'm sure you will be able to figure out if you have any problem with it, if you would like to look at any of the dvds that will be in evidence. in reaching your decision, do not do any research on your own; that is, do not use dictionaries, the internet or any kind of reference materials or -- you must also see and hear the evidence together at the same time; that is, when we take recesses, you will stop your deliberations at recess and then come back and deliberate together. you are not to communicate with any person outside the jury room about the case until you have reached your verdict. you must not talk about the case in person or through use of your telephone or any kind of electronic communication with anybody about the case. do not contact anyone to assist you, such as a family accountant, doctor or lawyer. and these rules, of course, will continue to apply until you have reached a verdict. and of course if anyone becomes aware of a violation of those rules, let me know. now, your notes that you have taken you may take to the jury room with you and use them during your deliberations. the notes are simply an aid to your own memory, and neither your notes nor those of other members of the jury are binding on you. your notes are not a substitute for your own memory. instead, your verdict must be the result of the collective memory and judgment of all jurors based on the evidence you have heard. and as i told you at the conclusion of your deliberations, we will collect your notes and tear them up and throw them away. now, in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received and the law that i have instructed you on. now, reaching a verdict is exclusively your job. i cannot participate in your decision in any way, and you should not guess what i think your verdict should be from something that i may have said or done during the trial. you should not think that i prefer one verdict over another. therefore, in reaching your verdict you should not consider anything i have said or done except for the specific instructions of law that you will take back to the jury room with you. of course, pay careful attention to the instructions, for that is the law that you must follow. all of the instructions are important and you should consider them all together. there are no other laws that apply to this case. and even if you do not like the laws, you must use them in reaching your decision. after you have decided what the facts are, you may find that some of the instructions simply do not apply. that is not unusual. in that case, follow the instructions that do apply; then use them, together with the facts, to reach your verdict. now, when you go to the jury room, the first thing you should do is select one of your number to preside over your deliberations like a chairperson at a meeting. and we call that person the foreperson. and it will be the foreperson's job to sign and date the verdict form once you have reached your verdict. now, it is your duty to talk with one another in the jury room and consider the views of all of