mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. and i'm going to ask dan gardner to assist me with the poster boards. good afternoon, guys. you can see i've got a lot of boards and so i'm going to ask dan to come sit here and help me manage the boards, if that is all right, your honor. the court: that is fine, mr. reilly. mr. reilly: all right. well, good afternoon. i hope everybody had a good lunch. let me begin my closing argument the same way i started my opening statement and that is by thanking you guys for your service. i know -- hassia and i know that we have taken you away from your retirements, your jobs, your normal lives, and we have asked you to come in here and stay because for two weeks now and i know that that is not just an inconvenience, that is actually a true sacrifice on your part. so let me begin by saying, just as i began my opening statement, by staying thank you for your service. second, i promised you that, in opening statement, that hassia and i would use your time economically because we know what a sacrifice it is. and so you saw that we made -- presented our evidence in this case through our cross-examinations of the witnesses. i mean, we, hassia made a presentation at the end of our -- i read a little tiny bit of a deposition that was taken from mrs. brown yesterday, but other than that, we presented all of our evidence through our cross-examinations of the witnesses and the plaintiff put on its case. and third, i told you that i was going to be using the very same boards in my closing argument because what i put on those boards and what i presented to you in my opening statement was what the evidence was going to show especially in relation to mr. brown and mr. brown's history, mr. brown's story, mr. brown's smoking. and how could i say that? i could say that because we had already been here. we had already heard it. and so we knew that unless people changed their testimony, by putting my boards together, i knew exactly what people were going to say. and sure enough, of course, kaiser thomas did not change his testimony. he was on videotape, right? there is no change there. and other than mrs. brown altering her testimony a little bit -- and i told you, look, if anybody changes their testimony, i'm going to point it out to you. and so there were a few times during mrs. brown's testimony that i had to, what we call, impeach her with her prior testimony from the earlier trial. remind her what she had already testified to. and you guys saw that. played out right here in front of you. so i'm going to use the very same boards and i told in you my opening statement i will fill in the blanks. i will would actually show you the true testimony that was given during the course of this trial. and so that is exactly what i'm going to do right now, okay? i started with this board. what are the issues -- you guys have to decide the issues in this case based on the evidence that you heard in this courtroom and the instructions that judge jay gives to you, has already given to you, and the final instructions he is going to give you after i sit down and after mr. shields has his second opportunity to talk to you. and then you have got to go back in the jury room and decide collectively -- each one of you is your own independent judge. and you guys have to make your own decisions and then you have to collectively see if you can collectively come to conclusions on these two questions. and what are those two questions? can everybody see that? can you see that? so the first question is, determine the amount of compensatory damages and the second question is, under the circumstances of this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against philip morris. and then in my opening statement i said, so let us walk through these two questions and see what the questions really are. and now i'm going to not only remind you what the questions really are, but i'm going to show you exactly what the evidence was and what it all means. so let us start. first question, determine the amount of compensatory damages. and this is the same board that i showed you in my opening statement. compensatory damages come in two types. economic damages and non-economic damages. and in my opening statement i said, look, hassia and i, on behalf of philip morris, have already stipulated to the exact dollar amount of the economic damages. i told in you my opening statement that number was $375,277. and now, when you go back into the jury room to deliberate, you are going to get a verdict form and it is going to look just like that. and on it, preprinted, are going to be those -- these numbers, $123,240, $137,750, and $114,287.41, total. i guess i should add 41 cents. total, $375,277. so, please, i do not think you even have a choice anymore, please give that amount of money to mrs. brown. so what is left? what is left on this first question? well, it is the value of the non-economic damages. that is mrs. brown's loss, the emotional losses of mrs. brown, and jennifer brown. and, of course, they have had emotional losses. there is no question. you lose a spouse, you lose a dad, you have emotional losses. no debate about it. so the only question then is, and the court has instructed you, that you are to assign a just and fair dollar amount. now, that is where the -- that is where your work comes in, right? that is where your work comes in. because that is all judge jay is going to tell you. there is no formula for determining what that value is. he does not give you any other guidance on how to determine what is a just and fair amount. there is no question that the browns were a close family. there is no question that mr. and mrs. brown had a successful marriage. there is to doubt that mr. brown was a fine dad for his daughter. there is no doubt that mrs. brown and her daughter jennifer achieved great success in their professions. no doubt about that. mrs. brown rose to the very top of the education system here in duval county and her daughter already is in early -- probably not supposed to say her age, but in her early forties. she is already risen to the same level as her mom. so, yes, they have achieved a lot. so did mr. brown. no question about it. i said to you in my opening statement that there is, of course, no amount of money that is going to bring back mr. brown. there is no amount of money that will take away the loss the family's experienced. and mr. shields mentioned in his closing argument that they have put in evidence these life tables. and those life tables really point out something that is so true for all of us in all of our lives. and what is that? in any marriage, except in some extraordinary circumstance, one spouse is going to lose the other at some point. in every parent/child situation, the natural course of events is the child is going to lose the parent. that is the normal thing. and that is what those tables actually point out. i think mr. shields indicated, and i believe that when mr. kalil was reading them to you, he said mr. brown had a life expectancy in 1995, it was 22 years, slightly over that. mrs. brown is much longer and of course jennifer brown is much longer than that. so that really points out the fact that this is no different than the normal situation in the sense that at some point mrs. brown was most likely going to lose her husband. at some point jennifer brown was most likely going to lose her dad. but, so what you guys have to do is figure out, okay, that time frame, because of his death in 1995, that extra time, was abbreviated. so you guys have to figure out what is the just and fair way to calculate it. and each of you -- you may have -- each one of you may have a different conclusion as to that. mr. shields came up with a dollar figure for mrs. brown of 7 and a half million dollars. that is a ton of money, obviously. ton of money. and for jennifer brown, 5 million dollars. another ton of money. if you stop and think about it, if the average family in florida earns $50 a year, that is 150 years of the average income in florida. for jennifer -- that is for mrs. brown. for jennifer it is something like -- mr. shields: your honor, i object. the question here, of course, is the loss, not comparing it to what someone else makes. that is not the measure of damages. inappropriate comparison. the court: i will sustain as to the average family. i do not know that we have heard that in this courtroom. the -- mr. reilly: i'll do it differently, your honor. the court: the multiplication, the court will allow, mr. reilly. mr. reilly: i'll just withdraw it. all right. $50,000 a year. significant sum of money. 7 and a half million dollars is $50,000 a year for 150 years. $500, (sic) that is 100 years. these are enormous sums of money. so -- and keep in mind that the purpose of compensatory damages is not to punish philip morris. it is to compensate mrs. brown and jennifer brown. that is what it is here for. and you guys have to decide, what is a just and fair amount? we know you are already giving mrs. brown $375,000 so i'm just going to suggest to you that this is also a very large sum of money. but round it up to a million dollars. round it up to -- i know that is a big number. but fair and just, you guys decide. for jennifer brown, half a million dollars. these are very large sums of money. you guys have to decide what is fair and just. that is what i'm telling you. all right. let us go to number 2 because we could have presented all the evidence on that first issue in two hours in this whole trial. so the rest of the time we spent here together was in an effort by mrs. brown and her legal team to try to convince you that they could satisfy their burden in connection with this punitive damage issue. so what is that question again? under the circumstances of this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against philip morris. well, that, as i told in you my opening statement, that does not really tell you what the issue is, does it? but there is another instruction that judge jay has given you. and sure enough, it is the exact language that i put on my board. you can tell that is the board i used because it is still marked on, right? and so what is this question? the question is, punitive damages may be warranted against philip morris usa based only on your finding by clear and convincing evidence that conduct in furtherance of a conspiracy between philip morris usa and other tobacco companies to conceal material information regarding the health effects or the addictive nature of cigarettes was a substantial cause of him getting lung cancer and dying. who is the focus, seriously now, who is the focus of that question? it is mr. brown and mr. brown's decisions. i'm not blaming mr. brown. mr. shield said i'm blaming mr. brown. this question is about, is there something that philip morris and these other companies did that was truly a substantial cause about concealing information and it was truly a substantial cause of mr. brown's own death? and i said, well, how are you going to know -- in my opening statement, i said, how are you going to know the -- there is a lot of legal verbiage here, how are you going to know what to look for to try to answer that question? and i put this board up. i said, well, first of all, who has the burden of proof on this point? mr. shields in his closing argument spent -- talking about mr. brown. this is about mr. brown's decisions about smoking? mr. shields spent the last five minutes talking about the proof that he had on this point, talking about mr. brown. what is the burden of proof? the plaintiff has it. there is no burden on hassia or me. the burden of proof is by clear and convincing evidence. well, what is clear and convincing evidence? clear and convincing evidence, this is what the judge is going to -- he is already read it to you, but each one of you has a set of these instructions and it is in there. and it says clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and more persuasive. the greater weight of the evidence, that is just the standard burden, greater weight of the evidence means that the more persuasive and convincing evidence and effect of the entire evidence in the case. but in our case on this issue, what is the burden? the burden is to prove clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue. what are those operative words? precise, explicit, lacking in confusion. you know, during voir dire we all talked about when you guys have to be very precise, down to the penny, painting perfectly. you know the difference between precision, exactness. you know that. it is not supposition. it is not inference. it is not the possibility. it is explicit. it is precise. what else did you have to know? you had to know what were the acts of the conspiracy. we will talk about that in a little bit, what the evidence was. you are going to have to know when did it start? when did this conspiracy start? and sure enough, i said you are going to find out that their claim is the conspiracy started in december of 1953. you are going to have to learn when did mr. brown begin to smoke? did he begin to smoke as a result of this conspiracy, this agreement? and i said to you, it would be unequivocal, precise, explicit. absolutely not. not even a claim that he did. why? because if the conspiracy starts in december of 1953, mr. brown started smoking as a 13 year old, a 14 year old. that is what kaiser thomas told you on the video. he was born in 1936. he is 13 years old in 1949. he is 14 years old in 1950. so is there any earthly way that mr. brown was influenced to begin smoking or even to become a daily regular smoker because of this agreement? absolutely not. as a matter of fact, mr. shields is not even claiming it. i'll show you that in just a minute. well, what is left then? you know he began to smoke before it. you know he continued to smoke before it. he became a regular daily smoker before it. what is left? what possible way did they have any hope of trying to convince you? let me just put this down. what had to be the focus of their evidence to try to prove that by precise, explicit evidence that whatever it was, that philip morris and the other companies did in connection with this agreement to conceal information, was actually a substantial cause of why mr. brown developed lung cancer. the only thing left was that whatever it was that they are complaining about, that it prevented him from quitting smoking in time to avoid getting lung cancer. mr. shields actually acknowledged that at the very end, of the last tail end of his closing argument. that is all they had left. and so now the question is, did they present to you during the course of this trial precise, explicit, evidence lacking in confusion, i mean, really compelling evidence that mr. brown was prevented from quitting smoking because of philip morris not agreeing with the surgeon general or philip morris not acknowledging that smoking caused lung cancer until 2000. and that is why i said, was mr. brown waiting to hear something from philip morris that prevented him from quitting smoking? that is what this boils down to. so where was that evidence? well, who did plaintiff bring? mrs. brown and her lawyers brought three witnesses: dr. proctor, dr. burns, and dr. goldberg. now, what did they all have in common? well, one thing they all had in common is they had been paid enormous sums of money, right? 4 million, 3 million. dr. goldberg was a little trickier, though. he could not remember how much money he had really been paid. some issue about did i earn 700,000 or 300,000 or 400,000? i mean, they had been paid enormous sums of money. in this case alone, dr. burns, $50,000; dr. proctor, $50,000; dr. goldberg, well, i do not know how much i've been paid in this case. well, how many hours do you have in it now? i do not know, could be this, could be that. i do not know. but one thing they all had in common in this case and what was that? they did not know a thing about mr. brown. not one fact about mr. brown. and yet, who is this case all about? mr. brown and mr. brown's decisions, right? i mean, that is what is on the verdict form. nobody else. this is not a case about the general public. this is not a case about americans in general. this is not a case about addicted smokers in general or some generic -- -- this is not a generic case. this is a case about -- you have to make a decision about whether or not mr. brown was prevented from quitting smoking. that is what you have to ask yourself. they did not know anything about his decisions, his awareness, nothing. they did not know anything about mr. brown. they did not know when or why he started smoking. they did not know when he became a regular smoker or why he continued smoking. they did not know what mr. brown knew about the health risks of smoking. they did not know if mr. brown saw ads or statements from philip morris or other cigarette companies. they did not know anything. did not know anything. and here's an instruction that judge jay is going to -- has already given you and that is that, just so you know for sure, that december of 1953 is the beginning when they claim this conspiracy occurred. plaintiff has not made a claim for conspiracy to conceal information regarding smoking and health or addiction before december 1953. it is in the court's instructions. so what were the acts of conspiracy? they said that the cigarette companies concealed their true belief about whether or not smoking really caused lung cancer and other diseases or not and they concealed their true belief that smoking was addicting. they said that they did it through advertising. was advertising really an act of a conspiracy or was it something that was done in a very competitive way? this was dr. proctor. i asked him. "the companies used their advertising in a very competitive way, did not they?" "yes." "they each wanted to obviously sell as many cigarettes as possible." when you are in the business, that is what you are doing, right? design of cigarettes. "so the companies were not sharing how they went about making their cigarettes or what their design parameters were, were they?" "generally that is true. they were competitive so they would each have their own suppliers of papers, suppliers of chemicals. you know they were buying all the chemicals for additives. it is a small -- fairly small set of suppliers but as you say, the formulas are secret." but really, wherein lies the answer to the question of whether or not mr. brown was really waiting to hear something from philip morris or some other cigarette manufacturer about whether or not cigarettes cause disease, whether or not cigarettes are addicting. you got to go to mr. brown's own personal life story. that is where the answer must lie. and so that is why i created this timeline and i said, you need to know what mr. brown knew. you need to know what mr. brown already knew. so that you could decide -- and what decisions did mr. brown make in connection with smoking? did mr. brown make a decision about quitting? did mr. brown -- as a matter of fact, for decades, did mr. brown give any indication that he had any interest in quitting at all? and that he was prevented from doing it by something? so let us just walk again back through the evidence that we know that you heard during the course of this trial. mr. brown began smoking at age 13, 14. where did that evidence come from? let me explain to you how this works. down here it says tr. that is trial transcript. every day, just like she is doing right now, this court reporter takes down every word that occurs in this courtroom. and that is a phenomenal talent, right? one that i certainly do not have. but she has the ability to take down every word, every question, answer, and then this gets typed up into a booklet every day. every day. and so we know exactly what was said. and every page is numbered and every line is numbered. it is like reading a book that every page is numbered and every line of every page is numbered. so when you see that, it means that is the page, that is the line. this is right out of the trial transcript. kaiser thomas, he is the guy that was on video. he was mr. brown's very dear friend. earliest person we heard from, right? "when did you start smoking?" "at a very early age. i would say about 13, 14, maybe it could be 15. it is hard for me to say because i did not just start off -- " "you were experimenting. did mr. brown start smoking?" oh, yes. we were all about the same time." talk about precise, explicit evidence, that is the only evidence that exists in this case as to when mr. brown began smoking. period. that is it. and now you know on the timeline, that is either 1949, 1950, or if it was 15, he says, could be 15, that would be 1951. when do the plaintiffs contend that this agreement began? december of 1953. years later. so now you know. there is no question. there is precise, explicit evidence that mr. brown did not begin smoking or become a regular daily smoker as a result of any agreement in december of 1953. regular smoker. kaiser thomas, again. "now, in these early years when you were experimenting with cigarettes, you know about how many you and mr. brown would smoke during the day?" "maybe that four." you remember he put his nickel up and he would get four cigarettes for a nickel. so here he is in these experimenting days smoking maybe those four, so before december of 1953. now, why did i talk to you about the information that mr. brown was receiving from his mom, his aunt, his coaches, all those folks? why did i present that to you? because it tells you what mr. brown knows and it tells you, even with that knowledge, what decision does mr. brown make regarding whether he is going to quit or keep on smoking? that is what you need to know, right? so here was the evidence. this is straight out of the transcript from kaiser thomas's video testimony. "and your mother, ms. thomas, and mr. brown's mother, mrs. brown, both told you and mr. brown not to smoke, did not they?" "they did." "while you were growing up, right?" "right." "and they gave you a big talking-to, a certain talking-to about it, did not they?" "yeah. that was about the extent of it." "well, in fact, they talked to you about smoking more than ten times over that period when you were in high school, did not they?" "yes. i would say more than ten." "did they punish you or punish mr. brown when they found those residues -- " remember in his pocket the little bit of tobacco in his pocket. " -- or other telltale signs of smoking while you were in high school?" "not that i could say punish us but we would get a stern talking-to about it and what it probably would lead to." "this is before december of 1953. mr. brown is already saying, you know what? i know my mother does not want me to smoke, i know kaiser's mother does not want me to smoke, i know my aunt does not want me to smoke. there is his aunt, ms. queen brown's mother, he also had an aunt that was on his case, right?" "yes. she was on our case." "and she was on your case about smoking, too, was not she?" "yes, she was." "like your mom and mr. brown's mother, she told you both you should not smoke, did not she?" "she did." "she was on your case about smoking, about discipline period. she was more of a strict disciplinarian than queen was. did she ever speak to you or mr. brown about smoking?" "she spoke to us about smoking and a few budweisers that we had, too." that is a heck of an aunt, right? how about coaches? why did i tell you about coaches? because, look, mr. brown is learning from his mother, his best friend's mother, his aunt, and now his coaches, you should not be smoking. and yet what decision does he make? he continues to smoke, right? "but when you did smoke, you hid your smoking from your coaches at school because you knew that was not something you should be doing, right?" "right." "and you did not even take cigarettes to school, did you?" "no, we did not." "did you have to hide the smoking that you did from coach small and coach montgomery?" "definitely. we had to. definitely did not want them to see it." "did they ever catch you or mr. brown smoking, the coaches, coach small, coach montgomery?" "coach small and coach montgomery have caught several of us doing it and he would bench you. you would not play." "i think we just heard it from some of the old -- " oh, this is about cancer sticks. "does mr. brown -- has he already heard that smoking cigarettes can cause cancer while he is still in school?" you bet. "i think we just heard it from some of the older people around us calling them that. like, what are you boys doing with those cancer sticks?" "and you heard that in high school? when you were both in high school?" "i would say i heard this in the old pool rooms, in the concession stand when someone saw a young kid with a cigarette between his fingers." all right. how about addiction? mr. shields said i do not know why mr. reilly pointed out that people over 150 years ago were referring to tobacco, use of tobacco and nicotine, and all of that. because it is no secret, ladies and gentlemen, that people were smoking for nicotine because there was nicotine in tobacco. this is no secret. that is why i showed it to you. and it has not been a secret for forever. that is why i showed you reader's digest. that is why i showed you all that stuff so, you know, take the mystery out of it. because sitting here today, not one of you was around in the thirties or the forties. so we have to take you back in time and show you what people were talking about in that time frame in mr. brown's life. not just in general, not to the american public, but specifically, precisely, explicitly in mr. brown's life. "did any of those coaches ever tell you that cigarettes were addictive?" "the coaches did not, but other -- we have heard it from other people." "when you were kids?" "right." addictive. and yet mr. brown continued to smoke. he was not waiting to hear from philip morris or some other cigarette manufacturer that cigarettes were addictive. is there any explicit, precise evidence that mr. brown would have quit smoking if philip morris had only said, hey, these are addictive or these are cancer sticks? is there any evidence, i mean, not just precise, and explicit evidence, is there any evidence in this case that he was going to quit if that had happened? of course not. there is none. much less precise and explicit evidence. that is why i presented you with dr. proctor saying "there is new information available to the american public for over one hundred percent -- nicotine is the major reason why people smoke. nicotine feed, nicotine fit." "yeah, you certainly find that. in fact, nicotine was identified in tobacco almost 200 years ago. that is when it was first organically identified." i asked that to dr. proctor. here's dr. burns. "yes, it is been known for quite sometime that once you start using tobacco regularly it can be very hard to stop." "whether you call it an addiction or a habit, whatever. if we were to go back in time 150 years, regular citizens refer to the use of tobacco in cigarettes addicting. well, they used -- the use of tobacco as being addictive. it was pipes, cigars, and chewing tobacco way back 150 years ago, but, yes, if you substitute tobacco that would be correct." all right. so now, let us bring ourselves -- let us go back to our time. here we have mr. brown, mr. thomas, in pool halls, smoking, smoking, hearing that their cigarettes are cancer sticks, that they are addicting, and here in 1950 that is when that avalanche of information begins. that is what dr. goldberg agreed it was. dr. proctor is going to tell you that. "will you acknowledge that there was a little avalanche of information flowing to the american public as of 1950 regarding the ill consequences of smoking, correct? you will acknowledge?" "i will." here's dr. proctor. "you talked about the beginning of the 1950s as sort of a watershed for medical science and linking smoking with lung cancer and other diseases?" "that is right." "with the five simultaneously published epidemiological studies linking smoking to cancer. that was no secret to the american public?" "no. it was published." "it was published. and not only published, but big news as well. it was in newspapers and magazines. it was well covered." why do you think mrs. brown, mrs. thomas are telling their sons -- there is no evidence that said wait until you are 18. they said, do not smoke. smoking is bad for you. that is kaiser thomas's testimony. the mom's are -- mrs. brown said my husband was very intelligent. is there any reason to believe that his mother was not? that she -- mrs. brown said my husband was very up to date on what is going on in the world, current events. avid reader of the newspaper, avid reader of magazines. any reason to believe that his mom was not? all this information, this little avalanche is coming out and mrs. brown and ms. thomas are telling their boys, do not smoke. and yet mr. brown and mr. thomas are deciding they are going to smoke. here's dr. proctor again. "but in terms of -- was the american public aware that the science is coming out? that was no secret to the american public, was it?" "well, it was in the newspaper. you cannot just say that what is in the newspaper was a secret by definition. this was big news, right." this is dr. proctor saying: "this was big news, right." "i mean, it was in hundreds, if not thousands of thousands of articles. it was big news. i mean, it is arguably the news story of the century." is there some reason to think that mr. brown is not paying attention, that he is unaware? you know, i have no burden of proof. i did not have any burden to prove this stuff. the burden is on the plaintiff to prove by precise, explicit, lacking in confusion evidence that mr. brown would have quit and quit in time to avoid getting his lung cancer. that is the burden. and there is no question about it. "you testified about advertisements in response to ms. bryan's questions earlier this morning. in fact, you do not have any idea when he started smoking his first cigarette, do you?" it would not even matter because it is before the agreement. it is years before the agreement. "and you cannot say that mr. brown purchased anything because of something he saw in an advertisement, including those little four cigarettes that you used when you started smoking, right?" "right." all right. let us go to -- you know that -- oh, the frank statement, january of 1954. mr. shields did not even mention it in his closing argument. is there any evidence in this case that mr. brown saw it? none. none. was there any evidence in this case that mr. brown ever saw any of the speeches, any of the articles, any of the -- anything that mr. shields complained about in this trial? was there one person who came here and said mr. brown never saw any of that, much less said mr. brown was influenced by it, mr. brown was prevented from quitting smoking by it. was there one person who ever came here and said that? not one. no precise -- no evidence, much less precise and explicit evidence. you know he joins the army in -- oh, i talked to dr. proctor about the ninety percent of americans who have heard smoking can cause lung cancer as of 1954. is there some reason to believe that somehow mr. brown is in the ten percent that did not hear that? i mean, what you know about mr. brown and the success he had in his life, rising to the very top of the postal service here in this community, getting the accolades and awards and mrs. brown saying my husband was a very intelligent man, as well read as he was, is there some reason to believe that he falls into the ten percent of americans who have not heard it? come on. "when you met mr. brown -- " which she does in 1958. this is mrs. brown's testimony -- "you did not tell him not to smoke." "no, i did not." "as a matter of fact, you did not talk to him about smoking for the next 30 years, did you?" "no, i did not." that takes you to 1988. 1987, 1988. so was there any evidence from mrs. brown that mr. brown ever said, i do not know about the health risk that i'm taking, i'm unaware that what i'm doing comes with the risk of lung cancer? was there ever any testimony from mrs. brown that her husband ever said, gosh, i do not know that it is possible to become addicted to these things i'm unaware that there is nicotine in these cigarettes? was there any evidence to that effect in this case? mrs. brown -- mr. shields gets to get back up again and he gets to do just what i'm doing. if there is a passage, if there is testimony from mrs. brown that mr. brown did not know, he ever said i did not know, i'm unaware, or i'm waiting to hear something from philip morris, or i'm thinking of quitting but i'm not going to because i have not yet heard from philip morris, or i read something from philip morris or some other cigarette company, he gets to put that testimony up. but there is none. there is not any, much less precise and explicit testimony. none. now, mr. shields, i do not know whether he misspoke or whether he thinks he is right. but kaiser thomas said that mr. brown, when they were together -- and by the way, mr. brown became an 18-year old, legal for him to buy cigarettes in 1954. saying -- 1954. here when mrs. brown -- you said -- "what did she say was his brand of cigarettes?" "benson & hedges." she remembers to this day that her husband, when she first started dating him, was smoking benson & hedges cigarettes. apparently he switched from philip morris to benson & hedges. why did he switch? no one knows. there is no evidence as to why he switched. none. and she does not speak to him about his smoking for the next 30 years. let us go to the sixties. you know that they lived with mrs. brown, rayfield's mother, from 1960 to 1962. you know mrs. brown said she still did not like his smoking but he is continuing to smoke. mrs. brown is in school. she is going to become a teacher. she testified -- "are they current? do they stay up to date?" "mrs. brown was a daily newspaper reader." "to my knowledge mr. brown was a very intelligent man." "yes, he was." "during your marriage he had a subscription to the florida times union?" "yes, we did." we put articles from the florida times union in evidence. "you had a subscription to reader's digest beginning in 1962?" "i said yes." "you had a subscription to good housekeeping?" "i said yes." "ebony? jet?" "yes." "life?" "yes." "newsweek?" "yes." what magazine is missing from here? mr. shields got up in his closing argument and showed you a copy of true, right? and he showed you some article in true. is there any evidence in this case that mr. brown ever read true magazine or read that article? none. none. is there any evidence in this case that mr. brown's doctors ever told him, hey, you know what, the cigarette industry tells me it is okay to smoke, smoking's not addictive? no evidence of that. none. not precisely, explicit. none. generally -- this is mrs. brown again: "generally throughout his working career he was home for the evening news and watched it?" "yes." "you were both home and both watched the news together?" "yes." let us go to 1964 because that is the year of the famous surgeon general's report, right? and it got tremendous news coverage. i'm just going to show you a little tiny bit just to refresh your recollection of the -- this is the cbs news coverage. i'm not even going to show you the whole thing. just -- not even going to show you what i showed you entirely in the trial. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) harry reasoner: in this time in the country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going tell him it is not good for him either. the decision is his. the decision, and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner, good night. (videotape ends.) mr. reilly: now, just to demonstrate how powerful that news coverage was, mrs. brown actually remembers it. that is 1964 and yet mrs. brown can remember it to this day. what was that? 50 years ago? i asked her: "you were asked, and the jury has heard a lot in this room about -- " now, this is one of the things i had to refresh her recollection on. called impeachment. i had to take her back to her testimony in the last trial. and i said: "the jury has heard a lot in this room about the '64 surgeon general's report. you saw that report on television, did not you?" you asked which report. i said: "the '64 surgeon general's report." and you said: "yes." "do you recall that?" and mrs. brown, reading her prior transcript said: "i said yes." "it was big news when it came out. you saw the tv coverage." "i said yes." "it was a big splash when it came out, right?" "i said yes." "it made headlines in the newspapers and on television." i said: "you do not have to read it in the transcript, just tell me." she said: "yes. sure." did that cause mr. brown to say i'm going to quit smoking? i want to quit smoking? even think about it? no. no. there is no evidence of that. none. now, that is mrs. brown seeing it. you saw that mrs. brown and mr. brown oftentimes watched the daily news together. did they present some precise and explicit evidence in this case that mr. brown did not see it or did not know about it or that only his wife knew about it? no. there is no precise, explicit evidence to that effect. you remember that the first warning goes on the packs of cigarettes: "caution. cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." as of january 1966. that is still 50 years ago. i asked mrs. brown: "do you remember seeing the warnings on the packs of cigarettes in 1966?" "yes. the warning on the pack said may." she could remember the exact wordage, the exact verbiage from that warning from 50 years ago. that warning was only on packs of cigarettes for four years, and yet to this day, that is how powerful it was. it was so powerful that people that were around then can remember the exact words. think of any other warning for any other product that you have ever seen that you can remember the exact words of it. i'll bet you there is not one, to be honest, with you. all right. dr. goldberg said: "no, the message in the tobacco industry was drowning out all of this information. by the end of the fifties, 10 million americans had quit smoking. by the end of the sixties, more than 20 million americans had quit smoking." that is some number. here's her testimony, more testimony. "but it was big news that a warning was going on every package of cigarettes, was not it?" "yes." "and when the warnings went on the packs you did not discuss it with your husband?" "no, i did not." okay. we have put in -- oh, you know that public service announcements began to run in 1967. evidence showed that in 1968, 1,500 of them. i think dr. goldberg said for every three cigarette ads, there was one of these anti-cigarette ads. can we just show a little tiny bit of bill talman just to refresh your recollection what those things look like? how powerful they were. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) bill talman: this is the house we live in. that is bailey. he is great to have around. steve, home from college. marvine, looking after her brother tim. debbie, who will soon graduate from high school. susan, our youngest. and my wife, peggy, who looks after all of us. and that is me, bill talman, with a friend of mine you might recognize. you know, i did not really mind losing those courtroom battles but i'm in a battle right now i do not want to lose at all. because if i lose it, it means losing my wife and those kids you just met. i've got lung cancer. so take some advice about smoking and losing from someone who is been doing both for years. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you do smoke, quit. do not be a loser. (videotape ends.) mr. reilly: thank you. powerful ads. powerful ads. no question about it. did that cause mr. brown to quit or even think about quitting? or say i'm going to quit or i want to quit or make any ever effort to quit? no. 1968. we put in evidence an article from the new york times. i do not know what the number is. but we put in evidence an article from the new york times showing that in february, march, 1968, mr. brown's gone to work for the post office in 1967. in 1968 every postal truck has billboard size ads on it that say: "100,000 doctors have quit smoking cigarettes. maybe they know something you do not." any way that mr. brown would have missed that? no way. every day he goes to work. every vehicle here in jacksonville, every post office vehicle here in jacksonville has that billboard on it. does that cause mr. brown to quit smoking or even consider it? even try to quit? no. does mr. brown enjoy smoking? i'm going to show you in a minute everybody who addressed that issue said mr. brown enjoyed smoking. mrs. brown, kaiser thomas, his best friend and his wife both said mr. brown enjoyed smoking. people enjoy smoking. you are going to see in just a minute that dr. proctor is going to acknowledge that there are people that know all about the health risks of smoking, rational, normal people and they decide, you know what, i enjoy smoking and i'm going to keep smoking. my decision. my body. my life. is this a criticism of mr. brown? no. these are the decisions -- we get to decide if we are going to smoke. we get to decide if we are going to drink. we get to decide -- these are decisions we get to make. big news. the warnings going on the pack. i asked when the warnings went on, you did not talk to your husband. all right. let us go to the seventies. [#deleted recess#] mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. we are all the way up to 1970. i promise it will move a little quicker. let us go to 1970. you know that the warnings changed on the packs as of 1970, and now they say -- sorry: warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. that is the same year that mrs. brown begins working as a teacher. you know that we talked -- mrs. brown and i talked about what it means to be a teacher here in duval county and the instruction you give to your students about the health risks of smoking. something you did not know but the judge has now instructed you is that, after 1969 -- in other words, starting with 1970 and that warning, the warning labels of philip morris and other engle defendants placed on cigarette packs complied with federal law, and philip morris-usa and other engle defendants had no legal obligation to make no additional warnings. mrs. brown has made no claim for failure to warn after 1969. you did not know that until right now. what is going on with mrs. brown -- what does this warning tell you? mr. kalil asked a bunch of questions of mrs. brown about the meeting that occurred with the browns when they ran into the old high school friend of mr. brown -- that we are going to talk about in just a minute. he said, well, did mr. green said that smoking could kill you? did mr. brown say that smoking was addicting? did mr. brown -- that cigarette pack that they got for free had that warning on it, and the court has instructed you that there was no legal obligation to make any additional warning, period. period. what does that warning tell you? that warning tells you: if you continue to smoke cigarettes, these things are dangerous for your health. that is what it tells you. and that happened in 1970. did that cause mr. brown to quit cigarette smoking? no. try to quit smoking? no. have any interest in quitting smoking? no. no. what is going on in mrs. brown's life in connection with what is happening in 1970 when she becomes a teacher? "you became a teacher, a substitute teacher in '69 and a regular teacher in '70? "i did. "and part of the curriculum in jacksonville, in the jacksonville school system, is to ensure that school students in every grade, whether they are in grade school, middle school, or something called junior high or high school, they are getting an education about the health risks of smoking, correct? "we had the "say no to drugs" campaign. "and that included cigarettes, did not it? "the say no to drugs campaign included all drugs. i said, just so we are clear, that included cigarettes, did not it? "yes. "and so from your perspective, cigarettes were under the umbrella of drugs, correct? "yes." and there was more. so each of the homerooms had an internal competition among its students, teaching them about the health risks of drugs including cigarettes, right? right. and the students would do their own door decorations and whatever research they wanted to do? yes, for that. and then on a school-wide basis, they would have sort of a competition among the homerooms as to who made the best presentations? that is correct. the best door decorations. now, mrs. brown said that she was in the business ed department, right? and that this was not part of her personal responsibilities. but look what she knew about them. and, yet, is there any -- this is in grade school, junior high, middle school, high school -- everywhere. is there any indication that her husband did not know, a man as intelligent as he was, as well read, as well as up to date as he was, did not know what grade school was doing? any reason to believe that? is there any precise, explicit information to the contrary? any at all? i mean, any at all? 1971, the ban on advertising for cigarettes on television went into effect. you recall that there were bans on cigarette advertising on television and radio as of january of 1971? mrs. brown could not remember the exact date, but it was banned -- but i know it is in the '70s. "and it was big news that there was no longer going to be cigarette advertising on television, right? "yes. "you did not talk to your husband about that either? "no, i did not." now let us talk about that social event where they ran into mr. brown's old high school friend, ralph green. yes, ralph green apparently -- of course, i was not there, but they said ralph green was handing out sample packs of philip morris multifilters. what brand of cigarettes is mr. brown smoking at this moment? according to mrs. brown he is smoking benson & hedges cigarettes, right? so here's a guy handing out -- a guy he went to high school with. he is handing out free packs of cigarettes, and he hands two packs to mrs. brown and two packs to mr. brown. they take them. what do they have on them? "those little sample packs mr. green gave you and your husband both carried that warning, label did not it? "yes, it did. "you said you examined those packages carefully, so you would have seen the warnings on the packs at the time they were given to you by mr. green? "yes, as well as the lower in tar and nicotine." now, i asked mrs. brown because there is seems to be a question -- i'm not even sure why it is important -- whether mr. brown thought they were lower in tar and maybe a little safer. why is that important? the real key, the real key is not whether he was thinking he might get a little smaller -- a little smaller dose of tar and nicotine. the real question is was there any indication that mr. brown was going to quit? any at all? was there any indication that mr. brown took those packages of multifilters and smoked some of those instead of quitting? where is that evidence? i wrote down what mr. shields said to you in his closing argument. he said, if he had not switched to philip morris multifilter, he said, there is a much higher likelihood he would have quit earlier. mr. brown never quit. you guys sat here throughout this trial and heard mr. brown never quit. what was the basis for saying that there is a much higher likelihood that he would have quit earlier? he never said that. he never said, i'm thinking of quitting. he never said, i'm even thinking about quitting. i asked mrs. brown, did you actually even talk to your husband about why he decided to smoke multifilters? i said, you never had any conversation with him about why he decided to smoke multifilters, did you. her answer was: i do not remember any discussion about it other than i gave him the cigarettes i had. right. and the answer is: no, i did not directly discuss it with him, no. correct? no, i did not directly discuss it with him. was there any discussion about mr. brown quitting smoking? none. none at all. where is this precise explicit testimony? there is none. "did rayfield request that you start buying multifilter cigarettes? "no. i started purchasing the cigarettes, and he smoked them, so he enjoyed them." that is what mrs. brown testified to as to why mr. brown smoked multifilter. so there is one statement that he enjoyed smoking. here's another by kaiser thomas: "you mentioned previously he enjoyed smoking while he was drinking coffee, right, or socializing? "yes. both of us smoked after a cup of coffee. "did mr. brown ever tell you that he enjoyed smoking while he was a smoker? "he never told me, but he seemed to." that is one smoker to another. and here's that quote that i told you i would show you from dr. proctor. dr. proctor, their $3 million witness. "and you would agree with me that there are millions of people who, with knowledge of the risks of smoking, have decided that they want to smoke for the pleasure of smoking, correct? "well, i'm sure that is true in general, yeah. "millions of people who, with knowledge of the risks of smoking, have decided that they want to smoke for the pleasure of smoking, correct? "i'm sure that is true in general, yeah. "and you do not know whether mr. brown was one of those folks? "sure, i do not." because he does not know anything about mr. brown. but you do. so if you really want to know whether mr. brown was contemplating quitting, all you have got to do is look at what he does next. after he switches to multifilter and enjoys them, as mrs. brown said, for how long -- i asked mrs. brown, do you know how long he smoked the multifilter? she said, i do not remember. i said, it could have been a year or two? she said, i do not know. and mr. kalil got back up and he said, hey, were not you buying them at publix for him for a number of years? "yes, a number of years." whether it is a year or two or four or five, it does not really much matter because you know that kaiser thomas is bringing him what he really likes the best, and that is benson & hedges, right? and then what does he do? instead of quitting, he smokes benson & hedges again. and he is going to keep on smoking benson & hedges until, as far as we know, the end of his life. mary and here is kaiser thomas: "but you are sure that, at least up until the time when mary and jennifer asked you not to bring cigarettes to mr. brown anymore, from 1972 or '3, up until that point, the only brand that you brought mr. brown was benson & hedges? "that is right. "and that is the only brand, to the best of your knowledge and recollection, that he was smoking? "right. at that time." this is kaiser thomas: "but mr. brown never told you why he started smoking and benson & hedges? "no, he did not. "and he never told you exactly why he started smoking benson & hedges? "no, he did not. "all you know is that in 1972 or '3, when you offered to bring cigarettes down from fort jackson to jacksonville --" this is the very same time that this social event is occurring. '72 or '3. "when you offered to bring cigarettes down from fort jackson to jacksonville to mr. brown, that was the brand he asked you to bring, right? "that is correct. that is correct." is there any evidence that mr. brown would have quit smoking if he had not gone to that social event? was there any evidence in this case that he was thinking of quitting before going to the social event? no. was there any evidence that he was thinking of quitting after the social event? no. here's michael brown, the son: "and so the first brand you actually remember your father smoking is multifilters? "right. "you do not know why he smoked multifilters, is not that true? "that is true. "and then at some point he switches to benson & hedges, correct? "that is true." there you go. and so i asked mrs. brown: "and, in fact, you heard your son today say that at some point your husband switched from -- stopped smoking the philip morris multifilters and was only smoking benison and hedges. do you recall that? "yes, i do. "and he is correct about that, is not he? "yes, he is." so where in the world is this evidence that mr. brown was prevented from quitting smoking because he switched to multifilter and smoked some multifilters along with benson & hedges? and then ultimately switches back entirely to benson & hedges? where is that precise, explicit evidence? there is none. he has no interest or makes no effort at quitting smoking in the '70s. the public service announcements are continuing on throughout the '70s. and we put them in evidence. i do not know if you have a viewing box. i do not know if you have any interest in watching old antismoking commercials, but they are in evidence. by 1980, 30 million americans have quit smoking. let us go to 1980. stuff happens in the '80s here. 1981. this was dr. david burns. this really and truly sums it up, it seems to me. this was their $4 million expert. $4 million expert. this was a quote from dr. burns in january of 1981. here's 1981, dr. burns. he is from san diego. this is the san diego paper. he was quoted as saying: it is not that smokers do not know the risks. in fact, 95 percent of them are thoroughly aware of the health dangers and ninety percent realize that their health could be affected, according to dr. burns. now, look, is there some reason to believe that mr. brown fits -- smart as he was, successful as he was, that he fits in the 5 percent that do not know? or the ten percent that do not believe? that defies -- it is so far beyond common sense. that defies any kind of logic at all. here we are dealing with an incredibly successful, incredibly intelligent, incredibly well-read gentleman. to put him in the 5 percent that are not thoroughly aware of the health risks or the ten percent of the ones that do not think it applies to them? what he is, obviously, with that much intelligence and knowledge -- i'm sorry. i cannot go back to it, but he is one of those people that dr. proctor said, look, there are millions of people who understand the risk they are taking, that it applies to them, and, yet, they decide, for the pleasure of smoking, that they are going to continue to do it. here's the conversation he has with his daughter jennifer in 1983. right there. hassia asked her: when you would tell him that smoking could cause cancer, you did not want him to die from it, he acknowledged what you said to him, did not he? "he did. "he did not disagree with you when you told him the information you were learning in school?" she is what? '83, she is 12 years old, something like that. 11 years old. and so she is telling him, dad, i'm learning in school cigarettes cause cancer. they can cost you your life. "he did not disagree with you when you told him the information you were learning? "no, he did not disagree." of course he did not disagree. in fact, what he said was -- in fact, what he said to you was, i hear you, right? "he did." he said, i understand. you are right. is not that what he said? "he understood what i was saying. of course he did. he is certainly in the 95 percent that are fully aware of the health risks of smoking and the ninety percent who know it applies to them. has he given any indication that he has any interest in smoking? none. but that is what they have to prove, that if philip morris and the other cigarette companies simply had not entered into that agreement, that he would have quit and quit in time to avoid getting his lung cancer. but they have to do it by precise and explicit evidence, not by suggestions or surmise. okay. mrs. brown sometime in the mid-'80s starts to talk to her husband about his smoking: i do not want you smoking in the bedroom. i do not want you smoking -- i want you to limit your smoking to the den. i do not want to be exposed to your secondhand smoke. "what was his standard response? i have to die from something; did not he? she said, i do not know if it was his standard response; but, yeah, he said that to me. does mr. brown in the mid-'80s understand that smoking comes with a risk? of course he does. and how about the event in -- kaiser thomas thought it was '86, mrs. brown thought it was '87 or '88. it does not match matter. what is the point? mr. brown has some sort of breathing problem. takes him to the emergency room. in the emergency room, they hold him overnight. the doctor talks to him. he is not there because of smoking, but he is there because he has a throat problem, a breathing problem. and so one of the doctors caring for him has a conversation with him in which he says, look, you should quit smoking. you need to quit smoking. so he gets out of the hospital, he sees mrs. brown, and they have a conversation. "and when you had the conversation with him, he told you about a doctor having a conversation with him in which the doctor said he should quit? "that is what he told me. "that is when you had a follow-up conversation with him, and you told him, yes, you should quit? "yes, i did. "and he agreed? "he did." and here's mrs. brown. "and to your knowledge, that is the first time your husband ever agreed to quit smoking, is not it? "to the best of my knowledge, yes. "that is the first time he ever gave any indication he had any interest in quitting smoking, is not it? "we never discussed this. so to the best of my knowledge, yes." how could they possibly prove that mr. brown had some interest in quitting smoking before this if mrs. brown, his wife, never spoke to him about it until this moment? he never made any quitting-smoking gesture. he never did -- they never even talked about it. so where is the explicit and precise evidence that he was prevented from quitting smoking because of some agreement? michael brown. "and you know of no time where your father had ever tried to quit smoking before the time you no longer see him smoking, correct?" i'll talk to you about that in just a minute. "correct. "and now you have described your dad as a -- he was never an i've-got-to-have-a-cigarette-right-now type of person, right? "right. right. so when is that time that mr. brown expresses an interest in quitting smoking? well, after that hospitalization -- you remember, he and kaiser thomas talked about the fact that the doctors told him this and that you have got to quit smoking. and kaiser thomas said, we entered into a pact. we said we would quit. i, kaiser thomas, did; mr. brown did not. now, where was the evidence that mr. brown did not quit because he was waiting to hear something that was concealed by philip morris or some other cigarette company? where is that? nowhere. he just had a conversation with his physician who said, you need to quit smoking. he is talked his wife, he is talked with his best friend, and, yet, he still does not quit smoking. whether he is addicted or not, addicted smokers can quit smoking if they want to. i think you and mr. shields talked about, through the present day, there is something like 50 or 60 million folks who have quit smoking? he said 50 or 60. this is dr. burns: "as we have discussed previously, i've never seen a number that is up to 60 million. it is about 54 million at this point in time. "that is a big number. "sure. "in your opinion, the vast majority of those folks are addicted? "yes. a large fraction of them -- i'm sorry -- certainly were. i mean, eighty percent. but you have to want to quit." dr. burns was asked about his concept of cognitive dissonance. you remember that? he said, well, this is why smokers do not quit. it is because they have cognitive dissonance. they have the idea in their mind that they -- they really are taking a health risk because they are smoking. on the other side of the coin, they enjoy smoking, you see they enjoy smoking, and so they do not quit. and so i said, well, doctor, would you please explain to the jury -- to you guys -- use exercise. explain what cognitive dissonance means in nonsmoking terms. he said, i get up in the morning, say to myself -- i get up in the morning and say, you know, i really need to go to the gym, you know? and then i look at my e-mail and i say, oh, boy. no, i really need to do that, handle his e-mail. maybe i do not need to go to the gym; maybe i ought to do this. and so i do not go to the gym. that is an example of how you have these competing needs in your head and one of them wins out. and he went on to say: and what would happen if my wife came in and said, you do not need to go to the gym today? and then he said, oh, but she would never say that. that was dr. burns and cognitive dissonance. that is how we human beings function. mr. brown continued to smoke. the evidence you heard was that, even after this pact, even after the agreement, even after mrs. brown, jennifer brown, kaiser thomas no longer see him smoke, they know he is still smoking. how do they know he is still smoking? the son said, i found cigarettes in his -- in the console of his car. mrs. brown said, i could still smell smoke on him from time to time. okay. he continued to smoke. they have to prove to you that he would have quit and quit in time, by precise, explicit evidence, except for this agreement. how can that be if he is had a conversation with his doctor, he is made a pact with his best friend, he is agreed with his wife, and, yet, he still does not quit smoking? all right. let me bring this to a -- i do not know -- a conclusion. kaiser thomas. i asked -- i did not ask, but he was asked: do you know whether he ever read any materials from a tobacco company that discussed smoking? "that i could not say. "did he ever tell you that a tobacco company withheld information from him? "no, he did not. "and i think we talked about that. you do not know what, if any, advertisements on tv, radio, or print mr. brown saw for cigarettes, right? no." mrs. brown: "he never mentioned cigarette advertising on television to you? "we never discussed it. "he never mentioned billboard advertising for cigarettes? "we never discussed it. "he never said to you that cigarette ads influenced him in any way, did he?" now, look at this, this last question and answer: he never said to you that cigarette ads influenced him in any way, did he? "we never discussed it." so how can there be precise, explicit evidence in this case? jennifer brown: "and in all the conversations you had with him, he never mentioned cigarette advertising, correct? "no conversations about that either." how about michael brown -- these are all the people that knew him. this is everybody that came to this trial that knew mr. brown. that covers his best friend, his wife, his son -- here's his son, his daughter, in talking about ads: "you were not suggesting that your father ever smoked any brand of cigarettes because of any ads that you might have seen with him, correct? "no. "and your father, in talking to you, never mentioned any particular cigarette ads, correct? "that was not something he talked about." the evidence that was not presented to you by plaintiff, who has the burden of proof, evidence that was not presented: no one ever came here and said that mr. brown was unaware of the health risks of smoking. no one came here and said that. no one told you that he was waiting to hear the cigarette companies agree with the surgeon general. no one told you he was influenced by philip morris or other cigarette companies. and no one told you that cigarette -- that knew him -- no one told you that cigarette advertising played a role in his decisions. what you did learn in this case, what the evidence did show you was that he was told from a young age that smoking was bad for him, that it could cause cancer, and that it was addicting. you learned that mr. brown enjoyed smoking. he showed no interest in quitting in the '50s, '60s, '70s, or the '80s, really. when asked to quit in the '80s, he said, you got to die of something. and you know that he never quit. so that brings us back to these two questions -- or this question and this instruction. and this is what this all boils down to: punitive damages may be warranted against philip morris only on your finding by clear and convincing evidence that conduct by philip morris and other cigarette companies concealed on any material information regarding the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a substantial cause of mr. brown's death. and what was left? it was not beginning. it was not becoming a regular smoker. all that was left was they had to prove that to you, by precise, explicit evidence, that he would have quit and quit in time to avoid getting his lung cancer. there is no evidence to support that, much less precise, explicit evidence,. period. now, that does not mean -- so what is the answer to this question on the verdict form? the answer is no. there is no question about that. but that does not mean that mrs. brown and her daughter do not get any money in this case. it does not mean that. i've already told you, please, you are going to give them the $375,000, and i've asked you to give them more money than that. you guys decide the just and fair amount. i'm not to go back through that again. but on the verdict form, when you are given that opportunity, collectively if you guys can decide on a number for each of them, do that. if you can decide on that collectively. if you answer this question no, your work is done -- after you figure out a couple of numbers, if you can. if you answer this question yes, then you have more evidence, more argument, more. but with all this evidence, really and truly, is not the answer to this question -- in light of this instruction, is not the answer no, really? all right. that concludes my closing argument. i'm sure you are happy about that. i've gone on long enough. but mr. brown -- i mean, mr. shields gets to get back up again. why? because he has the burden of proof. he has this burden of proof. and he gets to address you again to try to convince you that in fact he has satisfied this burden of proof. and i do not know what he is going to say, but i just want to leave this thought with you: where was this evidence about mr. brown -- not the general public, not america: mr. brown? thank you. and thank you.