closing statement mr. kaczynski: may it please the court. mrs. brown. counsel. good afternoon. i'm going to start off by doing something very unusual for this trial. i'm going to start off by agreeing with something mr. gerson said. and that is, i want to take this opportunity as well to thank you for your service on this jury. i'm especially taking this opportunity because i'm kind of hoping that this is the last time i speak to you from this podium. brown vol12 1218 because if you check no on the verdict form, then phase i is over; the case is over. if you were to check yes, we will be back for phase ii for the end of this week and as the judge told you, possibly into the beginning of next. but not just for showing up. we have remarked amongst ourselves about how attentive you have been, both to the live witnesses, the videos, everything. my client and mrs. brown could ask for no more. so i take this opportunity to express my appreciation and that of my client. i'm going to speak to you on the issue of addiction and mr. upshaw will speak to you on the medical issues in this case. and the first issue is actually kind of upfront and kind of -- could be case dispositive, and that is this: the judge is going to instruct you that the plaintiffs must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that mr. brown's injuries were caused by his addiction to reynolds cigarettes which contained nicotine. now, you have heard over and over again in this trial, both in argument and from the brown vol12 1219 witness, that mr. brown began smoking at age of 12. now, i've called that family folklore. witnesses have treated it as if it is family history. mr. gerson: objection, your honor, there is a stipulation i believe that covers this. the court: folks, step into the jury room, please. [#deleted proceedings#] the court: thank you. be seated. thank you for championing your cause, sir. thank you for that. you may continue with your argument. mr. kaczynski: thank you, your honor. the court: yes, sir. mr. kaczynski: good afternoon again, and take two. ladies and gentlemen, as i said before, we all heard that what i call the family folklore, what they treat as family history, that mr. brown began smoking at age 12. no one in this trial testified about the circumstances of his smoking at age 12. or quite frankly from brown vol12 1225 age 12 to 21 when he met mrs. brown. we do not know what he smoked for those nine years. we do not know why he smoked. we do not know what manufacturer's brand he smoked for those nine years. there is no evidence in this record at all. you may recall the testimony of a dr. benowitz. we heard a lot about him earlier from mr. gerson. among the things you saw up on the screen, this is in the transcript at page 55, dr. benowitz was asked and he told -- he was asked, and then the final stages, nicotine addiction. and when does that occur? and the answer was, well, that is when they are smoking daily. and especially if they are smoking daily in the absence of friends or social context, where they are really smoking in the context for the effects of nicotine. so let us connect the dots here. by the time he met mrs. brown, mr. brown was smoking daily. she told us that. by the time he met mrs. brown, he would been smoking for nine years. we do not know what he was smoking for those nine years. so i would argue to you that it is a pretty brown vol12 1226 easy route to checking no on that verdict form because the plaintiffs have failed to produce any evidence whatsoever, not the greater weight of the evidence, any evidence whatsoever that mr. brown became addicted to a reynolds product. we have heard a lot of "we just do not knows" in this trial. that is a fundamental one. and that is a fundamental one that ought to effect, in our opinion, how you decide this phase of the trial. now, i could also save a lot of words by calling your attention to the testimony of dr. cummings. dr. cummings was the man from buffalo who testified, he said, against my client about 50 times. this man works for free for plaintiffs' lawyers, writes articles and teaches seminars about how they should try their cases. even he admitted that some people enjoy smoking. "question: there are some smokers who for whatever reason enjoy smoking and do not want to quit. do you agree with that? "answer: there is a segment of the population of smokers that say they enjoy brown vol12 1227 smoking and do not give it up." i heard the argument this morning from mr. gerson, and if i'm accurately paraphrasing it, it is sort of in this day and age of the year 2009, how could anybody be smoking unless they were addicted to nicotine? and i guess this is one fundamental difference between the parties. between the parties, apparently, and dr. cummings. because there are people, and we would contend roger brown was one of them, who smoked and enjoyed it and were not addicted, smoked because they enjoy it. we all know them. people like that sometimes infuriate family members, as mr. brown infuriated or frustrated mrs. brown who did not like the smell of smoke. or the way he frustrated his daughter catherine who was worried about his health. and i suppose it was especially frustrating in a family like the brown's where mr. brown was sort of the undisputed lord of the manor. look what we heard from mrs. brown: "question: but you did not tell mr. brown he cannot smoke in the house; did you? "answer: no, i would never tell him that. brown vol12 1228 "question: that is right, because it is his house, too? "answer: yes. "question: and he would not listen to you anyway, would he? "answer: no." or catherine. "question: and the reason you did not tell him was because he was not going to listen to you about smoking? "answer: i did not say that, sir. "question: i'm asking you right now, ms. ceasar? "answer: no, i did not. "question: do you know why you did not tell him, do you? "answer: it really was not my business, you know. my dad was a grown man. you know, i would not disparage my father like that. "question: and none of you felt it was your place to tell your father what to do, whether it came to smoking or anything else, is not that right? "answer: my dad was a grown man and we respect him. brown vol12 1229 "question: you respected your father. you did not feel it was your place to tell him whether or not he should stop smoking, right? "answer: right." and it must have really been incredibly frustrating when they finally got up the nerve to talk to him about smoking. and what did he do? you heard it here. he ignored them. "question: but when you told your husband to quit smoking that one time -- "answer: yes. "question: and he did not pay any attention to you, did he? "answer: no. "question: you asked him to quit smoking but he ignored you, right? "answer: yes." catherine remembered that he promised her, saying he would try to quit. and dr. cummings tells us he is seen people like that, too, as he testified before you. "question: and some people promise to quit smoking because a loved one is nagging them, right? "answer: that is right." brown vol12 1230 and we all know people like that too. now, whether it is smoking or dieting or drinking or something else. sometimes we want a loved one to do something, and they just will not do it and it frustrates us. and in this case i contend to you that mr. brown was like one of those people who wanted to smoke and he did and who promised his loved ones he would try and quit and he did not. make no mistake about it. mr. brown never really quit smoking. as you were told. "question: he actually did chew some gum for two days, two or three days? "answer: yes. "question: but he did not really stop, did he? "answer: no. no." frustration of his family is understandable. the frustration of his family might be justifiable. it was probably a reflection of the love and concern that they had for this man. and it is pretty clear that if mrs. brown and catherine could have made the choice for mr. brown, that choice would be that he would quit smoking, but it was not their brown vol12 1231 choice to make. it was his. mrs. brown pretty much summed up mr. brown's choices in her testimony. "question: very good. now, mr. brown smoked cigarettes whenever he wanted to, is not that right? "whenever he wanted to? "question: right. "answer: yes. he did." that was his choice. and although now we hear words like addiction being thrown around for purposes of this lawsuit, it was a perfectly logical conclusion for mrs. brown to make that he enjoyed cigarettes and she did make that conclusion. let us take a look. "question: you never talked about -- with him about whether he liked cigarettes, did you? "answer: no. "question: you just assumed he liked cigarettes, right? "answer: yes. "question: i mean, that is what he wanted to do. he wanted to smoke them so -- "answer: yes. brown vol12 1232 "question: so you figured he liked them, right? "answer: yes." and she figured he liked them right up until this lawsuit when the liking became an addiction. but it was perfectly logical for her to think that he liked to smoke. just as, based on the evidence before you, it would be perfectly logical for you to think that he liked to smoke. because from the time he made that first choice to smoke, which is really at an unknown time for an unknown reason with an unknown brand made by an unknown manufacturer, his entire life he never said he wanted to quit. for his entire life he never told anybody that he was addicted or hooked. and for his entire life he never really did anything that would suggest he wanted to quit smoking. and that includes that one time, that one time in 40 years when he was spoken to by his daughter and wife, and mrs. brown told us what happened. "question: at no time did mr. brown quit smoking the whole time you knew him, did he? "answer: no. brown vol12 1233 "question: now, he never went to classes to try to quit smoking? "answer: no. "question: he never did any of that hypnosis stuff? "answer: no. "question: he never went to a doctor to quit smoking, did he? "answer: no. "question: he never tried anything like that patch or that nicotine gum that you buy at the drugstore? "answer: no. "question: he really never did anything to try to quit smoking the whole time you were with him, did he? "answer: no." we heard a little bit about how he continued to smoke after his cancer diagnosis. and we heard why he did that from his daughter. "question: in fact, when you were with mr. brown at the doctor, the doctor told him really no reason for you to stop at this point. do you recall that? "answer: correct. brown vol12 1234 "question: and so he just continued to smoke, right? "answer: he did. "question: and that doctor was dr. bass that you went to see, was not it? "answer: correct." now, dr. cummings, dr. benowitz told you both that the key to quitting is motivation. and as common sense tells you, you do not have a lot of motivation to quit when your own doctor, your treating physician, dr. bass tells you, "do not bother, it is too late." common sense. now, common sense ought to be the real test in this case, and i'm going to get to what i call the common sense test in a bit. but you heard from some experts and from some other tests -- about some other tests. and i want to talk to those -- talk with those -- with you about those. but let me pause here and say a word about our experts because between the cross-examination and some of the remarks that you heard in opening and again in closings, it appears that they are being belittled or their reputations are being challenged. brown vol12 1235 now, it began in opening when you heard that these individuals, all three of them, had been usual testifiers for reynolds. and it is gone on. remember dr. bertino? you were told in opening that he was a usual testifier for reynolds and you found out that was completely false. this is his first trial. the first time on the witness stand for any tobacco company. you remember that in opening we heard that dr. bertino was something like a plastic surgeon who did facelifts and eye jobs. and you learned that that was false. that dr. bertino treats all diseases of the head and neck including esophageal cancer, which is at issue in this case. and apparently dr. bertino is also being criticized for testifying at trials. now, in doing that, of course, we ignore the fact that dr. bertino also works at the audie murphy veterans hospital in san antonio and is affiliated with the brooke army medical center in san antonio. and i would be willing to bet that at both those facilities, whether it is for injured service members or sick veterans, that dr. bertino does not do a brown vol12 1236 lot of eye jobs in those jobs. then there is dr. nichols. we heard about how he is a regular testifier for reynolds and you learned that was not true. this is his first trial. he is given one deposition. this case. now, he was ridiculed because he has a forensic practice where he now testifies on behalf of both plaintiffs and defendants and he said more often plaintiffs than defendants. what is forgotten about dr. nichols is before that he was a public servant for the state of kentucky for 20 years. he set up the state medical examiners office. he built it from scratch. made it work. and at the end of 20 years he retired with a job well done, which is something i think in our heart of hearts all of us would like to do. now he testifies to make a living. and finally dr. tucker, who you just heard a few moments ago was a cheerleader, but who also was accused of regularly testifying for reynolds. you learned that was false. you were told that he regularly finds people nicotine -- or not dependent on nicotine when he does testify. you learned that was false. brown vol12 1237 and he was criticized, too, for his forensic practice. forgetting that dr. tucker treats patients, patients with serious substance abuse problems, above and beyond cigarettes. it ignores his service in mexico where he was teaching. and it ignores the fact that he too set up and ran for years a substance abuse treatment program for veterans in the va hospital in los angeles. he currently treats patients. he currently assists the state medical board of california, the state bar of california, and is called upon by courts to serve as an expert. this is not a cheerleader. this is a man of substance. now, i mention this because i am not going to belittle plaintiffs' experts in my closing. i'm not going to do that. they have admitted forthrightly that they are anti-tobacco crusaders. but these are serious men. these are distinguished men. and these are men who had to concede certain truths of this trial and did. and let us start with dr. benowitz. dr. benowitz gave you a science lesson. but brown vol12 1238 when you cut through the science lesson, there is some things that he told you. now, this ought to look familiar to you because i told you in the beginning of the trial you were going to hear these things from dr. benowitz. and you did. nicotine occurs naturally in the tobacco plant. mother nature put nicotine in tobacco, not r.j. reynolds. it is been known for over 100 years that nicotine was in tobacco. it is been known for 100 years that nicotine has a pharmacological effect on the human body. it is been known for over a hundred years that smoking could be difficult to quit. 60 million smokers have quit, including heavily addicted smokers. 3,000 smokers quit every day. dr. benowitz also told you ninety percent of smokers have quit without help of any kind. without nicotine gum, without the nicotine patch, without joining a smoking cessation program, without medical assistance, without hypnosis, without medications of any kind. so however powerful this drug called nicotine is, it is clearly possible to beat it if you want to. brown vol12 1239 dr. benowitz added a few things. the characteristics of smoking behavior have changed over the years. it used to be called a habit. now it is an addiction or a dependence. the behavior did not change, just the definition. he tells all his patients to quit smoking. it takes motivation, and persistence. any changes in the brain made by nicotine return to normal in a few weeks after quitting. remember you heard before: once an addict, always an addict. not true. not true. per dr. benowitz. dopamine. you heard about dopamine being released in the brain. it is released by smoking; it is released by any pleasurable activity. he told us playing, watching sports, drinking soda, eating chocolate, anything pleasurable releases dopamine. that is not unique to smoking. withdrawal from nicotine, lasting a few days to a week or two. and then you are over it. that is what dr. benowitz told us. now, you also heard from dr. cummings. as i said, he is testified about 50 times against tobacco companies. but dr. cummings told us brown vol12 1240 some things that you ought to know as well. the surgeon general has called smoking an addictive behavior, but the surgeon general who you heard cited earlier, he said the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. that sounds like a choice. and dr. cummings agrees. dr. cummings tells his patients the success rate for smokers who want to quit is one hundred percent. anybody can quit who makes up their mind to do it. and notwithstanding what the surgeon general's report says about cigarette smoking and nicotine being like cocaine and heroin, dr. cummings says pharmacological effects of nicotine are not comparable to the euphoria caused by heroin and cocaine. and finally, the body begins to repair itself as soon as you stop smoking. dr. cummings, as you heard, treats people for smoking cessation. and he told us in the video, a slide that -- about a slide he shows his patients when they first walk in the door. this is the slide. what it takes to quit smoking. and i'm just going to stop at one: a sincere desire to quit smoking. dr. cummings brown vol12 1241 says it requires a sincere desire to quit smoking. in the evidence in this case, on the whole, did you ever, ever see a desire to quit smoking on the part of mr. brown? i contend you did not. so, forget the fagerstrom test. forget dsm-iv. under the cummings test, the plaintiffs' expert's test, mr. brown is not addicted. he never had a sincere desire to quit smoking, and he certainly never wanted to quit smoking. now, you heard about some other tests. you heard about the fagerstrom test and you remember how drs. benowitz and cummings both talked about how they were good buddies with dr. -- with mr. carl fagerstrom who dreamed up this test. and apparently plaintiffs are going to ask you to sort of serve as either a psychologist or a psychiatrist or a smoking cessation counselor and you are going to decide the diagnosis, based on the fagerstrom test, whether or not mr. brown was addicted. but dr. benowitz says if you did that,, you would be making a mistake. because brown vol12 1242 dr. benowitz says that he, well, here it is. "you testified specifically about the fagerstrom test for nicotine dependence. yes. okay. "question: it is not typically used as a test to determine whether the person is or is not addicted, right? "answer: yes." dr. tucker told you it is the wrong test, but forget dr. tucker. plaintiffs' expert, dr. benowitz, says it is the wrong test. that is not what it is used for. if you used it, if you were to use it you would be using the wrong test. and this kind of makes sense. because you heard what some of the elements of the test are. and for example, if you -- what difference does it make when you smoke your first cigarette, if you smoke it because you want to rather than because you have to? if you do it because you want to, you are blowing the fagerstrom test but you are not addicted. you are just doing what you want. it tells us nothing about addiction. now, dr. tucker is the only psychiatrist brown vol12 1243 you heard from in this trial. the only one. dr. benowitz is a cardiologist. dr. cummings is not even a medical doctor or even a psychologist. dr. tucker is the only expert in human behavior that you heard from in this trial. and let us not forget that dr. tucker is the only substance abuse professional you heard from in this trial who uttered the words roger brown. you did not hear if from dr. benowitz; you did not hear it from dr. cummings. for them, mr. brown was a forgotten man. carl fagerstrom got mentioned twice but roger brown never got mentioned at all. and dr. tucker used the dsm-iv just this -- or yesterday afternoon to diagnose mr. brown; he is not nicotine addicted, not nicotine dependent. now, it is important to realize that dsm-iv, that book, is not something that was dreamed up by dr. tucker for purposes of this trial. it was not dreamed up by dr. tucker at all. this was a serious volume arrived at by serious people, psychiatrists from all over the united states, meeting under the auspices of the american psychiatric association. they put brown vol12 1244 this book together. and i learn now not to call it the bible of the psychiatric profession. but it is a very important volume. it is a very serious volume. and dr. tucker told you that to be diagnosed as nicotine dependent is a serious thing. because that volume diagnoses mental illnesses. to call somebody nicotine dependent or addicted is to say they are suffering from a brand of mental illness. that is serious business. so when you diagnose somebody as nicotine dependent or addicted, it is not the same as telling, say, oh, i'm addicted to video games or american idol or chocolate or jogging or whatever. it is serious. and these people, these professionals that put it together, the men and women of the american psychiatric association took it seriously when they put together the criteria that determined whether or not someone is nicotine dependent. it uses medical and scientific terms, but the bottom line it basically codifies or embodies common sense. let us take a look at factors. dr. tucker took you through these yesterday. and he brown vol12 1245 applied them to roger brown, again the only person who did that. and he diagnosed mr. brown as not nicotine dependent. he looked you in the eye and told you why. and as we look at factors to be reminded, first of all, a key to the diagnosis -- before you go any further, if you are going to label somebody nicotine dependent or addicted, they have to have clinically significant impairment or distress. and as you heard from dr. tucker, mr. brown had none. smoking was simply not a problem for him. a key to the diagnosis is withdrawal. mr. brown had none. a key to the diagnosis is losing control over your smoking, smoking more than you want to over a longer period of time. and he never did. a key to the diagnosis, a persistent desire to quit smoking. and i think we can all agree mr. brown never had any desire to quit smoking. a key to the diagnosis is whether there are unsuccessful attempts to quit or cut down, and the best we got here was one that you heard in opening from plaintiffs' counsel was brown vol12 1246 halfhearted. and in that attempt mr. brown was not unsuccessful because we now know he never even tried. he never stopped smoking because he never wanted to. a key to the diagnosis is whether he was a chain smoker, and in a pack to slightly more than a pack a day, he was not. now, bear in mind, mr. brown, the life he led, he could smoke anywhere he wanted to. he did not work in a building or in a facility that -- where he could not smoke, such that he could only smoke on breaks or before work or after work. he smoked in his house. he smoked when he did his farming. he smoked when he visited with his friends on weekends. he could smoke any time he wanted as much as he wanted. but this man throughout his entire life only smoked about a pack a day. for a man with mr. brown's lifestyle, that does not make him a chain smoker. a key to the diagnosis is whether your activities are affected by your smoking, and in mr. brown's case they were not. did not affect his marriage. did not affect his relationship brown vol12 1247 with his children. did not affect his jobs. and of course, the last one when he smoked despite his cancer diagnosis. we know why -- we heard from his family -- his doctors told him it was okay. this is it. this is the only test you heard of in this whole trial that was designed by professionals, that is used by professionals everyday to determine whether or not someone is addicted or dependent on nicotine. and from the only professional on that subject who took the stand and talked about it regarding roger brown, you were told that he was not addicted to cigarettes; he was not nicotine dependent. so again, when you get that verdict form, you should check no. you know, there is another piece to this puzzle, and oddly enough it was introduced by the plaintiff. let us listen again -- mr. gerson made reference to this earlier -- let us listen again to jim johnston, the ceo of r.j. reynolds in 1994. (thereupon, the videoclip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability:) brown vol12 1248 "chairman: mr. johnston, if you will pull the microphone in front of you. "good morning, mr. chairman, members of the subcommittee. again, i am jim johnston, chairman and chief executive officer of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. "much of the recent controversy surrounding our products has focused on our use of various techniques that help us reduce the tar and nicotine yields of our products. let me be clear. we could stop using those techniques. we could chop up the tobacco and roll it in paper, but the consequence of doing that would be a return to the 1940s when the average cigarette yielded 40 milligrams of tar, 2.8 milligrams of nicotine. that would increase the tar and nicotine in our cigarettes by three to 400 percent. i trust this committee would not endorse such an effort as a matter of public policy." okay. there is two sides of that. it tells you the tar and nicotine levels were a lot higher in the 1940s than they were in 1994 when mr. johnston was here testifying. it also tells you that the tar and nicotine levels, if brown vol12 1249 they were 400 percent higher in the 1940s, were one quarter of the level of the 1940s in the 1950s. tar and nicotine levels over the years went down dramatically. that is what he just said. now, we learned that mr. brown smoked about a pack a day for as long as anybody knew him, from the 1950s to the 1990s. but now we also know that as he did that, the tar -- the nicotine level in particular in cigarettes was going down. such that by the time he reached the 1990s, it was one quarter of what it was in the 1940s. so if it is true, if you buy the claim plaintiffs are making, that mr. brown was smoking for the nicotine, if you buy what mr. gerson said earlier about dr. benowitz saying a person gets to a certain level of nicotine and that is what their requirement is, then mr. brown should have been smoking a whole lot more cigarettes to get that nicotine in the 1990s than he was in the 1940s. because as his cigarette consumption was steady, the nicotine level was dropping. and if he is smoking for the nicotine, would not it make sense that as brown vol12 1250 the nicotine level in each cigarette he smoked went down, that the number of cigarettes he would smoke would go up? just common sense. if he is smoking for the nicotine, he is going to have to smoke more cigarettes to get that same nicotine. but guess what, he did not. he did not. he smoked a pack of cigarettes a day as long as people knew him. what does this tell you? it tells you he smoked not for the nicotine but because he enjoyed it. he smoked not out of addiction, but out of choice. nicotine did not have ahold of his brain and dictate his actions. his life was not driven by it. if it was, if it was, he would have smoked more and more as the nicotine in each cigarette became less and less. but that did not happen. another piece of evidence that mr. brown smoked, not because he had to, but because he wanted to. and finally before i turn the floor over to mr. upshaw, i'm going to make up a test. and it is really the test i think we all should employ. it is the common sense test. and the common sense test goes like this. take a look at all the facts in the case. and it says, if brown vol12 1251 someone says they never -- never say that they want to quit, if someone never really tries to quit, and never tells anybody else that they want to quit or never tells anybody else that they are addicted or hooked, and whose wife, the closest person in the world to him, believes all her life until this lawsuit that he is smoking because he likes it, then does not the common sense test tell us that we should respect the choices that man made in his life? you have heard from the testimony of his wife and his daughter that mr. brown was a strong man. he did what he wanted when he wanted. he was the lord of his house. he was not a victim in life. and this lawsuit should not make him a victim in death. he never second-guessed his decision to smoke. he decided for whatever reason to smoke, whenever he decided, on whatever cigarette he decided and he never looked back. the common sense test tells us that by checking no on the verdict form, you are respecting mr. brown, you are respecting the choices that he made, and you are not making a victim of a strong and proud man. brown vol12 as i said when i opened, i'll say now as i close, this case is about roger brown and the choices he made. and with that i'll turn it over to my colleague, mr. upshaw. thank you for your attention. 1253 closing statement mr. upshaw: let me set up this other easel real quickly. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. thank you for your wrapped attention all day today. i'm going to try to make it as brief as possible so we can move forward in this process. but what i'm going to talk to you about is really part two of the two-part question. and the only reason you get to part two of a two-part question is that if you find roger brown was addicted to cigarettes. now, mr. kaczynski just talked about that. and i in fact agree with everything that he just said. but you know, i would be remiss if i did not go ahead and tell you what our position is with regard to part two of that question. so let me discuss why we believe the plaintiff has failed to prove the second fact issue, and that is: were roger brown's injuries caused by his addiction to smoke? there is one key that you want to remember throughout when we talk about the testimony. brown vol12 1254 can you all see that? burden of proof. you heard it. you heard it during voir dire. i talked about it. you heard it during opening statements. and you are going to hear it again during the judge's instructions. this is the second question. were roger brown's injuries caused by his addiction to smoking, or in other words, very simply, did mr. brown's smoking cause his esophageal cancer or the cancer that was found in his lungs? well, what was the evidence? fairly short. you had -- this is the sixth day we have been in trial. and this was the evidence. you saw medical records. you heard from dr. bertino. remember the medical records we have talked about over and over again? you have seen them in detail. mr. gerson's reviewed them. i've reviewed them. i'm not going to discuss each and every record with you again at length. thankfully. we do not have to go back through the trial all over again. and you will have those records with you when you deliberate. so if you want to review them, please do so. you heard from dr. bertino, the brown vol12 1255 otolaryngologist, head and neck surgeon. treats 20 esophageal cancers a year. this was his area of the body. this is where he practices. remember he drew the graph. and we are going to get back to that graph. i think that graph may even be here. he drew this graph. remember how he told you how esophageal cancer is going up, but that the incidence of smoking has been going down. okay. he is the one that came in and told you that. he is the one that came in and taught you the anatomy. you remember this illustration. dr. bertino talked to you about this, showed you where the esophagus was. where the lungs are located. pointed out to you that mr. brown's cancer was located right here in the midsection of the esophagus. and you have heard other testimony, i'm not going to pull those records up again, how that cancer was along the midsection and it was ulcerated. i mean it was pretty bad stuff. and how it was adjacent to the cancer that was found in the right lower lobe, right there. brown vol12 1256 remember how he said this space in there there is a common wall; how the cancer in the esophagus was adjacent to where they found the cancer in the lung. now, you heard from dr. nichols. who was dr. nichols? board certified forensic pathologist. the guy who does this type of thing as his profession. and you heard mr. kaczynski talk about him. i'm not going to belabor the point. but he was a medical examiner for 20 years. it was his job to come into court and tell folks why people passed away. what the cause of their particular demise was. and then lastly, you heard from dr. patel. now, unfortunately dr. patel was asked to do quite a bit in this trial. you all know that he was the only medical doctor that had anything to say about the treatment of mr. brown. he only saw mr. brown twice. once when he decided to do the bronchoscopy, and then the next day when he actually did the diagnostic test. you recall he never diagnosed mr. brown with cancer back in 1993. he did not even know brown vol12 1257 that mr. brown had esophageal cancer until march of 2009. but he did his best, folks. he did his best to testify for all of the doctors who were involved. and we are going to talk about that a little bit. but he did his best to stand in the place of every single doctor that saw roger brown during his hospital stay. and in fact, even tried to stand in the place of dr. bass and talk about the death certificate as well. and that is it. that is the sum and substance total of testimony and evidence you have about whether or not mr. brown's esophageal cancer or the cancer in his lung was caused by smoking. now, remember this. we, reynolds, the defense, does not have a burden of proof. the plaintiff has the burden of proof. and because they have the burden of proof, that is why they got to go first. that is why they got to put their evidence on first. and that is in fact why they got to close first and then come back and talk to you again. they have this very heavy burden. it does not say the assumption of proof, the burden brown vol12 1258 of proof in this case. now, he did not bring you dr. bass. okay. they have the burden of proof. he was the treating physician. he was the guy who saw mr. brown more than anyone before he died. he did not bring you dr. alvarez. who is he? he is the pathologist. put the pathology report's up there but you did not hear from dr. alvarez. were we supposed to bring dr. alvarez? no. reynolds did not have the burden of proof in this case. dr. singh. dr. patel had to interpret what dr. singh meant. and this is what i think his words mean -- and this is how i would read them -- as a pulmonologist. but remember dr. patel is a pulmonologist but not a gastroenterologist. not his area of expertise. did not bring dr. singh in for you. did not bring in the oncologist. okay. they had no x-rays. no ct scans. no pathology. and as mr. gerson agreed, there was no autopsy in this case. the only evidence presented to you is that the cause of mr. brown's cancer was dr. patel. and what did dr. patel say? the best that brown vol12 1259 dr. patel could do when he sat at that witness stand, he says it is highly probable. highly probable. folks, when you came upstairs on this floor after lunch, you used that bank of elevators, four elevators, right, and when you go home tonight, it is highly probable that you are going to use one of those elevators. but right now, none of you can say with certainty which elevator you are going to use. when we get the risk factors you will see that it was a number of risk factors for esophageal cancer but there was not enough evidence to say which of those risk factors could potentially be the cause. i'm giving you a little teaser where we are going. now, how highly probable is the best that dr. patel could do. and in fact, mr. gerson said that in his opening. dr. patel cannot say it was one hundred percent but he says it is probable. in fact he repeated here in his closing statement to you. and i agree. i agree with something else that mr. gerson said in his opening. he said, brown vol12 1260 there is a lot of information that we do not have about this case. that is the truest fact of all the facts you heard. there is a lot of information that we do not have. but we are sitting here in a courtroom and you are going to be tasked as the triers of fact, the judges of fact. as mr. kaczynski said when he started, we stand up for you because you are the judges of fact. we stand up for judge streitfeld because he is the judge of the law. and because of that, you do not have enough information in this case. now, let us look at briefly why we contend that there is not enough information, simply not enough proof that -- to say that mr. brown's injuries, his cancer was caused by smoking. let us look at the medical records really quick. there is -- was not one medical record, not one, which said that either mr. brown's esophageal cancer or that the cancer that was found in his lung was caused by smoking. now, in 1993 they were not trying to determine the cause of mr. brown's cancer. he was in the emergency room. they were trying to brown vol12 1261 treat him. they were trying to provide him with some treatment for what they found was ailing him. and so cause was not the issue. so what does that mean? that means certain tests were not run, other things were not done, and in fact, certain specimens were not kept. now, on this point mr. gerson agrees. he wishes that stuff was here because that would be evidence. but unfortunately, it is not. and because it is not, we contend you cannot find that mr. brown's cancer was caused by smoking. all right. i got to do it. i got to go through a few of the records. you know i could not not go through the records, because i want to show you briefly in 1993 that there was in fact some confusion. and the confusion was: what was the real cause? well, he was admitted on january 23rd, 1993. there were four issues that were brought up by his admitting physician. i'm not going to belabor these. four issues, one of them, the lung lesion to rule out cancer. no. 3 was the enlarged liver and the prostrate and the abdominal pain. brown vol12 1262 the next day they did a study, right. and they found out the left adrenal gland suspicious for metastatic spread of disease. someone's questioning that there is a spread of this disease. this consult from 1/24/93, this is actually the consult that dr. bass gave to dr. patel. and it asked him to check out whether or not -- check the lung mass and adrenal mets. adrenal metastasis. we do not know where it is going; they do not know. please, somebody check it out. okay. so dr. patel brought in as the pulmonologist, the lung specialist, and that is it. remember i asked him, what was your job? his job was to determine what it was. they saw a mass on an x-ray and his job was to find out what it was. so, he noted it was an enlarged left adrenal grand, possibly malignancy, possibly cancer, possible metastatic disease. i'm not showing you these because they knew whether it was metastatic from the lung to the esophagus or the esophagus to the lung or the esophagus to the adrenal gland. in 1993 the question was, this guy has some cancer brown vol12 1263 going on, and we need to figure out where it is and where it is spreading to. liver's enlarged. there has been discussion about why his liver has been enlarged. why it is not. we will get to that. the liver plays one role in this case. one role. and that is when we start talking about whether or not mr. brown drank enough alcohol to make a difference as a risk factor for his esophageal cancer, we do not have to look any further than right there. because there was not a doctor you heard from that did not say, the main cause for an enlarged liver is alcohol use, excessive alcohol use. we will get back to that. 1/27, i know mr. gerson said we are going to select records, but i'm following right in line here, folks. we do not have to go over every particular record. but what i'm pointing out to you is, 1, probable metastasis. do not know whether the primary is gastrointestinal, okay, or bronchiogenic. that is right. to the lungs. okay. what does this note say? you have seen this note i think four times now. need oncology brown vol12 1264 evaluation and full metastatic workup. this note's saying we need to find out where the cancer is spreading and where it came from. again, 1/28, need full staging. we need this. 1/29, possible metastasis to lung and adrenal gland. okay. possible metastasis to lung, we do not know; adrenal gland, we do not know. we need to find out. that is what they are saying in '93. 1/27, dr. singh. we do not have to have this interpreted. it is typed up. mild esophageal ulcerative mass. rule out esophageal primary, rule out lung carcinoma primary to the esophagus. does dr. singh know where this is starting and where it is going? he is saying let us rule it out. and then finally, dr. bass making the determination on the official record, the death certificate, that it was the esophageal cancer which caused mr. brown's demise. the one thing that we can be sure of is that there was not a doctor who saw mr. brown in 1993 who could tell whether or not the esophageal cancer spread to the lungs. there brown vol12 1265 was not one doctor in 1993 who could say that the lung cancer spread to the esophagus. there is not one doctor in 1993 who said, i'm sure that there were two primaries. not one. because that was not what they were trying to do back then. they were really trying to find out where the cancer's gone and how do we treat it. now, mr. brown after getting all the information determined that he did not want treatment. and that is fine, and extremely understandable that he and his family would make that decision. but when we go to look back, which is what we are doing today, 16 years later, we do not have the information to make that decision today. well, the metastasis question is a big question in this case. okay. and what did the people you heard from have to say about metastasis? dr. patel -- fortunately, dr. patel gave no opinion. dr. patel never said, i think in my opinion that it was metastasis from one part to the other part. he did a lot. he read and interpreted every single record that mr. gerson put in front of him. he did his best to stand brown vol12 1266 in the shoes of each and every one of those treating physicians and he pointed out the opinions of dr. singh. but dr. singh was not here to give you those opinions. those were dr. patel's interpretations. but most importantly, with regard to metastasis, this is what dr. patel said. mr. gerson's question was: "question: in your experience, does large cell lung cancer become esophageal cancer or become squamous cell cancer or does squamous cell cancer become large cell cancer?" and he had to admit: "answer: at times, it does." you recall this testimony. dr. bertino was grilled, grilled on how can you say that if there is squamous cell in the esophagus that there could be large cell in the lung and that it transferred, that it was a metastasis from squamous cell to large cell? and dr. bertino explained that to you. he explained how that common wall, one was infiltrating, and that when they metastasize, when the cancer metastasizes, it becomes, i think his word was, "wild". right? brown vol12 1267 dr. patel had to agree. dr. bertino. he said that esophageal primary -- the esophageal cancer was primary with a spread to the lung. and how did he come to that conclusion? this is a man who this is his practice area, right, 35, 36 years, this is his practice area. 1 percent. 1 percent chance that there are two primaries at the same time. i think the words come up a couple of times "synchronous." 99 percent chance that it is a spread. and what else did he say? he said when he does an endoscopic study, when someone comes in with esophageal cancer in his office, he checks everything else in the area of the digestive tract because he knows where there is one, there most likely is a spread somewhere else. and where did he say that spread most commonly happens? it happens to the right lower lobe of the lung. the last thing he talked about was that there was a small sample size. remember we talked about how much sample you get from the esophagus biopsy versus the size of the sample brown vol12 1268 from the lung biopsy. it makes sense. i'm sure dr. patel took the amount that he needed to make a diagnosis of cancer. remember, dr. patel was not doing a biopsy at that point in 1993 to determine whether or not the cause of the cancer was smoking. the biopsy he took was the biopsy he needed at the time. what was dr. patel trying to find out? was this cancer or was it not? and so that is what the pathologist gave him. and he told him what that sample said. dr. patel was not trying to find out the cause of the cancer. and lastly on this issue, dr. nichols. dr. nichols also said that in his opinion and in his review of the records the esophageal cancer was primary with spread to the lung. again, rare to have two primaries. now, this is from two different fields, right, because dr. nichols is the pathologist, the guy who reads the slides, and dr. bertino is the otolaryngologist, head and neck surgeon. the presentation of the esophageal tumor. it was major to him that it was ulcerated. i guess that means something to him. but when he saw that, he said, well, that is a classic brown vol12 1269 presentation of primary esophageal cancer. lung to esophagus, very rare. different cell types. does not mean they are different. and he also pointed out the small size of the sample. now, there is one thing that mr. gerson brought up. do you have the surgeon general one here? mr. gerson: yes. mr. upshaw: mr. brown was diagnosed in january of 1993. he passed away in august of 1993, eight months. remember there was testimony about what did that mean. dr. bertino talked to you that an esophageal cancer it grows a little slower, right, than a lung cancer. well, look what also was mentioned. patients live five years after diagnosis and most die within six months if smoking is involved. if the cause is smoking. that is exactly what they are talking about. now, if the cause was something else, does that mean you are going to live a little longer? yes. that is what that means. so looking at the greater weight of the brown vol12 1270 evidence, you are going to hear that term. it is going to be in the instructions, the greater weight of the evidence, the greater weight of the evidence here leads us to the conclusion that, one, the esophageal cancer was primary and that the lung cancer or the cancer found in the lung, said most appropriately the cancer found in the lung, was spread or metastasized from the esophageal cancer. now, if we establish that the primary cancer was the esophageal cancer, now we have to look at what was the cause of the esophageal cancer. and as we discussed, the medical records really do not help us in that sense. so what happened? what happened in this trial is there were three doctors who now had to take a look back. dr. patel was asked to do so in march 2009. dr. nichols did so and dr. bertino did so. they all had to look back. now, dr. bertino used his expertise in head and neck surgery to take his look back. and his conclusion, after looking at all of the medical records, from his point of view as a head and neck surgeon was very clear. there brown vol12 1271 was not enough evidence to conclude that mr. brown's esophageal cancer was caused or was substantially contributed to by his smoking. now, how did he come to that conclusion? he said there was not enough evidence. why? because you have to take into account all the risk factors. right. let me show you that. this was the chart dr. bertino showed you. it was shown to dr. patel as well. these four are the major risk factors. now, i know that plaintiffs' counsel tried to discount all of these. and in fact, there are many here at the end that do not apply to mr. brown. but those are the 25 risk factors that must be taken into account. must be taken into account when you are trying to determine what the cause of a single person's esophageal cancer was. all right. alcohol use. we know the one key piece of evidence was in the medical record. does not take anybody to testify to it. you do not have to believe anything anyone ever said from that stand. the one record that makes a difference is the enlarged liver. the enlarged liver. a sign that every doctor says brown vol12 1272 is indicative of excessive alcohol use. but we do not have to stop there. each of the experts were able to look at deposition testimony and come to the conclusion after their reading deposition testimony from family and friends, that there was excessive alcohol use. burden of proof. we do not have the burden of proof here. we do not have to bring those family and friends, people in. remember when they were asked they had a rebuttal case, and they wanted to refute anything that dr. bertino said or dr. nichols said or dr. tucker said, the burden of proof is theirs. you did not see one of those family members come in after those doctors stood up and said -- mr. gerson: your honor, i object to -- the court: sustained. mr. upshaw: so alcohol use is a valid risk factor. dr. bertino talked about reflux. he told you about the zantac. he referred to that record that said no reflux disease found. told you that was not indicative of reflux, that you did not have to find it on a particular test, that there were better tests. i asked brown vol12 1273 dr. patel, are there better tests? there is another test that they could use. he had also been taking that zantac for what, three days between the time that was done. i do not know how zantac works, but i cannot assume that he did not have reflux or that it was not a viable risk factor for esophageal cancer. yes. tobacco use. he smoked for 40 years. yes. dr. bertino said it is one of the risk factors. and hpv. you are right. first thing i thought was there is nothing in the medical records that says hpv. but why can we not discount it? because back in 1993 this was not, one, something they would have looked for, and two, it is the only -- only risk factor that we know that there is a dna marker for. so if we had the stuff that mr. gerson wishes we had, and that we wish we had, we could test for it. but today in this court we cannot discount hpv. okay. we cannot discount poor oral hygiene. you cannot discount that he was african-american. you cannot discount that he was male. you cannot discount occupational brown vol12 1274 exposure. dr. bertino could not discount chemical exposure either because he did not know how -- where miss brown worked or what she did at the dry cleaner. but she told us she did pressing work. okay. that may or may not have been any chemical exposure, but we know that there was some occupational exposure, potential occupational exposure, so we cannot discount that. where does all of this go? it all goes to the simple fact that there is not enough evidence. there is not enough evidence to show that smoking was a cause or a substantial contributing factor to mr. brown's esophageal cancer. now, dr. patel, again, carrying a lot of weight, okay, he only had the hospital records to come to his conclusion. and he did not have the opportunity to even look at the radiology, which he would have, of the lungs, so he could make some other determination, or the pathology to send to some pathologist at his hospital. he did not have that. who was the best person, the best person brown vol12 1275 to take a look back out of the three doctors? well, there was one guy who was called that that was his job for 20 years for the state of kentucky, dr. nichols. it was his job to always take a look back and determine why someone passed from life to death. he did it for airplane crashes, he did it for bus accidents, and he did it right here in this case. he took the same evidence, the same materials he takes in any criminal case he used to do as a medical examiner, in any criminal or civil case that he does now as a private citizen, and he took that and he gave us his opinion. and his opinion was that, i do not have enough evidence. i do not have enough evidence to give you an opinion why mr. brown passed from life to death. why esophageal cancer caused his demise. that is a tough position for a medical examiner to say, "i do not know." because that is basically what he had to say, is "i do not know." so what are you left to work with? what do you have? well, you have the evidence, you are going to have the medical records, you are brown vol12 1276 going to have the testimony that you heard from the stand and from the screen, and you are going to have the judge's instructions. and i want to walk through just two of the instructions that you are going to get, and discuss how we believe those instructions apply to the evidence in your deliberations. let me move first to instruction no. 2 and i'm going to put it on the elmo here. okay. this is instruction no. 2, and this is going to be believability of any witness. and you will not have to read it later. you do not have to read it now. the judge is going to read it to you. but i want to point out a few things for you. one of the things on the believability of any witness and the weight given to that testimony is the intelligence of the witness, what the witness may have in the outcome of the case, and the ability of the witness to remember matters, and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness. from our experts what is most important is there are some separate things that you want to take into account on opinion testimony on certain technical subjects. that is dr. tucker, brown vol12 1277 dr. nichols, dr. bertino and dr. patel. you can reject it. or you can give it the weight you think it deserves considering these factors: knowledge, skill, experience, training or education. okay. when you look at what the greater weight of the evidence was in this case, and you apply the believability of the witness, and you understand that two very well-known, very schooled, very educated doctors had to come in and tell you they cannot give you an opinion as to the cause, that goes a long way to the frankness and believability of those particular witnesses. let me also show you one other instruction. i'll put that one up here. there you go. i got it. okay. this is prejudice and sympathy. and this is the area that i want to concentrate on. not to be swayed from the performance of your duty by presence, sympathy or any sentiment for or against any party. and most importantly, your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received and the law on which i have instructed you. the evidence that brown vol12 1278 has been received. it is our contention that on the evidence that you have received, there is insufficient proof. and that shows up on how you answer this last question, which is right here. the verdict form which you have not seen yet. all right. that is the question. that is the piece of paper you are going to have with you when you walk back into the jury room. was roger brown addicted to reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine? that is the first part. mr. kaczynski talked about that. and if so, was such an addiction a legal cause of mr. brown's death. from all you have heard, from all we have talked about, from all we have summarized, the answer to that particular question, we believe, is no. now, this is the last opportunity that mr. kaczynski and i get to speak to you before you deliberate. mr. gerson, as i said, gets another opportunity to talk to you because he has the burden of proof. the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. and he will stand up and talk to you a little bit more. what i would like you to do and what i ask brown vol12 1279 you to do is that when mr. gerson is talking, i want you to think to yourselves, because we do not get a chance to do it, we do not get a chance to respond to what he says, what would kaczynski and upshaw have to say. for everything he says, think what would we have to say to that. what would reynolds have to say to that? challenge his responses and ask him the question, where is the evidence? not what am i supposed to leap to? not i should make this assumption. where is the evidence? when you do that you are going to find that the answer to that question is no. i also want to thank you for your time. thank you for your focus. thank you for your attention. realize this has been a long day. it is almost over. and again, on behalf of reynolds and on behalf of ms. brown, we appreciate your time. without you our justice system would not work. thank you.