ms. gallagher: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. there is no 4 doubt in this case that ms. brown has suffered significant 5 injury. and it would be natural to feel sympathy for her. 6 but the judge is going to instruct you that you cannot decide 7 this case on sympathy, that you have to decide it on the 8 facts as you see them and the law as he gives it to you. 9 that is how you decide this case. i think in deciding the facts of this case, you need to separate out the litigation world from the real world, the world that donna brown lived in. so, for example, in the litigation world, the plaintiff's attorneys would have you believe that philip morris fooled and confused people about the dangers of smoking. but in donna brown's world, she knew by the time she was 18 that smoking was dangerous. in fact, in donna brown's world, the first time she picked up a cigarette it already had a warning on it. in the litigation world, the plaintiffs would have you believe that everybody starts smoking because of advertisements. in the real world, ms. brown told you that she does not remember much about ads back then. she could tell you that she remembers the marlboro man and a saddle and that that did not have any effect on her deciding to 1659 1 smoke. 2 in the litigation world, they brought you a paid 3 historian, who knows nothing about ms. brown, to tell you 4 that some people were fooled about the health risks of 5 smoking. but what do you know about ms. brown's world? she 6 told you that for as long as she could remember she knew 7 that smoking was bad for you and she believed it. she 8 was not fooled by anything philip morris said. 9 in the litigation world, the plaintiff's brought you an expert to say that ms. brown's smoking was a substantial cause of her pvd, an expert who said she could not rule in or rule out any other risk factors because she had not seen them. in the real world, you heard from dr. harding, ms. brown's treating doctor who has treated her for over 20 years, who could not tell you that smoking was a substantial cause of ms. brown's pvd. in the litigation world, ms. brown is severely addicted, according to an expert they brought you. in the real world, you will hear that ms. brown smoked for reasons other than nicotine and that when ms. brown finally decided she was ready to quit, she did. and when dr. kyriakoudes came to you, their paid expert in the litigation world, he talked to you about a lot of historical evidence. you saw pictures of all sorts of people smoking, you saw a lot of ads. and he brought all this to you and talked about statements that were made by 2 philip morris, statements that were made by tobacco industry 3 groups. but the one thing that dr. kyriakoudes did not do 4 was to link any of that evidence he brought you to 1660 5 ms. brown. 6 and you know that he is done that before, because 7 he told you while he was testifying that there are cases 8 where the plaintiff's lawyers say, hey, dr. kyriakoudes, 9 would you please review this information about this smoker and give us your opinions about this smoker in the context of all this testimony you just gave to the jury? and they could have asked him to do that in this case, but they did not. and the reason they did not ask him to do it is because he could not connect what he was talking about to ms. brown. there is simply no link. now, we brought you a bunch of historical evidence, too, and you might have been asking yourself why are they doing this? what does this have to do with ms. brown. the question i told you to ask in opening, what does this have to do with ms. brown. we brought you that, because if you listen to the plaintiff's lawyers and their expert, you would think that the tobacco companies were the only voice out there about smoking and health in the '50s and '60s and '70s and '80s and on. and that is why we brought you that evidence, so that you could see that there were other people, lots of other people, the government, the 1661 2 public health community, newspapers, magazines, talking 3 about the health risks of smoking, talking about the 4 addictive nature of smoking, so that you would get the 5 complete picture, so that you would know everything that was 6 going on during this time period and not think that the 7 tobacco companies were the only people talking about this, 8 so that you could get the whole story. 9 so let us look at your specific questions that you are going to be asked to decide in this case and see how those facts apply to ms. brown. question no. 1, question no. 1 was, was donna brown addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? now, you will notice when you read -- when the judge reads you the instructions that there is no definition of addiction. and in fact, you will remember dr. werner telling you, remember from the surgeon general's report, that there is no consensus, there is no agreement, as to how you define or diagnose addiction. that is something for you-all to decide. and you have to decide whether the plaintiff has proved that she was addicted, because she has the burden of proof, just like they told you. now, in the litigation world, ms. brown's lawyers want you to believe that she was addicted to nicotine, that she was severely addicted to nicotine. but you know from 1662 1 listening to the plaintiff's own witnesses that ms. brown 2 was smoking for reasons other than nicotine. and how do you 3 know that? well, you know that from dr. werner, because 4 dr. werner told you that within 24 to 48 hours, one to two 5 days, of not smoking, any withdrawal effects -- or the 6 nicotine is out of someone's system in 24 to 48 hours. in 7 ten to 14 days, the withdrawal symptoms, the anxiousness, 8 nervousness, in ten to 14 days the withdrawal symptoms are 9 gone. and then she talked about all those brain receptors, but she told you that in two to four weeks all those brain receptors are back to normal. and what you will see when you look through the medical records is that there were numerous, numerous times that ms. brown was hospitalized for more than ten days, meaning that by the time that she got out of the hospitalizations, all the nicotine was long gone from her system and any withdrawal symptoms she had would have been over. and so she picked up cigarettes again not for the nicotine, but for some other reason. and you will see that there were a couple of times she was in the hospital for two months, one time for 59, 60 days, another time for more than that. by that time not only was all the nicotine out of her system, the withdrawal symptoms gone, but these brain receptors that dr. werner talked about were now completely back to normal. so she 1663 1 was not picking up cigarettes for the nicotine. 2 what are some other examples? when ms. brown 3 was -- told you about the quits when you heard about the 4 times that she tried to quit, you heard about the nicotine 5 patch. you heard about the gum. you also heard that while 6 she was taking the patch and while she was taking the gum, 7 she was still smoking. and dr. werner told you, remember 8 the whole way the patch works, you put a patch on and you 9 pick the milligram of the patch depending on how much you smoke. it says on the box if you smokeless than 25 cigarettes, use this patch. if you smoke more than that, use a different patch. you put it on, and as dr. werner told you, that gives you the same amount of nicotine that you would have if you smoked what you regularly smoked, whether it is a pack a day, pack and a half. it is giving you the nicotine. and so when ms. brown was using the patch and using the gum, she was not smoking for the nicotine, because as dr. werner told you, she already had all that. it was in her system. and you know that because of what ms. smith told you. remember ms. smith said that when they would use the gum or use the patch, they would have so much nicotine in their system that their heart would start racing and it would be kind of scary, getting double the amount of nicotine that she got on a regular basis. 1664 1 dr. werner told you that fifty percent of the people 2 who smoke are addicted. and the plaintiff has to prove to 3 you that she was one of those people. there were other 4 reasons she was smoking other than nicotine. and whether it 5 was to relieve stress, whether it was because she enjoyed 6 the social aspects of it, whatever it was, she had other 7 reasons for smoking. 8 so let us look at the second question you will be 9 given. the second question is: was donna brown's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her peripheral vascular disease? and this question is different, because it is not asking you if she was addicted. that is the first question. this question is asking you was that addiction -- if you find she is addicted, was that addiction a legal cause of her pvd? and you are going to get a long definition of what legal cause is from the judge. but what you will hear is that legal cause is not just a cause. it is something more than that. it has to be a substantial factor. it has to be a but for cause. and that is important, because that means that in answering this question, you have to think about was ms. brown, but for her addiction, could she have quit in time to avoid her pvd? and i'm going to talk about whether her pvd was caused by smoking in a minute and that is something else 2 plaintiff has to prove. but right now i want to just focus 1665 3 on the legal cause part. 4 now, in the litigation world, the plaintiff's 5 lawyers want you to believe that ms. brown was so addicted 6 in the '60s, '70s and '80s that she just could not quit 7 smoking. but in the real world, what you heard is that she 8 never ever made any attempt to quit during those time 9 periods. what the evidence is, that mr. brown did not make any real attempt to quit smoking until she was diagnosed with pvd. and even after she was diagnosed with pvd, it was a long time before she tried to quit smoking. she was asked by her own lawyer, you tried to quit smoking right after you were diagnosed with your pvd, right? and ms. brown candidly told you, well, no, not right after. towards the end i did, but not when i was diagnosed with pvd. and you know that ms. brown could have stopped smoking if she wanted to and you know that because she did stop smoking. when she was ready to, when she made up her mind, that is when she stopped quitting -- or stopped smoking. and you heard from the doctors that it would have made a difference, that her pvd would not have progressed. that is what the doctors told you. now, dr. werner told you that every smoker has the 1666 1 ability to quit. today there are more than 60 million 2 people in the united states who have quit smoking. there 3 are more former smokers than there are current smokers. and 4 dr. werner told you that addiction does not make you unable 5 to quit. addiction does not make you unable to understand 6 the health risks of smoking. and she conceded that it 7 did not have any effect like that on ms. brown. she told you 8 that ms. brown could quit if she wanted to, because she told 9 you anybody can quit smoking. but smokers have to make the decision for themselves when they want to stop smoking. no one else can make that decision for them. addiction was not a legal cause of ms. brown's pvd. the sole legal cause of ms. brown's pvd was her decision to continue to smoke knowing full well the health risks associated with that decision. now, the next question you have is: was donna brown's smoking cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by the defendant, philip morris, a legal cause of her peripheral vascular disease? and again, here you have to look at the litigation world versus the real world. you have heard from two doctors in this case. one a hired expert, the other ms. brown's treating doctor. one who looked at some medical records provided to her by the plaintiff's lawyers, who never met ms. brown, never treated ms. brown, never talked to any of 1667 1 ms. brown's doctors. 2 and then you have dr. harding, who has actually 3 treated ms. brown for 20-plus years, who know her medical 4 history. now, the hired doctor, dr. jackson, the lady who 5 came down from minnesota, michigan, minnesota, said that 6 smoking cigarettes substantially contributed to ms. brown's 7 pvd. now, dr. jackson acknowledged that there were a lot of 8 risk factors for pvd other than smoking, family history, 9 personal history or family history of cardiovascular disease, hyperlipidemia, high cholesterol, hypertension, that those were all risk factors for pvd. but then she told you that she did not have enough information to say those were actual risk factors or could be a cause of ms. brown's pvd and she told you because she did not see it in the medical records that the plaintiff's lawyers provided her. she did not see any history of hypertension, she did not see any history of high cholesterol, she did not see a strong family history of peripheral artery disease or coronary artery disease. she did not see it in the records that were provided to her by the plaintiff's lawyers. we brought you that. we showed you that information. now, dr. harding, the one who actually knows the plaintiff's medical history, he did not say, he was not willing to say that smoking caused her peripheral vascular 1668 1 disease. and when mr. finch asked him, well, did it cause 2 it or did it substantially contribute to it, what was the 3 doctors response? it contributed to it. he did not say it 4 caused it. he never said that smoking caused her pvd. 5 now, we brought you the testimony about these 6 other risk factors. we showed you the medical records that 7 talked about ms. brown, who has vascular disease, who has a 8 history of stroke, who has hypertension, who has high 9 cholesterol, and then we showed you the records where ms. brown's mother had all the same things. ms. brown's mother had vascular disease, stroke, hypertension, high cholesterol. and her sister had vascular disease, stroke, hypertension, high cholesterol. and her brother had at least two of those with vascular disease and stroke. i do not know what records dr. jackson saw, but obviously they were not the same ones that we showed you. and then, when he was asking dr. harding questions, the plaintiff's lawyers showed you a record and they showed a record -- remember this, the medical problem list? except when plaintiff's were showing this list to dr. harding, they cut it off at no. 10. remember? so you could not see all 15. well, what is no. 11? hyperlipidemia, high cholesterol. that is the litigation world. mr. finch just got up and told you, oh, but all the records we showed you were 1998 or later. this was 1669 1 after she had peripheral vascular disease. well, what he 2 did not mention to you is that dr. harding told you he moved 3 practices in 1998 and when he moved practices, all the 4 records stayed there. that is why we do not have any records 5 before 1998, through no fault of anybody in this litigation, 6 they just do not exist anymore. they are not around. the 7 records we do have from 1998 on show these other risk 8 factors. 9 so here, on this question, you either have to pick the litigation world or you pick the real world, because if you pick the litigation world, then you listen to dr. jackson and you say, yes, smoking was the cause of ms. brown's pvd. but if you go into the real world, what you have are all these other risk factors and her own doctor who has treated her for 20-plus years who cannot tell you that it caused or substantially contributed to her pvd. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is an i do not know. an i do not know is not proof by a preponderance of the evidence, which is what the plaintiff has to prove to you. so if you are in that i do not know world, the answer to that question is -- in the real world is no. now, the next question on your verdict form talks about comparative fault. and you-all remember these, these are the same boards that when we did opening statement i showed you. i just want to walk you through this a little 1670 1 bit when you are thinking about the answer to the comparative 2 fault question, because what you know from the testimony 3 you have heard that back in the '50s ms. brown was reading the 4 newspaper. she had an interest in current events and she 5 started reading the newspaper and keeping up with things. 6 and in fact, she remembers the 1964 surgeon general's 7 report, the news coverage about it, which would make sense, 8 because she was reading newspapers and she was interested in 9 current events. you will remember that in 1966 the first label goes on cigarettes and it says, caution, smoking may be hazardous to your health. this is the surgeon general's warning, the surgeon general determined what it would say, where it would be, and how big it was. that happened in 1966. and it is not until 1967 that ms. brown tries her first cigarette. and she tells you that she does not take up smoking then, she kind of smokes them every now and then, but she is not a regular smoker. in 1968, until she graduates, she is smoking a little bit after school. and then says she picks it up more when she graduates and leaves her parents' home in 1968. and during that same time period she goes to her new -- her doctor, her own doctor, and she tells her doctor that she is smoking. and back in 1968 her doctor tells her, you need to stop that and you need to stop it now, because it causes 1671 1 lung cancer, it causes cardiovascular disease, and you need 2 to stop it. and that is when ms. brown said she believed 3 her doctor. she was not thinking maybe it does, maybe it 4 does not, maybe i believe my doctor, maybe i do not, she says 5 as far as back as 1968 she believed her doctor when he told 6 her that smoking was dangerous and it could kill you. 7 so then in 1970 and ms. brown is only smoking 8 about half a pack of cigarettes, the second warning label 9 goes on it and it says, warning the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. and then all those ads you heard about in 1971, they are no longer on tv, they are no longer on the radio. in 1972, any of the ads that are left, the paper ads, print ads, all have this same exact warning on them. and then in 1972, ms. brown goes to work for bell south. remember she told you at that point she is still only smoking about half a pack of cigarettes a day, that she can only smoke during breaks, and it is not a problem at all. it is not a problem to go several hours without a cigarette. then in the 1970s, ms. brown's sister quit smoking. later on ms. brown's mother is diagnosed with cardiovascular disease when she was 50 and she quit smoking because of that. and during this time period, ms. brown's mother and her sister urge her to quit smoking for the same reasons that her doctor was telling her back here in 1968. 1672 1 and then we go forward, ms. brown starts to smoke 2 more in the 1980s. and then in 1985 the rotating warning 3 labels go on. and two of those, one of them says, smoking 4 causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may 5 complicate pregnancy. it is right there on the pack. and 6 then another one says, quitting smoking now greatly reduces 7 serious risks to your health. and you know that is true, you 8 heard that from the experts in this case, that if you quit 9 smoking the risk of any disease associated with smoking reduces and reduces quickly. and this is what the surgeon general is telling smokers in the 1980s. ms. brown was getting a consistent message, a consistent message from her doctors, from her family, from the public health community, that says smoking is dangerous, and you need to quit. and what does she do? she does not try to quit during the 1960s, she does not try to quit during the 1970s, she does not try to quit during the 1980s, and she does not try to quit in the early 1990s. that then takes us up to 1992 when ms. brown is diagnosed with pvd. and at the time that ms. brown is diagnosed with pvd, she is diagnosed with mild pvd. remember, she goes in and dr. harding gives her an aspirin and tells her quit smoking. at this point she is still playing softball, she is still active. and he tells her this is a progressive disease. if you do not do something, if you 1673 1 do not make a decision to try to stop its progression, it is 2 going to get worse. but there are things that you can do to 3 stop its progression. and he tells her every time he does a 4 procedure, either before she goes in for surgery or if it is 5 emergency afterwards, you have got to quit smoking, you have got 6 to quit smoking. it is a consistent message from her 7 doctor. and he even goes so far as to tell her, if you 8 do not quit smoking you will lose your legs. and according 9 to ms. brown she does not stop, try to quit smoking then. remember, not at the beginning, sometime toward the end. and what does she do when she tries to quit smoking. well, you heard from time to time she was on the patch. she was on the patch for about a week, but she continued to smoke the entire time that she was on the patch. she told you about the shot behind the ear. remember, ms. smith went several days without smoking. she did not make it home. she stopped on the way home to pick up cigarettes from the shot. she told you she tried the patch later on, she tried the gum. but again, she is smoking through these times when she is telling you she is really trying. when she put the patch on and when she started taking the gum, she had to make the decision, okay, am i gonna smoke or am i gonna not smoke? and she made the decision to stop the patch instead of smoking. she made the decision to stop the gum instead of smoking. 1674 1 what else did she try during this time period? 2 you heard about chantix. sometimes she would not even get 3 the prescriptions filled. other times she gets the 4 prescriptions filled, but when she is supposed to stop 5 smoking on the chantix, she decides to stop the chantix 6 instead of smoking. 7 and none of these efforts lasted very long. and 8 as she told you, there was a difference between these times 9 when she is tried to stop smoking, somewhere in here (indicating) until this time (indicating). and the difference was that she was ready to quit. she had made the decision, i'm going to put these down and i'm not going to pick them up. and that is the only difference, because she is back using the patch. that is how she quit smoking in july -- or june or july of last summer. she put on the patch, same patch that she had worn before. the only difference was she had made the decision, i'm not gonna smoke anymore. and this is familiar with something else in ms. brown's life. you remember hearing about how alcohol was a problem for her, that period of her life? and she went to aa once or twice, she tried professional help, she had the urging of her partner, the urging of her family, stop drinking, and that did not work. but what did work for her was one day she woke up and she said, i'm not going to drink anymore and she did not, just like she did with her 1675 2 smoking. 3 in the litigation world ms. brown was constantly 4 trying to quit. she was so addicted and she was making all 5 these efforts, even though during a 25-year period she never 6 quit once. and how serious was she in those other times? 7 but you do know that in 2014 she made the decision that she 8 was going to quit and she did. these were her decisions 9 about her own life. and you know that, because ms. smith told you. remember when ms. smith said one of the times when she got out of the hospital she said, you have got to quit smoking or smoking is going to kill you, and ms. brown said, it is my life, leave me alone. and i'm not critical of the decisions people make. we all make decisions in our life on things that we want to do and that we do not want to do. but when we make those decisions, we live with the consequences of those decisions. and the decisions about ms. brown's smoking, whether to stop, when to try, how hard to try, when to make up her mind to stop, those decisions were all hers. those were not the decisions of her partner, her family, or of my client. those were her decisions. now, you have several questions, questions 5, 6, 7, 8, that in your jury instructions you will see referred to as the fraud or fraudulent concealment questions. and i want to talk about all those together, because it is all the 2 same facts that go with those questions. and what you have 3 to decide on those questions are whether ms. brown heard any 1676 4 statements or was fooled about the risks of smoking and 5 somehow relied on something that philip morris said or 6 did not say to her. that is the gist of all of those 7 questions. 8 and we have heard a lot and i'm sure we will hear more 9 when the plaintiff's lawyers stand up about philip morris and heard a lot about what the american public knew and what the american public did not know. but this case is not about the public, it is not about all smokers, it is about ms. brown. and the questions you have to answer in this case are about ms. brown. in fact, if you look through the verdict form that you will see when the judge gives it to you, see all these highlight, that is all ms. brown's name. it does not say smokers, it is all about ms. brown, because that is who this case is about. so what statement or concealment affected ms. brown. that is what you have got to decide. what did she see, hear, or read and what did she rely on? we just went through a number of events in ms. brown's lifetime, you know, when people are telling her to stop smoking, her family, her doctors. she heard all that. and her doctors continued to tell her that the entire time that they have been 1677 1 treating her. and she is seen a lot of doctors. that has 2 been the consistent message as she will tell you since at 3 least back to 1968, that she knew the health risks of 4 smoking and she knew this both before and after may 5th of 5 1992 -- of '82. 6 now, we go back to litigation world and real 7 world. in the litigation world they are saying philip morris 8 confused people. well, ms. brown was not confused at all. 9 from the very first time she picked up a cigarette, it had a warning on there. from the first year she was smoking, her doctors were telling her to stop. she knew as far as back as she could remember. those are her words. not even to her doctor. as far back as she could remember she knew that smoking was dangerous and she knew she should quit. in the litigation world, ads make everybody smoke. but you know that does not apply to ms. brown. she started smoking because she was with a bunch of her friends and they took a vote and they all decided to try one. that is why she started smoking, not because of ads, but because all of her girlfriends were doing it. that is why she started. in the litigation world, they brought you dr. kyriakoudes to talk about how people were fooled and how the tobacco companies were saying things that fooled people about the addictive nature of cigarettes or the health risks associated with that. but in the real world ms. brown told 1678 1 you she never heard any of that. i never heard any 2 statement from any tobacco company or tobacco institute or 3 ctr, she told you she never heard any statement. in fact, 4 she told you she never heard anyone ever tell her that 5 smoking was not bad for you or that smoking was not addictive. 6 she did not hear that from anywhere. and you cannot rely on 7 what you do not hear. 8 she was not waiting for any more information from 9 philip morris. if philip morris had come out at any time and said smoking is dangerous, smoking is addictive, smoking will kill you, that would not be anything different that ms. brown had not been hearing her entire life. and when asked about what she believed about the health risks of smoking, she said, yes, it is dangerous, i knew that. she was relying on her doctors for information. she believed her doctors. that is who she was relying on, not philip morris. now, the next question you have to answer is about damages. and i said -- the first time i talked to you in opening statement, i said ms. brown's loss is significant. there is no question about that. but if this case -- that all that this case were about, then we would not have any disagreement and we would not be here. but obviously we have disagreements in this case on other issues. now, i do not think the evidence will get you to 1679 1 this question. as you will see, if you answer certain of 2 these questions no, then you stop, you do not go through the 3 whole verdict form. and i do not think you will get here 4 because of the various answers to the other questions, but 5 it is my job as a lawyer to talk about all of the questions 6 and so i need to do that. 7 now, you have heard about the medical expenses in 8 this case and you will be asked that. and we agree that if 9 you get this far, if you think that ms. brown is entitled to damages, that 439,000 and whatever it is, is the correct number for medical expenses. but then they are also asking you to award money for lost wages and that is another 400-and-something thousand dollars. that i ask you to think about, because the evidence you have heard in this case is that ms. brown was physically able to do her job. remember, her company went in and did renovations to her workplace so she could continue to work, do her job. she comes back to work, she is physically able to work, and then her company comes to her and says, here's this agreement you signed a couple decades ago, we want you to take early retirement, and she does. and she gets this pension package. and then she says i never looked for work after that, because i did not think i would be able to. but she had been working fine at the job that she just took early retirement from. so think about 1680 1 that when you are thinking about this element of damages. 2 and you will also remember that dr. raffa got up and 3 told you that she was actually making more money retired 4 than she was when she was working. 5 now, mr. finch did not put a number on it, but i 6 saw in their slide they had up here that for pain and 7 suffering it had a whole lot of x's. so much, in fact, that 8 it looks to me like they are asking you to award more than 9 $10 million for pain suffering. and i cannot tell you what that number would be any more than mr. finch can tell you what a number can be, but it has to be reasonable and it has to be related to ms. brown. and i do not know what that number is, but i would suggest that something along the lines of two times her medical is a more reasonable number than eight x's. that would be more than a million dollars and you know that that would take care of her for the rest of her life. in the real world, more than million dollars is a lot of money. now, the final question i want to discuss with you is punitive damages and that question asks you in determining punitive damages, the judge will instruct you that you have to find that by clear and convincing evidence. it is a higher burden of proof than preponderance of evidence. and you only get to this issue if you decide that ms. brown has proved her fraudulent concealment claims. 1681 1 that is the only way you get to this question. that she 2 somehow relied on and was fooled by philip morris, that 3 there was some reliance in those questions i was talking 4 about earlier. 5 and if you find that ms. brown's -- the answer to 6 the fraudulent concealment questions are yes, then the 7 damage questions i just told you about will not be reduced 8 at all, she will get the full amount. 9 now, the first thing i want to talk to you about here is the standard of proof. it is clear and convincing evidence. and the judge will give you an instruction on that. but it is evidence that is more compelling and persuasive. it has to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion. in other words, you have to be really, really convinced that it is appropriate to award ms. brown punitive damages. and those are extra damages to punish and deter philip morris. those are not to compensate ms. brown. if you get to this point, whatever you decide is the number to compensate her, she will have been fully taken care of for that. this is another number, this is in addition to and above that. so let me talk a little bit about what you heard yesterday when we brought dr. jupe to talk about philip morris, the philip morris of today that is run by people like mr. jupe. and he told you that since 1999, right in 1682 1 here, philip morris has said on its website publicly that 2 smoking is addictive and that smoking causes disease. and 3 it includes links to all these different surgeon general's 4 report, all this public information, and so that there is 5 no -- nothing on philip morris's website other than what the 6 public health community says as far as addiction and health 7 is concerned. and philip morris has been saying that since 8 1999, 15 years before ms. brown quit smoking. 9 you heard about the 1998 master settlement agreement, the master settlement agreement that controls marketing and advertising, that required payments on yearly basis forever to the states, that required the disclosure of company documents, and that disbanded ti and the other industry groups. you have heard about the fda regulation in 2009. the fda controls marketing of cigarettes, manufacturing of cigarettes, in fact, and design of cigarettes. the fda controls everything that goes into a cigarette, the fda controls everything that comes out of a cigarette, and the fda controls everything that is said about a cigarette. it is a much, much more restrictive environment now for the tobacco companies. now, one last point on punitive damages and that is they can only be used to punish and deter philip morris from concealing information that actually impacted ms. brown, not other smokers. other smokers can bring their 2 own lawsuits. this has to be information and concealment 1683 3 that affected ms. brown. 4 now, i'm about to sit down and plaintiff's counsel 5 has another opportunity to come up. i think they have got 6 another 25 minutes to talk to you. and i expect that 7 they are going to talk to you about the litigation world. i 8 think you are going to hear a lot about philip morris, i 9 think you are going to see a bunch of documents, they may play you some more videos. but what i do not think you are going to see is the link to ms. brown. dr. kyriakoudes could not provide that link when he was here last week and now, after a week of evidence, there is still no link between that litigation world and ms. brown. because in ms. brown's world she started smoking when there were already warnings on the pack. she made the decision to continue to smoke after her doctors told her that it was dangerous. she made the decision to continue to smoke when she believed that smoking was dangerous. she made the decision to continue to smoke when all these people were telling her, you need to stop, it is bad for you, it is gonna kill you. she made the decision to continue to smoke. and she never heard anything from the tobacco companies that was different than what her own family and her own doctors were telling her. and when ms. brown made 1684 1 the decision to quit smoking, she did. ms. brown's 2 decisions about smoking were hers and hers alone. 3 ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your 4 attention over the last week. we really appreciate it and 5 we appreciate your jury service. thank you.