mr. shields: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies, and gentleman. rayfield brown was just in his mid teens when he started to smoke, buying four cigarettes for a nickel at the corner store. almost all smokers, then and now, start to smoke as teenagers and probably for the same reasons, be cool, peer pressure, to be like an adult, maybe even more than that. it was a different time and a different culture in america in the 1950s. smoking was everywhere. almost all men smoked. more and more women were starting to smoke. as kaiser thomas told you, all the men around him smoked. and advertising for cigarettes was everywhere. it was like wallpaper. kaiser told you, we were bombarded by it. often the advertising was sponsored on the only three networks throughout prime time with the principal characters like lucille ball on i love lucy, her loving cigarettes. that culture of smoking remained for decades following the 1950s. rayfield brown, by the time he graduated from high school and went into the armed services, was a regular daily smoker. he, like the soldiers at the time, in fact, was given cigarettes by the service. when he returned home to jacksonville and ultimately started to work at the u.s. post office, he continued to smoke for decades. he was addicted and although he tried to quit, he struggled with it. i want to thank you for your attention, for being on this jury. you have heard a lot of evidence. it is been a long trial. it is been a complicated issue. obviously we could not do this without you. and so as a beginning point, let me emphasize again how much we thank you for being on this jury. now, john, michael, leslie, rayfield and i are proud to represent mary brown in this action against philip morris for the wrongful death of rayfield brown. this part of the case, as the judge told you, is called the "closing argument" or "closing statement." it is our opportunity to tell you what the evidence is, what we think it is, what we think it means and how it all fits together. but you are the ones who determine the facts, not the lawyers. you collectively have to determine what you think the evidence means and how it fits together. but let us begin our discussion with what the evidence is by talking about how we got here. this case arose out of a class action, as judge jay told you, called the "engle class action" that was filed in 1994 on behalf of florida smokers against the tobacco companies. it was tried for over a year in 1999 and ultimately worked its way to the florida supreme court in 2006, when the florida supreme court held certain of the findings from that trial, but said that the individual damage claims of the class members should be proceeded and tried separately in individual claims like this. mary brown, following that decision, then filed her individual damage claim for the death of rayfield brown as a member of that engle class. the court also instructed you, this case has already been tried to a jury and that there were certain findings made in that prior jury trial, findings that you are bound by, and consequently you do not need to decide what has previously been decided by the jury. the prior trial determined liability and class membership and made the following findings. first, the prior trial, the jury determined that rayfield brown was addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine and that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer. that determined he was a member of the engle class and determined certain elements on the cause issue. you are bound by that. you have not heard all of the evidence that that prior jury determined, and you oath -- and you would be violating your oath if you did not apply that prior finding to this compensatory damage claim. secondly, that jury determined that philip morris's agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of rayfield brown's death. that is the conspiracy finding. you are also bound by it. as a result of the findings, it has already been determined philip morris is liable, is responsible to mary brown for the wrongful death of her husband on the conspiracy count. you are not asked to redetermine that. all you are asked to determine is the amount of damages. as a result of that prior trial, there are two remaining issues for your consideration. first is the amount of compensatory damages to be awarded mary brown, the estate, and her daughter, jennifer, for the death of rayfield brown. second is whether punitive damages are warranted against philip morris to punish them and to deter others. now, i thought about the best way to talk about those two issues and talk about the evidence of those two issues. and it occurred to me that it would be most helpful to you if we looked at the verdict form which judge jay just told you about and look at the specific questions you will be asked and talk about the evidence that supports you filling in the blanks on that question. that make sense to everybody? let us start then with the verdict form. here's a copy of the verdict form. there are two questions on the verdict form, as you can see. the first question is the compensatory damage question, that is, the amount of damages that you will award for compensatory damages. the second question, on the second page, question 2, is the punitive damages question, that is, whether punitive damages should be awarded against philip morris. the first question has blanks for you to fill out for mary brown, a blank to fill in the amount to be awarded for her pain and suffering and loss of companionship and protection from the death of her husband. there is also a blank to be filled out for jennifer brown on her pain and suffering and the loss of her instruction, guidance and companionship from the loss of her father. now, there are other items on compensatory damages that are already filled out. those are called the economic component of the claim. damages fall in two general categories, as you heard in opening statements. the economics, that is, the lost money, and the noneconomics, pain, suffering, loss of companionship, protection and guidance. economic amounts were stipulated to, agreed to by the parties, as a result of which the court has directed you that you have to include the amounts on this verdict form, and they are on the verdict form so that you have the amounts for mary brown, the value of loss of services for the estate, the value of medical, funeral expenses and the value of lost wages and earnings. those amounts are already on the verdict form. they total around $375,000. now, in addition to those amounts, you will be required to award the additional sums for the other categories that are left blank, and that is what i want to talk to you more about. that is, what is the evidence that supports your determination of the amount to be awarded? the court has instructed you that you should determine and write on the verdict form the total amount of damages which the greater weight of the evidence shows mary brown and jennifer brown suffered. it tells you that there is no exact standard for fixing that amount other than it should be fair and just in light of all the circumstances. and you, as jurors, in your mind and conscience, will determine what is a fair and just amount for these categories under all of the circumstances. in determining that amount, you may consider the joint life expectancy. now, why is that? because obviously rayfield brown would have died at some point in time, had he not died prematurely from lung cancer, and so you would not be awarding damages for a period of time longer than he would have otherwise lived. that is why you were given the figure of his life expectancy of over 22 years at the time of his death. you were also given the life expectancy of mary brown and jennifer to show that it would overlap that 22-year period. now, you have a similar instruction in regard to that to jennifer and awarding damages to jennifer brown for her pain and suffering and for her loss of companionship, instruction and guidance. this part of the case is -- the burden of proof is the greater weight of the evidence. that simply means if you are balancing, it slightly tilts more to one side than the other. so in evaluating and determining the amount of the compensatory damages, you are -- you will do that based upon the greater weight of the evidence. so the fact is, ladies and gentlemen, the only evidence in this case, not just the greater weight, but the only evidence in this case supports awarding substantial compensatory damages on that first question. i thought maybe the way to talk more about what figure should be awarded for compensatory damages, we should look back at rayfield brown's life and the relevant events in terms of it. and so we have the time line that we talked about from the beginning of the case with the relevant events from rayfield brown's life on the top and what was occurring regarding the tobacco industry and philip morris on the bottom. i'm just going to be talking about the top line. rayfield brown, once he had returned to jacksonville from the service, was introduced to mary brown in 1958 by their close friend, kaiser thomas, and they were married two years later in 1960, had their first son, michael, in 1961, and in 1972, their daughter, jennifer. rayfield, when he returned to jacksonville, had various jobs, but ultimately got his job at the post office in 1967, where he remained for the balance of his career. and you have heard a description of his success at the post office. he was a station manager at various stations, and he was the head of the organization of management professionals for the post office and how he was, in effect, the station manager that they called upon to go into a station that had particular problems and be a troubleshooter and try and solve the problem. and that is what he was doing -- he did. kaiser thomas and mary both described his success in his career. mary went further and described him as a husband. he was a loving, caring, compassionate husband. she told you that he was her friend, her confidant, her go-to person. and when she was giving that testimony, it reminded me, when i was in high school and working on the play our town -- you may, if you remember that play, it was made into a movie as well -- but there was a scene in that play in which a young man is talking with his grandfather about what he should look for in a wife, and his grandfather's advice to him is look for a friend, look for someone you can talk to, look for someone who is your go-to person because you are going to spend a lifetime together, and those are the most important considerations of the nature of your relationship. they clearly were important considerations for mary, cut short by rayfield brown's untimely death. you have seen mary's pictures of him, starting with a wedding picture, pictures of them at social events, pictures of them on vacation, pictures of them with jennifer and pictures of them on a cruise. all of those pictures tell a story. you see a happy, loving family. and both mary, michael and jennifer told you about rayfield brown's involvement with his children, teaching them to play basketball and other sports, going to all of their activities, becoming involved with them in jack and jill and being the kind of parent that we all seek to have. and you heard about rayfield's little girl and how much jennifer meant to him. and because of the age disparity -- i'm not saying that michael did not mean a lot to him as well, but because michael was older at the time, he was more a friend, whereas jennifer was his little girl to the death. his loss was devastating to jennifer. you saw that on the stand. here we are almost 20 years later and it is still devastating to her. she described her relationship and what she described most importantly was what a loss she had. recall the testimony. she is had so many successes at a very young age. and, in fact, being like her mother in reaching the very top pinnacle of the management at the duval county school board at a very young age. and she regretted so much that her father has not been there to participate in her success, to talk to her about her success, to congratulate her and to be proud of her for her success. she also talked about how devastating it was for her not to have him walk her down the aisle upon marriage, not to be there to talk to when she had problems and issues she wanted to discuss. so those are the kinds of things that you need to think about and evaluate when you determine pain and suffering and importantly, loss of companionship, guidance and instruction. and when you think about pain and suffering, also think about the suffering that occurred from watching rayfield brown suffer himself. you have, on the screen, the medical time line, and it walks you through the chronology of his diagnosis, treatment and suffering, starting with his diagnosis in july of 1993 with lung cancer, a lung cancer that was too big to just go in and remove surgically without first trying to reduce it by doing beam radiation. and so the next event was to go through those beam radiation treatments to reduce the tumor enough that you could cut it out. they did. and so for the next year, there was a follow-up and hope that it has been cured. and the hope was dashed in september of 1994 when the tumor recurred and started treatment again. and with that recurrence came pain, severe pain, pain so severe at some points in time he could not sleep in a bed. he had to sleep sitting up. pain so severe that it required additional surgery. and so they started chemotherapy to deal with the pain, for what is called "palliative care." that does not mean anything more than, we are not trying to cure you; we are trying to control the growth of this tumor enough to try and reduce your pain or keep the pain from getting worse. but it got worse and continued to grow until he reached that incident described by michael and jennifer, where he is at home with a bowl of ice cream, and he cannot feel it because he is paralyzed. and taken off to deal with the paralysis, he is paralyzed because the tumor was impinging upon his spinal cord. they do the spinal decompression to try and deal with the problem, but he remains paralyzed and goes through the last stages of his life in hospitals and hospice and ultimately died. and michael describes the last day. mary described it. jennifer described it. when you think about mary's pain and suffering, think about her going through this and think about the fact that, as michael said, she hardly ever left his side, and she saw how much pain he was in. and jennifer saw it and felt how much pain he was in. that is a major component of pain and suffering. but pain and suffering did not just end when he died. pain and suffering continues after his death. and mary described that. she described her loneliness, eating breakfast, being alone most of her time. and jennifer described it and how difficult it was for her mother over all the years. but loneliness and being alone are not necessarily the same thing. and so mary ultimately decided she did not want to be alone any longer, and she remarried in october of 19- -- of 2014. but it did not work out. '13. it did not work out. she ultimately was divorced. the simple fact was that she was not ready. the judge has instructed you that that information about a remarriage was admissible to show the whole truth, but you should not reduce any award based upon that. it is not relevant to that. it would be improper for you to reduce the award because she was grieving for a year. you can consider the fact that her loneliness may have been a little less during that time period in evaluating what amount to award. ultimately you need to determine what is a fair and just amount to award for pain and suffering, for her loss of companionship and protection of rayfield brown, and you need to determine with jennifer what is a fair amount to award based upon her pain and suffering and her loss of her father's companionship, guidance and instruction. now, that is your decision. let me suggest to you what i think would be a reasonable figure for you to think about. but it is your decision. i suggest to you that a reasonable amount to award for mary's pain and suffering, loss of companionship and protection would be $7.5 million under all the circumstances of this case. i suggest to you that a reasonable amount to award for jennifer's loss of her companionship, instruction and guidance and her pain and suffering would be $5 million. now, that is my suggestion. you can determine the amount. you can determine a greater amount. you can determine a lesser amount. that is what the jury system is all about, that you collectively come together and in your enlightened conscience, determine what will be a fair and just amount under all of the circumstances. that is the first issue in the case. let us next talk about the second issue in the case, whether punitive damages are warranted to punish philip morris and the tobacco industry. now, i want to start by talking, in regard to that second issue, about this conspiracy. the second issue is based on the fact that philip morris and the tobacco industry engaged in a decades-long conspiracy to conceal and omit the material information about the health effects of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking. that conspiracy is described in general in the latest surgeon general's report. you have heard us talk a lot about the surgeon general's report, and i just remind you about what this is. the surgeon general's report, by federal law, is required to gather all of the available evidence using the experts around the country that know about the issues and go through this very rigorous, detailed procedure to make sure that it sets out the consensus of scientific opinion. and you will have this document as an exhibit. i should warn you, it is not going to look like this. and if you try and find it, say, i remember that brown document, several inches thick, you will have a copy of it, a photocopy, as opposed to the original. so look for plaintiff's exhibit 799. if you want to find the most recent surgeon general's report, it is plaintiff's exhibit 799. and you will see when you look at that report that it has pages and pages in it of the expert witnesses who helped write it and who reviewed it, including dr. david burns, who testified here, and dr. robert proctor, who testified here. the first section of this report, the first chapter, talks about what it was that the industry did over the years. and what you will see is this summary. "for decades, the industry followed strategies set out in the early 1950s, denying the harms of its products, discrediting scientific evidence that showed those harms, funding research that was intended to divert attention from cigarettes and marketing new products with the implied" -- "that implied lower risk than existing products," the very things that we put in evidence in this case to show you the basis for awarding punitive damages. and the major conclusion reached by the surgeon general's report was that the tobacco company -- the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking. now, during that 50-year time period from the first surgeon general's report that is referenced in this report, over 20 million americans have died from smoking-related disease. and the major conclusion of this report, if you look in that first chapter, is that many of those deaths could have been avoided, but for this massive, extensive conspiracy to conceal and omit material information about smoking. so let us go back to the beginning of the conspiracy and talk about how it came about -- about and what occurred. first, the time period of the conspiracy is 1953 through at least the year 2000. second, there were a number of conspirators. philip morris was one of them. the other major u.s. tobacco companies were others. and you may recall that dr. proctor drew a diagram of all of the components of the conspiracy because over the years, it was not just the tobacco companies. they created groups like the tobacco industry research council. they created groups such as the tobacco institute, the council of -- committee of counsel, various groups that he described in detail as part of the arms of this massive conspiracy that they engaged in over the years. he also described for you the acts that they did in furtherance of the conspiracy. and they can be organized and categorized as follows. first, the principal focus was the denial that cigarettes were harmful and to conceal the information they really knew about cigarettes, conceal the fact that they already knew that cigarettes caused cancer when they first got together and over the years, all of the additional information that they concealed. secondly, one of the acts done was what we call "doubt," creating a controversy. it was decided in the earliest meetings that they could best deal with the issue by acting like there was a controversy, and they spent vast sums of money to convince the american public that there still was a continuing controversy about whether smoking caused cancer when there was not. third, and probably most important for this case, was the campaign of reassurance. the campaign of reassurance boils down to one simple fact. if we are going to sell cigarettes, we have got to keep people smoking. and how do you keep them smoking? you reassure them that if there is anything harmful in cigarettes, you will take it out; you will solve the problem; they might as well continue smoking in the interim. that reassurance theme was repeated for decades, and you have seen lots of examples of it. but most importantly, all of these things are particularly reprehensible because their massive, pervasive, misleading advertising was geared to focus on teens as the most likely source of replacement smokers. now, you have got to have replacement smokers if you are going to stay in business because smokers are dying from cancer and other diseases and smokers are quitting smoking. you have heard from the beginning of this case about the number of smokers that quit in various decades. who is going to replace them? the only likely source were teenagers. and so the entire marketing was focused on getting kids to start smoking, knowing that when they start smoking, they will quickly become addicted, and you may have a customer for decades, knowing, as part of their addiction, continue to smoke, or they struggle with trying to quit smoking. so that is the overview of the conspiracy. now, the court has instructed you that in evaluating -- evaluating the total misconduct in this conspiracy, you should keep in mind that philip morris is liable not just for what it did, but for what all of the other co-conspirators did in furtherance of the conspiracy. that is what conspiracy law is all about. you enter into conspiracy; you are liable for what all the conspirators do. it is not like when you say, i did not specifically authorize that. no, if you entered into a conspiracy to rob a bank, people go into the bank and somebody pulls a gun and shoots someone, it is not a defense to say, i did not agree to shoot someone. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: the objection, mr. reilly? mr. reilly: plaintiff's reference to a bank robbery. the court: as an example? sustained. please proceed, mr. shields. mr. shields: so the court has instructed you that philip morris is liable for the acts done by its co-conspirators in furtherance of the conspiracy. all right. how does the conspiracy start? it started by the developing scientific evidence showing that there was an epidemic of lung cancer. and we started by having dr. burns show you this chart. it is a chart that indicated that as cigarette smoking started to rise -- because back before 1900, there was very little cigarette smoking. but as cigarette smoking started to rise through world war i and even world war ii, there was about a 20-year lag, and then lung cancer started to rise in a line that is almost parallel to the increased use of cigarettes. that parallel led to investigators to be concerned that cigarettes and smoking was causing that dramatic increase of lung cancer, a disease that was almost unheard of before the massive sale of cigarettes. and so they started doing a series of studies to determine whether smoking was, in fact, a cause or the cause of this lung cancer epidemic. and dr. burns told you that the breakthrough year was 1950. four major studies came out in four major medical journals, saying that smoking was linked with lung cancer and that it appeared to be that smoking caused lung cancer. and a couple years later, in 1953, there was an additional piece of important evidence, the mouse skin study, in which tar from cigarettes was painted on the skin of mice, and lo and behold, they developed tumors that were very much like lung cancer tumors. that evidence created a panic among the cigarette companies because of the publicity of it, and it got a lot of publicity. you saw the magazine article. it got a lot of publicity at the time. and because of that publicity, stock prices of cigarettes started to drop. the companies had a serious problem. and so they got together by meeting at the plaza hotel in new york city in december of 1953 for what became the start of the conspiracy. and at that meeting, they agreed that they would promote -- effectively deal with the problem by engaging public relations counsel. now, think about that for a moment. the evidence is coming in that your product is killing people, causing lung cancer. you get together and you do not decide what we are going to do to solve that problem. you do not decide we are concerned about our customers and what we are doing to them. you do not discuss whether we even ought to be selling this product under these circumstances. you discuss hiring a major public relations company to run a campaign for you, denying that cigarettes were a cause of lung cancer. and the documents that you will see from that initial meeting pretty much confirm they already knew it caused lung cancer. they talked about producing a cigarette that did not cause lung cancer. they talked about people not being able to quit. that deals with addiction. interviews done by hill & knowlton and set out in these memorandums make it clear what they really knew at the time and instead of dealing with that, what they were going to do about it. one of the things they were going to do about it dealt with advertising. up to that point in time, it had not been unusual for the cigarette companies to make express claims about the health benefits of smoking. here's an example, philip morris, which claims that a group -- a report of findings of doctors support smoke in cigarettes as causing less irritation. similar claims were made by other tobacco companies during the time. and hill & knowlton suggested that they quit making claims of health benefits, but instead switch to what is called image advertising. that is what we all see, that the tobacco companies were the ones that invented it back in 1953, for the 40 years following it. imaging advertising does not make an explicit finding in writing. it uses pictures. it uses images that suggest to you safety, health vigor, physical activities. and so suddenly, the ads change from these kind of ads to ads with attractive, healthy, vigorous people, doing outdoor things, using colors that suggested purity, putting filters on the cigarettes that suggested filter purity. all of that was part of creating an image. that is what image advertising was and that is what the conspiracy did. now, did they compete in their advertising? of course, they did. they had products. that misses the point. as dr. robert proctor told you, the point was that over their advertising was this umbrella from the conspiracy, and that is you use image advertising. you do not tell people what we already know, that smoking causes cancer. you conceal the real health hazard. you conceal the addictive nature. and for decades, all their competitive advertising actually complied with that very express, explicit conspiracy decided in december of 1953. the first thing they did in support of this public relations campaign was issue the frank statement in which they denied that cigarette smoking caused disease, while claiming they were interested in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration of the business. they also formed a couple of initial organizations that were part of the arms of the conspiracy. early on, the principal organization they used was tirc, tobacco industry research committee, created in 1954. most of the early activities were done by it. later it became -- called ctr. they also created the tobacco institute in 1958 that continued to carry out their activities and to be a lobbying arm in washington, d.c. now, ctr, the tobacco industry research committee, as we know from their internal documents, was nothing but a front, a shield for their campaign to conceal and deny. the documents indicate that. all of the evidence supports that as well. it was a front because it really was not interested in finding out the truth. it was interested in trying to find any evidence they could that denied the allegation that cigarette smoking caused disease. and recall dr. proctor described this as distraction science; that is, you spent hundreds of millions of dollars conducting studies by well-known scientists. some of them got nobel prizes. but the studies did not look at the fundamental issue of whether cigarette smoking caused cancer. instead, they looked at all these other issues other than the real one. and what this enabled them to do was to say, look, we spent $300 million, and we find no evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. it distracted from the issue. it enabled them to make claims that there was a continuing controversy, when there was no controversy at all. and the documents confirmed that is what tirc was all about. now, if there was any doubt about whether they really knew that cigarettes really caused lung cancer, it is resolved by the memorandum of the visit by the bat scientists to the tobacco companies of the united states in april of 1958. this is one of the most important documents you will have. this document, plaintiff's exhibit 216, is a document in which they record that philip morris and all of the other tobacco company scientists that they met with, other than greene at yale, thought that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. the top scientist at philip morris knew that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer during the entire time period they were denying it in their campaign of denial and conspiracy. but you have an addition to that document in which they made the admission to the other companies, their own internal documents. here's one from 1958. dr. robert dupuis. he was the head of their research department, one of the top executives at philip morris, in which he sets out their knowledge that every cigarette smoked contributes to lung cancer, either alone or in association with other physical agents. it is further confirmed in a 1961 report by dr. wakeham. you saw dr. wakeham. he was shown in some of the interviews. we have seen lots of documents from him. he was a top executive, very top of management of philip morris. in this early report that he did, he reported that their research showed that he found cancer-causing substances in every class of compounds of smoke. think about that. this is at the time that they are publicly declaring over and over again, there is nothing harmful in cigarettes, and if we ever find anything harmful in cigarettes, we will take it out. the other thing that was found in this 1961 memo was that they could not take it out. selective removal of the carcinogens simply did not work. they did not have the technology to do it. ultimately, all of this led to the report of the surgeon general, the first report of the surgeon general, in 1964. it is actually an advisory committee of experts to the surgeon general, in which they conclude what the evidence had overwhelming established by that point in time, that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, and then it suggested that it caused other diseases, including lung cancer being one. now, from the plaza meeting forward, not just through the surgeon general's report, but in the decades following, the conspiracy had three themes. we have already mentioned them. first was denying that there was any harm from cigarettes and concealing what they really knew. the conspiracy is about concealing and omitting information. and what they concealed, they concealed that they knew cigarettes caused cancer. they concealed that they knew cigarettes were addictive. they concealed that they designed cigarettes to create and sustain addiction. they concealed that their filter cigarettes were no safer than regular cigarettes while implying that they were. they concealed that low-tar cigarettes, while advertising that they were safer, were no more safe than under -- unfiltered cigarettes for the simple reason that the way people smoke cigarettes, they got the same amount of tar. so they were not low-tar at all. all of those were the things that were concealed in the decades following the plaza meeting. they repeatedly told us that if there was anything harmful in cigarettes, they would take it out. and we showed you a bunch of documents to show that. i'm not going to go through all of them, but let me just run through some of them. first, we look at this speech from the president of philip morris in which he asserted that there was not one shred of conclusive evidence to support the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, at basically the same time frame that his scientists are talking to bat scientists, that, yes, smoking causes lung cancer. he went so far as to go beyond that in another speech and said, if i thought that there was any harmful effect of cigarette smoking, we would stop the business tomorrow. and recall, dr. proctor told you they repeated that statement time and time again. they would go out of business. why do you tell the public you will go out of business if there is anything harmful? it is a way of saying, we are credible, believe us. there really is not anything harmful. if there was, we would not be in the business. and they did that at the same time that the internal documents showed that they knew that cigarette smoking was harmful. and then you saw one of their representatives come on the cbs evening news following the issuance of the first surgeon general's report and repeat the mantra that there is nothing harmful in cigarettes, and if and when we ever find anything harmful, we will take it out, their reassurance campaign to keep people smoking. and later, you saw the president, named howard cullman, entitled philip morris go on face the nation and repeat it again. there is nothing harmful in cigarettes, and if we ever find anything harmful, we will remove it, so you might as well continue smoking. the new england journal of medicine summarized what they did in the 1960 editorial, in which it says no responsible person could still deny that cigarettes cause lung cancer and that the conduct of the tobacco industry has been deplorable. because of their denials, they are adding filters, suggesting that they were taking out anything harmful at the very time they claimed they were not -- there was nothing harmful. that is the denial and concealment portion of it. but in addition, one major element of conspiracy was creating doubt by claiming there was a controversy when there was no controversy. that is what tirc and its distraction science was all about, getting evidence out there from other scientists on unrelated subjects so as to suggest there was still a controversy when there was no longer a controversy. they also put out all of these white papers, sent them to doctors and medical schools and opinion makers and newspapers and politicians, in which they claimed that there was a scientific dispute. here are a couple of examples of it. and this kind of attempt to create the impression, totally incorrect, that there was a continuing controversy went on for years. into the '80s, they claimed that there was still a scientific controversy when any controversy had long since resolved. there had been a scientific consensus by at least the early mid 1950s. the audience, as we showed you, for all of these documents were opinion makers, doctors, politicians, newspapers, people that might influence the rest of us by their views. they also put out phony medical journals. here's an example, tobacco and health research, in which they are claiming that lung specialists causes -- it says there are 28 reasons for doubt in the chart. why is it set in this format? to make it look like it is a medical journal when it is not a medical journal and then send it out to doctors who, like lots of throw aways, put them in their office for the patients pick up and take a look at it. and, thus, they could influence with the now product. another example was the claim that lung cancer was somehow related to baldness, totally frivolous assertion, but part of their campaign of creating a controversy. and they recognized that they also had to discredit the public health for it. so they started attacking the surgeon general and the surgeon general's reports and attacking their person. you saw that television interview of the representative from the tobacco company industry, his deep voice, talking very authoritatively about joe califano. what was the point of that? the whole point was to ridicule the surgeon general, the public health community in hopes that people would not listen to what they had to say. but perhaps the most reprehensible thing was to plant totally bogus articles in the major magazines. the best example is true. back at the time, this was a major magazine, and they planted an article in it that claimed that cigarette smoking does not cause cancer. the author of that was hill & knowlton, public relations firm, but they used the name of a sports writer who was connected with hill & knowlton and put his name on it so that it appeared to be written by someone other than someone related to tobacco. they took the same article and then planted it in the national enquirer with the bold headline, "cigarette cancer linked to spine." only this time, they changed the name again and used another name, but one who was not even a real person, a totally made up person. now, these are not just isolated examples. dr. goldberg told you about hill & knowlton and their campaign of going out and talking to time and newsweek and the new yorker and meeting with the editors, convincing them to add information to stories, to publish favorable stories, to kill stories that were adversely in this group. now, you have seen -- and you will see in the evidence that you take out -- a lot of documents from newspapers, magazines and so forth, some put in by both sides. take a look at those. in almost every one of those, you will see a statement that some scientists say it causes cancer, and then you will have a statement from the tobacco people saying it does not. hill & knowlton played on the propensity of the press to think that there were two sides to every story and continued to get newspapers, magazines to write as if there was still controversy long after it was not a controversy by putting both sides in. that was part of their campaign as well. all of this was summarized in a 1979 surgeon general's report that talked about the claims of the tobacco companies being empty back at the time of the original report in 1964 and utterly vacuous by 1979. 15 years of additional research overwhelmingly showed that cigarette smoking caused cancer, but they continued to deny it until 2000. they continued to conceal what they really knew until 2000. the third thing was the reassurance thing, the whole point of which is to keep smokers smoking. that theme started very early when dr. dupuis appeared on see it now. we played that for you. and what he said, after talking about how they were looking at the components of smoke, and they used this scope to try and find them, what he concluded by saying was there is nothing harmful in cigarettes, and if we ever find it, we will take it out. that was a very carefully thought-out theme that was used for decades. it was specifically used to keep addictive smokers smoking. okay. you saw from the cullman video in 1964 that he repeated it on network television in regard to the surgeon general's report. you saw that the reason for that in this memorandum between two top executives at philip morris was to provide a psychological crutch for smokers to continue smoking. remember, dr. burns was asked a question, why did they continue these denials and concealments long after it was overwhelming in the consensus of the scientific community, long after public service announcements, long after all of this publicity? and he said, well, you know, they were not aiming all of this at the general public. they knew it would not sell with the general public. they were aiming it at addicted smokers as a way of keeping addicted smokers smoking. and they did that despite the fact that their own internal documents showed that the present technology did not enable them to remove the harmful components of cigarettes. here's the fundamental problem. when they try and take out the carcinogens in cigarettes primarily found in tar, it also takes out the nicotine. and so to the extent you are selectively reducing them, you are also removing the nicotine. you reach a point where if you take out any more nicotine, people will not smoke because people smoke for nicotine. there is a threshold level you have got to have to keep people smoking. so the choice is we will take out more and more of the carcinogens and reduce the nicotine so that people are not addicted, or we leave it in in order to make sure that there is enough nicotine to keep people addicted. and, of course, they chose to never go below that threshold and to leave it in so that people remained addicted. you have seen the research that they did over the years about why people smoke. they knew and understood, going back to the '50s, that people smoked for nicotine, that people smoked because they became addicted to the nicotine. and you will have those documents now to see as you deliberate. one of the most important documents you will have is monograph 13. it is a publication that dr. burns told you about in which the national cancer institute evaluated whether these attempts to reduce tar actually did any good, whether filters did any good, whether the design changes that they made in the '50s did any good. and dr. burns was candid with you and said, you know, back in 1981, i was part of the public health committee, public health service, recommending that smokers should switch to low-tar cigarettes as a way of reducing their risks. but we did not know what the tobacco company knew, what they already understood from their internal research and that simply was this fact. a low-tar cigarette does not mean the smoker gets low tar. because the smoker has to have a given level of nicotine to stay addicted, and in order to get that level of nicotine, they will smoke more cigarettes. they will cover the holes, which dilute the smoke, so that more of the smoke comes in, and because of this phenomenon called "compensation," they are not getting low tar at all. and as a result, years later when they look at all of the scientific evidence and evaluate it, there was no reduction in risk. there was no benefit whatsoever from filtered cigarettes or low-tar cigarettes. they simply did not work. and one of the conclusions of that report is that simple fact, that because of compensation that these low-yield cigarettes did not reduce the risk whatsoever. now, a major part of their campaign included the use of image advertising to develop these themes of denial and concealment, a controversy of reassurance. dr. goldberg told you that between 1954 and 1995, they spent $150 billion, in 2006 dollars, on their massive advertising approach, $4 billion a year, $10 million a day. they spent more on the massive advertising in one day than the public health community had to spend on public health announcements in an entire year. now, this just is not dr. goldberg telling you that. take a look at the various consensus reports we have put in evidence, starting with the 1967 report from the federal trade commission, which is required to report to congress and concluded that cigarette advertising continues to be pervasive in the american society, although at that point in time, in 1981, it had already been prohibited from the broadcast media. there is a report from the surgeon general that you will have in evidence as well, called "preventing tobacco use among young people," 1994 surgeon general's report. and it analyzes the pervasive nature of cigarette advertising and the amount of money they spent. there is a table in there. you can look at that table, and it shows you how much money was spent. and then there is the national cancer institute's monograph 19, "the role of the media in promoting and reducing tobacco use." in that report, you will see that in 2005, the u.s. tobacco industry spent $13.5 billion on tobacco advertising and promotion. and you will have charts that are included in monograph 19, 4.7 and 4.8. those charts show you how much money they spent and how much they spent on particular brands like marlboros. there is just no doubt that tobacco advertising dominated our culture throughout this entire time period because it was so massive, so pervasive. back in the '50s, you could not turn on the television without seeing a tobacco ad. it just totally dominated open television. and the characters smoked in the programs. the monograph 19 reports that tobacco advertising has been dominated by the three themes, the satisfaction theme, assuaging anxieties about the dangers of smoking, allaying the health concern, trying to convince people that there really was not a concern, what we called the campaign of scientific controversy and the campaign of reassurance and a third theme of associating cigarette smoking with desirable outcomes: independence, attractiveness, social success, sexual attraction, thinness. those image themes worked in given people, kids primarily, to start smoking and keep addicted adult smokers smoking. now, here's an example of their attempts to assuage anxieties about the health of cigarettes, and it is a particularly important example because this is a cigarette brand manufactured by philip morris that rayfield brown smoked, the multifilter, in which there is a suggestion that there is a reduction in tar and consequently it must be better for you. and the theme not only included that 95 percent theme, but also used outdoor image advertising of healthy, attractive people to suggest that cigarette smoking was okay. now, philip morris will say, well, everybody does that. look at budweiser commercials or look at the commercial for this. well, aside from the fact that those other constant things do not kill almost 500,000 americans every year, the point is, yes, that is what everybody uses because it works. and because they were using themes that worked that every other advertising used as well, it normalizes smoking. it makes it appear that it is acceptable, that it is part of the culture. so certainly these are common themes, and that is the whole point of what is wrong with doing it in the first place. here's some other examples of using image advertise to allay the health theme. they also directed their advertising ad kicks, and we know that because their internal documents show first that they understood that most smokers start out as teenagers, whether -- you have heard it said. almost ninety percent of new smokers are kids. they knew that. and because they knew it, they went out and surveyed and interviewed high school kids to try and figure out what they could do in their way of advertising to get them to smoke. and then there is this incredible document that you will see, smoking patterns of teenagers and its importance to philip morris. and what this document says -- and we will look at it -- is that the success of philip morris is the result of selling marlboros to teenagers. it went from the seventh largest company ultimately to the largest cigarette company in the world on the strength of the marlboro brand. you saw that documentary we showed you where they talk about how successful their ads were and how it caused their sales to go up. but what they did not tell you and what this document will show you is that almost seventy percent of 15-year-olds at the time smoked marlboros. marlboro's brand success was based on 15-year-olds. the company's success was based on selling to 15-year-olds. and what this document talks about is the demographics were changing. the number of young people who are smoking is less because of the changes in the daily consumption. and when the young people are fewer, it is going to adversely affect philip morris the most, because that is who we sell our cigarettes to. and this whole memorandum is about the economic impact on them from the change in the demographics and the fact that they would be selling fewer cigarettes to kids. the campaign also included denying that cigarettes were addictive. and you saw that leading up to the most blatant example, going to congress, raising your right hand, swearing to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth and then claiming under oath that cigarettes were not addictive when, in fact, your own files were full of your scientists telling you they were addictive, and you designed your cigarettes to create and sustain addiction. and we showed you some of those documents. but let me digress a moment. this is an important point. there is a question here that is been raised about whether all this advertising is effective in causing people to smoke. and -- and you are likely to hear philip morris say, how many of them start to engage maybe after it starts? finally, everybody's believed that advertising is effective. that really misses the point. the point in regard to conspiracy is that this advertising concealed what they knew and omitted all of the underlying health effects that were the basis of conspiracy. but does it work? now there is massive scientific evidence that shows that their advertising program caused kids to start smoking, and it resulted in increased smoking, that is, people continuing smoking. this is the major conclusion of the 2007 report from the national cancer institute, as you folks have see in the evidence. it is repeated as well in a report of the surgeon general. the evidence is sufficient to conclude there is a causal relationship between advertising and promotional efforts of the tobacco companies and the initiation of people starting smoking, and the progression of tobacco use among young people. the evidence is overwhelming. dr. goldberg told you about 4,000 cites in the most recent report that supported that statement. part of their advertising also was placing cigarettes in movies. they did it by providing free product. they did it in a variety of ways. and the report of the national cancer institute notes that between 1978 and 1980, they placed cigarette smoking in 191 movies -- that is philip morris alone -- many of which were rated pg, some of which, like the muppet movie, was g. and we saw an example of that, grease, and a movie that i think teenage girls for the last three decades have been provided and watched over and over and a play about it. what this really shows is what starting smoking's all about. the first time somebody picks up a cigarette, it is nauseous and you cough and it is not a very nice thing. and as philip morris recognized, a 16-year-old, 15-year-old picks up that cigarette for psychosocial reasons, peer pressure, to be cool, be an adult, be a little rebellious, but they quickly become addicted. and the second big scene that we saw really shows a point, how the movie depicted a change in the lead character sandy, olivia newton john, to this vamp, seductress, to what any 16-year-old girl would love to be. you think that had an impact on other 16-year-old girls that went out and started smoking? of course, they did. that is why they were placed in the movies in the first place, including in superman. you saw the marlboro truck in superman. let us turn next to the question of addiction. there is no question that smoking is addictive. what that means is how incredibly hard it is to quit smoking. dr. burns showed you this information on quitting. almost eighty percent of smokers went on to quit. almost 7 percent try to quit each year -- i'm sorry -- fifty percent. only 6 percent are successful six months later, and only 3 percent are successful long-term. now, that does not mean that after years of trying, someone's not going to be successful. but that is the whole point. for almost everyone, for 97 percent of smokers, it takes multiple attempts, years to try and quit smoking. that is how powerful nicotine is in addicting people. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine because nicotine is what addicts smokers, and nicotine is what they made sure stayed in a cigarette. their own internal documents showed they understood that nicotine was addictive and was the principal means by which they were able to sell cigarettes. and they designed their cigarettes to be addictive. dr. proctor told you there are three ways they did that. one is you do not become addicted at the levels you see unless you inhale cigarettes. you inhale cigarettes into your lung. nicotine hits your brain in about 10 or 20 seconds. if you do not inhale, it takes much, much longer, and you are much less likely to become addicted. so how do you make them inhale? you add all these flavors to reduce the harshness. you flue cure it. you select a tobacco that people can inhale because you need smokers to inhale to make sure they are addicted. that is what the huge increase of consumption of cigarettes was all about. the industry was able to make them inhalable and thus more addictive. in order to make sure that there is sufficient nicotine to be addictive, they also have to control the nicotine level because tobacco out in the field does not have a uniform level of nicotine. one might have one level; another one might have another level. so they have to bring them together to make sure they get the right amount. they add reconstituted tobacco, in which they create a paper slurry and chop it up to look like tobacco and spread nicotine back on it to make sure that they have more formal levels, and they design their cigarettes to have a specific level. this is a really crucial document. this document is the multifilter design, the cigarette that rayfield changed to, in which they had a specific specification as to how much nicotine it should contain. the amount that dr. proctor told you was the sweet spot in which you could make sure that people were addicted. nicotine can also be controlled in a variety of other ways. in fact, it shows the sort of thing they did to control it. one of the things was the use of ammonia, acetaldehyde to try and control ph. dr. proctor explained that to you. the ph of the smoke will determine how much of it is absorbed in the lungs and how quickly it gets to the brain. if you add ammonia, you will change the ph so that the nicotine gets to the brain faster, in hopes that it is more likely to be addictive. philip morris added ammonia to its products. this is the conclusion of the 2010 surgeon general's report, that cigarettes have been researched, designed and manufactured to increase the likelihood that initiation will lead to dependence and difficulty achieving cessation due to the contents of the emissions in addition to nicotine and it references ammonia compound. and these design features increase freebase nicotine, produce larger puffs, make it more likely that there is nicotine there. that is what marlboro was all about. it was so popular because of its nicotine kept, from adding ammonia and then the amount of nicotine to it. so at the time that they were designing their cigarettes to make sure that they were addictive, that they were adding ammonia, that they were doing all these things to make sure that they were inhalable, that they were controlling the levels of nicotine they needed for addiction, they were present before congress, and denying, as all the other tobacco companies did as part of the conspiracy, that nicotine is addictive. in fact, nicotine is the fundamental reason that individuals continued to smoke, as the 2010 surgeon general's report suggests. and it is the reason that people end up getting cancer because of the nicotine in smoke. now, let us go from talking about those events. and you are going to hear, i think, from philip morris that we have to prove our case by clear and convincing evidence. it is absolutely clear and convincing that they engaged in conspiracy. there is no evidence to the contrary. it is clear and convincing as to what they did in terms of denial, concealment, creating a doubt in the controversy, reassuring the smoker. there is no evidence to the contrary. it could not be any clearer. it could not be any more convincing. what they want to talk about is whether or not, in fact, it had an impact on rayfield brown. and so let us turn to that issue. what in their conspiracy is a substantial cause of rayfield brown continuing to smoke and as a result of this, did he get lung cancer? now, they introduced all kinds of evidence trying to blame mr. brown. you saw that from them in the case, his mind told him, his conscience told him that he knew. he went to the pool hall. why is all of that of interest? is to blame mr. brown. now, let me be clear, they have a right to defend themselves, and i'm not criticizing them for their defending. but i have a right to tell you that their defense is not true, that it is irrelevant, that it is nothing more than a distraction from the real issues in the case, just like distraction science by tirc. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. may we approach? i need to make a motion. the court: all right. ladies and gentlemen, while we are at sidebar, you can stand. please do not talk. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. reilly: judge, counsel has just equated the defense in this case to -- to the fraudulent concealment to the conspiracy that is been part of the causes of action in this case. it is highly improper and i move for a mistrial based on it. it is -- it has been the subject of countless -- realized by courts in tobacco liti- -- in engle litigation that it is totally impermissible and that counsel just did it right now in front of this jury. so i move for a mistrial. mr. shields: i specifically said i was not criticizing what they were doing and i'm not. but you have to have a right to say that what they say is not true. they have -- mr. reilly: i have a problem -- i have a problem with this jury -- mr. shields saying our defense was inaccurate or our defense was off target or something like that. what he said was -- and you can pull it up on your screen. what he said was that our defense in this case was nothing more than or the same as this distraction campaign to defraud. that is just what he said. i cannot -- i cannot restate it. you can see it in the transcript. and it was well beyond simply saying that, you know, our defense is inaccurate and not supported by the evidence and things of that nature. so i move for a mistrial. the court: all right. the court will take it under advisement. i'll going to -- how much longer do you think, mr. shields? mr. shields: i want to say something. i'm going to try to wrap it up in 15 minutes so that i have a half hour left. mr. reilly: i think your honor already indicated that rebuttal was 10, 15 minutes long, so. mr. shields: well, i do not intend to use it, i just -- depends on what you have to say, if you raise some issues that i have to -- the court: all right. thank you. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court, in the presence of the jury:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take a short break, and we are going to take a longer break in between the closing statements. this break also is to assist our court reporter, who has been typing diligently all morning. so this will just be a short break to allow you to go back to the jury room, use the restroom, probably about five minutes. mr. shields tells me he is got about 15 or 20 more minutes. we will then take our mid-morning break at that point in time. please do not talk about the case in any regard. so we will just take a short break now for about five minutes. (recess taken.) [#deleted motion for mistrial#] mr. shields: thank you, your honor. one matter i wanted to tell you about. i told you about the importance of that document in which they talked about the impact of teenagers on philip morris. let me -- you may not have been able to see the document itself. it is p366, if you want to take a look at it during your deliberations. we were just starting to talk about the defenses, and as i was saying to you, i'm not here to criticize or say they do not have the right to defend this case, and i'm certainly not equating anything they are doing defending this case as to anything that is happened before. i do want to talk specifically about their defense as you have seen and how they really do not address the issues here at all. sort of categorize them into a few categories. the first category i would call their use of documents to suggest that some people knew smoking was harmful prior to the time of this conspiracy. and you recall you saw an 1845 letter from president adams, and for the life of me i still do not understand what the point of that is. you saw a sears catalog from the turn of the century advertising something to help you quit. it is difficult for me to understand what that has to do with the issues in the case. and you saw a reader's digest and so forth. i take it the whole point of that is to say mr. brown has some responsibility for continuing to smoke because there was information out there at some point in the past that smoking might be harmful. but this case is not about whether mr. brown was responsible or was a cause of his own death. the issue for you to determine is whether their conspiracy was a substantial cause of the death. now, there can be more than one cause. two events can come together and be a cause, and both can be equally responsible. let me give you an example. i'm certainly not suggesting this is an example of what we have here, but it demonstrates the point. think about an automobile accident. one driver runs a red light and goes into the intersection. another driver coming from the other way is speeding 20 miles above the speed limit and crashes into the car that ran the red light. they both violated the law. take away either that they did and you would not have a collision. they are both substantial causes of that automobile accident. there can be more than one cause. well, the question here is not whether mr. brown was a cause. the question here is whether they, that is philip morris and the conspirators, were a substantial cause of his continuing smoking. now, i will tell you quite candidly, i do not dispute that mr. brown could have tried earlier to quit smoking, that we could criticize him for not doing more to quit smoking, that he may have some responsibility for not quitting smoking. that does not have anything to do with the issue. the question is whether they also are a substantial cause. so you will have to evaluate whether the conspiracy is a substantial reason that he continued to smoke. the second thing they talk about is the defense you have heard before, no secret. was this document secret? you have heard it repeated time and time again. i call it the no-secret defense. totally misses the point. the secret is not that people were saying that smoking causes lung cancer. you would not have had a conspiracy if nobody was saying it. you would not have had a conspiracy unless it was public information, unless, as dr. proctor said, it was big news. that is not the secret. to ask people, was it a secret somebody was saying it, was it a secret it was difficult to quit, totally misses the point. the secret is what they internally knew and believed, what they internally did and concealed from the public and never disclosed it. now, you also heard this phrase waiting to hear. i call it the waiting-to-hear defense. was mr. brown waiting to hear something? for the life of me i do not understand what that means at all. if something is being concealed from you, what are you waiting to hear? you do not even know what is being concealed from you, how could you be waiting to hear? does that suggest that somehow they are not responsible? think of another analogy. once again, not saying this is the equivalent of them. think of this analogy. a realtor and an owner conspire to sell a house and not reveal that it is got a major leak in the roof. they paint over the stain -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: hold on one minute, mr. shields. mr. reilly. mr. reilly: improper analogies for our litigation. the court: meaning different facts from this case? mr. reilly: sure. the court: that objection is sustained. mr. shields: your honor, may i be heard on that? the court: you may. ladies and gentlemen, you are welcome to stand. (sidebar bar conference outside the hearing of the jury.) the court: go ahead, mr. shields. mr. shields: the whole point of an analogy is to illustrate a point. i'm not saying it is factually identical at all, but to say here is something to help you understand. i've never had anyone say i cannot in closing argument do an analogy that is more common to the people than the facts you have here. the court: well, you never until today, mr. shields. i think the problem -- i understand, in situations you have different types of purported breaches, and i understand those types of analogies. i think the difficulty is when you are dealing with intentional behavior analogizing to other facts you run the risk of getting into situations that are potentially problematic. my next concern is the analogy -- the other things, the out of town, and those types of things i understand for all those same reasons. i think -- i think you are going to talk about an intentional tort, lying related to a house, and that just -- it just concerns me because i think that is a higher level analogy. but, you know, perhaps everyone else does it. i've been accused of that before by mr. reilly with regard to this partial verdict, but that is my concern with that analogy. mr. reilly, certainly i'll hear from you. mr. reilly: you made my argument for me, your honor. this is -- there is no way that people can start talking about other wrongful acts, intentional wrongful acts, and then say this is an analogous situation or a situation in which you are going to learn this lesson, or you experienced this lesson. just completely inappropriate. the court: that is my ruling. thank you. (following sidebar.) mr. shields: certainly mr. brown was not waiting to hear information that he knew nothing about. you cannot wait to hear something you do not know. that is the whole point of conspiracy, that you conceal material information. they also have a defense in which they talk about what his mother told him, what his coaches told him. once again, another attempt to blame mr. brown. that is not the issue. the issue is whether the conspiracy was a substantial cause as well. you recall kaiser thomas specifically said his mother's concern was he was not old enough. when he later was older he smoked around her. her concern was not that it caused cancer. the coach's concern was whether it impacted your stamina, not whether it caused cancer. those are wholly unrelated issues to what we are talking about. you may also hear that there is no evidence that rayfield heard their statements. it would be impossible not to hear. as the witnesses described to you, they were pervasive. you could not grow up in america in the 1950's and 60's and 70's and not see their advertising. you could not grow up in america in that time and not understand from their massive pervasive public relations campaign that they claimed there was nothing harmful in cigarettes, that they asserted there was a continuing controversy when there was not, that they said they would be taking out anything that was harmful when they knew they could not take it out. you from your common sense can understand and know given the extent of the conspiracy that he had to hear, he had to know like all the rest of us. let us then turn to the specific evidence here of substantial cause. the first evidence is what in fact happened? dr. burns took these diagrams to show you the impact of the disclosure of information on consumption, the drop, and then the impact of the conspiracy and how it went back up. and then only started dropping again as the evidence became more and more overwhelming and there was more and more information available. the point is that lung cancer rates directly follow those consumption lines, and had that information back at this end then moved 20 years out to when the conspiracy started in the first place what would have happened? millions of lives that would have been saved included the high likelihood of rayfield brown. that is a compelling piece of evidence. secondly, you heard about labeling, and the point is that study after study has shown that cigarette labeling was totally ineffective in advising people of the real risk of smoking, and that addicted smokers just did not accept it, and the surveys, the polling information confirms that information, starting with the 1967 federal trade commission report, the 1981 federal trade commission report, and more recently surgeon general reports. and the reason for that is addiction. dr. burns described for you the effect of addiction on information and whether you accept information. and what he told you, you have these competing considerations, but what addiction does is it makes an addicted smoker particularly susceptible to denial, makes them particularly susceptible to the assertion that there is a controversy, that there is doubt. it makes to them particularly susceptible to reassurance. so the very things this conspiracy was doing was designed to play into an addicted smoker's desire to continue smoking. that psychological crutch that the president of philip morris recognized back in 1964, because there is this addiction cycle, and you can interrupt the addiction cycle in an attempt of a smoker to quit by such things as filters, claims of low tar, and the very things that were done as part of this conspiracy. dr. burns explained to you the impact on the addicted smoker's ability to quit, the fact that they engaged in this campaign claiming effectiveness of filters and low tar cigarettes. the industry itself has long admitted privately that they could not defend their argument of free choice if addiction were known. and that is the reason that up to 1995 in congress -- '94 in congress they denied addiction and did not admit it until 2000. finally, and perhaps the most important piece of information, relates to the multi-filter. mary described for you meeting a philip morris representative at an event who had a table of literature and was handing out free samples of multi-filter, with the advertisement of a 95 percent reduction in tar from other cigarettes, and the clear implication that it was safer and less risky. that is what she took from it. she believes that is what rayfield took from it, whether he said that outright or not. but his conduct speaks volumes. he had been smoking philip morris cigarettes for years. he now switches to the multi-filter. how do we know that? because mary bought his cigarettes every friday at the publix store, a carton. he was smoking about a pack and-a-half a day, and she continued to buy those multi-filter cigarettes every week, week in and week out, a carton at a time at her favorite grocery store. now, it is true kaiser thomas may have brought some benson & hedges down when he came down every few months, but he was not there week in and week out buying the cigarettes. he was not there like mary was week in and week out knowing what her husband smoked. all of those brands, the philip morris brand he started with, the switch to the multi-filter brand, benson & hedges, were manufactured by philip morris usa. they are responsible for those brands. and what the switch to the low tar shows you is that he is relying, believing that this is a safer alternative, and switching to it in effect trying to reduce any risk. that is what causation is. had they told him the truth that they knew cigarettes caused cancer, that they knew they were addicting, that they knew this low tar multi-filter cigarette was no lower in tar, was no safer, that filters were no safer, then chances that he would have quit smoking much earlier would have been dramatically higher. that is what substantial cause is. but for this conspiracy, this conspiracy to keep addicted smokers smoking, there is a high likelihood by clear and convincing evidence that he would have quit smoking earlier, he would not have died before he was just 59, that he would have had a more expected life expectancy for another 22 years, and we would not be here. in evaluating their reprehensibility for that conduct you are entitled to consider the fact that it was not just rayfield brown, that during that entire time period 20 million americans died prematurely from smoking cigarettes. thank you. mr. shields: ladies and gentlemen, i'm not going to take much more of your time. i've talked with you too much already. and i do not want to go through every point point by point. i do not think that is necessary at this point. but i do have some preliminary observations that i think are applicable to what you heard. let us start with the fact that almost nothing that you heard from mr. reilly has anything to do with the issues in this case. he simply did not discuss what you are supposed to be deciding. and by that i mean the issue in this case that the court was instructing you -- and here's a copy of the court's instruction -- on the punitive damage claim. it is whether conduct in furtherance of a conspiracy between philip morris-usa and the other tobacco companies to conceal material information regarding health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a substantial cause of rayfield brown's death, and that such conduct warrants punitive damages under the standards set forth. now, mr. reilly puts this up and says, this is all about mr. brown. no. it is all about the conduct of philip morris and whether the conduct of philip morris was a substantial cause. the issue is not, as you would think from what you heard from mr. reilly, whether mr. brown was a contributing cause; the issue is whether their conduct in the conspiracy was also a cause, a substantial cause. i told you when we first talked about this that, first, there can be more than one cause of an event. two things can come together. and we are not here to tell you that mr. brown did not contribute. we are not here to tell you that he did not have any responsibility. we are not here to talk about what role his conduct played. that is already been decided. this case -- this phase of the case is about their conduct. it is about whether to award punitive damages based on their conduct. mr. reilly would not talk about that. not one word in that entire closing argument about their conduct. he simply misstates what the issue is for you to decide. he also misstates the claims. he asserts, for example, that we failed to prove to you that he started to smoke because of the conspiracy. well, nobody contended that he started to smoke because of the conspiracy. he started to smoke before there ever was a conspiracy. we never even suggested that as a possibility. what we told you was we had a culture of smoking created by their massive advertising. he started to smoke like other kids of his generations when everybody around him smoked. as kaiser said, every male they knew smoked. and they smoked everywhere. they smoked in courtrooms and on buses in restaurants in bars, every place you could go, people smoked. it was a culture of smoking. and he, like other kids of that generation and since, decided to try and experiment with smoking, became addicted, and became a regular smoker for most of his life. all of that is true. the conspiracy deals with why things did not change when it became clear that smoking caused lung cancer. why the culture did not change. why what happened in the last decade did not happen in the 1950s. think about that. think about how different it would have been in 1954 if the industry would have told the truth and said, we have got a problem. people should not be smoking. it is going to be killing people. what can we do about solving that problem? and if instead of entering into a decades'-long conspiracy to deny that there were hazards of smoking, to claim that they would take out any harmful elements and to try and keep smokers smoking by reassuring them, think how different the world would have been. the nonsmoking climate we have today could well have been the culture of the mid-'50s instead of continuing the culture of smoking throughout the '50s and throughout the '60s and throughout the '70s and into the '80s and even into the '90s. it would have been a totally different culture that we would have had. and what would have been the impact, not just on rayfield brown, but on all of those other smokers who died prematurely? the third observation: that is that they offered absolutely not one shred of evidence to refute the claims of their misconduct. they nibbled around the edges with their cross-examination of witnesses, and they attacked dr. proctor and dr. burns about how much they had been paid. but never even attempted to refute what they had to say because they cannot. forget whether dr. burns is paid some substantial amount of money for testifying over the last 30 years or how much dr. proctor has been paid, other than the fact that a major part of that is because they constantly take their depositions. what did dr. burns tell you? 150 times he is been deposed? driving up the expense, driving up the amount that he is been paid, so that they can then talk about how much he is been paid in court. if you really want to know the unvarnished truth, look at the 2014 surgeon general's report. it provides a summary, exhibit 799, of the conspiracy in the first chapter. everything that dr. burns told you, everything that dr. proctor told you, everything that dr. goldberg told you is in the 2014 surgeon general's report. the consensus of scientific opinion based upon peer review from dozens of experts, not just dr. burns, dr. proctor, and dr. goldberg. and where was any witness from philip morris to deny that was true? they did not call one. no evidence whatsoever to refute. fourth and final, as an observation: you are shown board after board of testimony, primarily dealing with things that are not an issue in this case, that do not address the real issue in the case, but it is all cherry-picked. it is pulled out of context to imply something other than what the witness really said. you know, think about the example of dr. burns being asked about the 95 percent quote. you heard mr. reilly say 95 percent of smokers knew it. dr. burns said so. when he asked dr. burns about that, dr. burns said, let me tell you the context of it. he would not let him tell him. dr. burns said that over and over again. he would not ask him. he would not let him tell him. finally, dr. burns said, look, it was hyperbole. i was trying to say that another pamphlet was not the issue; that we had to figure out a better way of convincing addicted smokers to quit smoking. but that context just all gets washed away when you cherry-pick a little quote out of something. you know as another example, mr. reilly says, where is the evidence that he ever tried to quit? really? jennifer testified they talked about quitting in 1983, and as far as she knew, he did quit. she never saw him smoke after that. kaiser thomas said, we tried to quit several times before 1986, and then in 1986 we made a pact to quit. kaiser thomas thought he had quit. mary talked about him not smoking in the house and saying he had quit, but she could smell it on his breathe. so what conclusion do you draw from all of that? he, like most smokers, had a difficult time quitting. no doubt quit, relapsed, quit, relapsed. that is what happens. dr. burns told you, you take all those people that want to start smoking -- that want to quit smoking and try to quit, make a sincere, honest attempt to quit, six months later only 6 percent are still able to quit. a year later, only 3 percent are able to quit. that is a difficult, difficult process taken many times. why? because of addiction. addiction is the fundamental issue that underlies all of this. and although addiction is not an issue in this case -- it is already been decided by the prior jury and you are bound by that and mr. reilly told you they were not going to contest it -- throughout all of this recitation of the testimony, he just ignores that mr. brown was addicted, that a prior jury has found he was addicted, and the impact of addiction. their own documents talk about how addiction means you cannot claim free choice. dr. burns told you addiction meant that they were receptive to this denials campaign, to this conspiracy to withhold what they really knew and concealed. and ladies and gentlemen, contrary to what you were told by mr. reilly, the contention is not that he did not know that people were saying that cigarettes cause cancer. the contention is not that he did not know it was difficult to quit. the point, contrary to what he would claim, is that they concealed not only what they knew and believed, but they concealed that they, in fact, made cigarettes addictive, they designed them to get kids to smoke, that they focused their advertising on getting the kids to smoke and become addicted, that they knew that the low tar in filter cigarettes which they impliedly claimed would be safer, were not a bit safer because of the way people smoked. those are the claims. that is what was concealed, not whether or not someone was saying that smoking was harmful. of course he knew people were saying smoking was harmful, otherwise there would have never been any need for a conspiracy in the first place. of course the news was there, otherwise their stock prices would not have dropped and they would not have gotten in a panic and gone to the plaza hotel and tried figure out a public relations campaign to keep selling cigarettes for the next 60 years and watching 20 million people die as a result of it. now, let us turn from that to talking about compensatory damages. it is correct, as mr. reilly said, that no amount of money can pay for the loss of a husband and father. but the law provides that money is how you compensate someone for a wrongful death. you as jurors have taken an oath to comply with the law, the court has given you an instruction as to what you are to do, and that is awarding punitive damages. now, mr. reilly told you about we all die. mr. reilly: i'm sorry. i object. you did not instruct them that they are to award punitive damages. the court: i think you misspoke. mr. shields: i'm sorry. i misspoke. compensatory damages. thank you, mr. reilly. the court instructed you on awarding compensatory damages and the amount. mr. reilly did not dispute the fact that because of the prior determinations you are to award compensatory damages, not only for the 375,000 but the additional amount. and he suggested that the amounts that we have referenced were too high in comparative to the average annual salary. ladies and gentlemen, are we really here to say that someone's life is measured by a man's salary? that the loss of a husband and a father is based upon what the average annual salary is? i hardly think so. lost wages have already been determined and are part of the verdict form that you have. what you are here to determine is, based upon the amount upon for the loss, the quality of the loss, the degree and the effect, what money would appropriately compensate mary for not only her pain and suffering but separately for her loss of companionship and protection from her husband for 22 years of his life that she lost. and for jennifer, not just the pain and suffering of his loss at the time and in the years since, but the loss of his parental guidance, instruction, and companionship for the last 24 -- what will be 22 years. and you are to determine what is a fair and just figure. mr. reilly suggests a million dollars for mary brown, 500,000 for jennifer. i suggest to you that fair and just compensation for a loss of that magnitude over that period of time is worth far more than the minimal amount that mr. reilly suggested. i gave you my suggestion. ultimately it is your decision as to what is fair and just considering the totality of the circumstances, including the length of time of the loss. so you fill out the form dealing with the amount of compensatory damages. it was interesting mr. reilly talked about was there any reason in connection with punitive damages to believe that mr. brown did not hear and did not know about cigarettes causing cancer. but apparently he does not use that same reasoning when it comes to talking about their conspiracy. you were told by the expert witnesses that this conspiracy was so massive -- and you saw the amount spent on advertising, for example, and you saw the extensive public relations campaign and the constant activities of the tobacco industry to pursue this denials campaign. is there any reason to believe that he did not see that avalanche of information? dr. goldberg told you in terms of an avalanche of information that the information from them just drowned out anything from the public health community. and you saw a surgeon general's report specifically quoting the amount of money they spent in comparison to how little money could be spent on public service. one day's advertising equalled the entire budget for any public service announcement. they show you, for example, a public service announcement with mr. talman on it, and act like surely he saw this. well, recall the testimony. those public service announcements only ran for a brief period of time, under what was called the fairness doctrine, in which for every ad -- three or four ads, there had to be a public service announcement. well, that was the last thing the tobacco industry wanted, public service announcements on television. and so as testified to by dr. proctor, they agreed to remove ads from television in order to get the public service announcements off television. and, yet, they come into court and say, surely he saw these public service announcements. he also talked about the posters on the post office vehicles. that is another interesting thing to bring up, as if surely mr. brown saw them and that somehow deals with their conspiracy. one of the documents you will have -- p-738. p-738 deals with those posters from the post office. and like other aspects of the conspiracy, you have just been told a little bit of the story. yes, there was a proposal to put those posters on postal trucks. and then the tobacco industry went after the u.s. postal service to prevent it from happening. and they got their supporters in congress to bring up the matter and conduct an investigation, and they hauled the head of the post office before congress and succeeded in getting the posters taken off of the postal trucks. that is p-738. mr. reilly talks about the reasoner example. played it again to you. but he left out the most important part. the part where harry reasoner talks about what cigarettes mean to people and how people will respond to whether they should be quit. let us play the real clip, not just the little part that mr. reilly showed you. (a video clip was played as follows:) "smoking has meant a great deal to a great many people. an old smoker never forgets how he started, and through the lifetimes of a lot of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages, have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. in a case like that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then you give him a chance to reform. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his. the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night." (the video clip was ended.) mr. shields: and there is no doubt that cigarettes were an old friend to millions and millions of smokers. and there is no doubt that the massive reassurance campaign of the tobacco industry kept those smokers smoking by telling them over and over again: there is nothing harmful in cigarettes. if there is, we will find it and we will take it out, so you might as well continue smoking. they did that because that message worked with addicted smokers like rayfield brown. they did that knowing that cancer-causing substances were in every class of compounds in smoke, and that there was no possible way to take it out, as they were suggesting over and over again. the issue is what their conduct did. the issue is not whether mr. brown heard that cigarettes cause cancer. the issue is not even whether mr. brown also bears some responsibility. he does. the question you have to answer is whether this massive conspiracy, whether their conduct to support that massive conspiracy that ranged from 1954 up to at least 2000, also was a contributing factor, a substantial factor in causing mr. brown's death. and i submit to you under the evidence that you have seen in this case, had they acted differently from the very beginning, the world would have changed rapidly and people like mr. brown would have quit long before they did, and millions of lives would have been saved. thank you for your attention. we appreciate it. we look forward to your verdict.