mr. reilly: thank you. i thought it was going to be good afternoon, but it is still morning, so good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. reilly: you know, i want to start my closing argument the same way i started my opening statement, and that is by thanking you guys for your service as jurors. we have taken you from your homes, your jobs, your lives for three weeks now. and we have asked you to do the service that is so important to our civil justice system; right? and that is to take the evidence that is occurred here in this courtroom and couple that with the law that judge jay has just read to you, and then take the verdict form that he is going to give you now, after i stop talking to you and mr. shields has another opportunity to talk to you again, and then take it and answer the questions as only you guys unanimously see fit and resolve this civil dispute; right? and -- so what we hope, to make the system work really well, is that the jurors will pay close attention to what goes on in the courtroom, and you guys have done a wonderful job about that. there is no question about it. so on behalf of hassia, myself, philip morris, thank you very much. 3566 all right. now, in the beginning of my opening statement, i said -- and do not be afraid of all those boards. yes, we will go through them all, but it will not be that bad. i said that i was confident, when i put these boards up -- these are permanent, you know? they are solid. and i said that i was confident that the evidence was going to be just exactly what i was showing you on my boards. and i said, i'm going to be using those same boards when i appear before you in my closing argument, and clearly i am. clearly i am. because it did. it turned out to be, especially in connection with the story of mr. brown and mr. brown's life and mr. brown's smoking history. and so, once again, i am going to be using many of the same boards. and i'm supplementing those with additional boards that point out other things that occurred in this courtroom that i think are really important for you guys to be refreshed about; okay? and so when i started, i put this board up. this was my first board. and i said, what is this case about? what is all the evidence in this case going to be about? what are the issues in this case about? i said it is about two words: control and responsibility. who was in control of mr. brown's lifestyle choices, especially his decisions to begin smoking, continue smoking, and decide whether he wanted to quit smoking or not; right? and how many days and hours of testimony have we had in this courtroom about that very subject? that is what this case has been about. this case is not a class action. it is not about the american public. mr. shields said, you can infer things, about things that happened -- this case is about one smoker and one smoker only, is not it, and that is mr. brown; the decisions that mr. brown made, and who was in control of mr. brown's decisions. then i said responsibility. the question will be, who, if anybody, other than mr. brown, was responsible for the decisions that he made about how he lived his life, how he dealt with his own body; right? and that is what this case has been about. there is been an effort here to -- mr. shields said in his closing argument that you may well find that mr. brown was responsible for his -- his decisions. well, how could it be otherwise; right? 3568 but there is an effort here to make philip morris also responsible for the decisions that mr. brown made; right? so i put this board up second. and i said, watch for evidence -- i suggested this to you. you guys -- you are the judges in this case of the facts of the case. and so i said -- i suggested to you, watch in this case to see who was in control of mr. brown's decisions to begin and continue smoking. i suggested to you, look at who controlled when, where, and how much he smoked. wow, did you have some interesting -- and we will go over it -- some interesting evidence about the degree to which mr. brown controlled where, when, and how much he smoked. did he ever lose control, or did he continue to demonstrate his ability to control how much, where and when, and around who, in front of whom, he smoked throughout his life? and especially -- i mean, we really got -- we really got exquisite, exquisite evidence about that from jennifer brown, from mrs. brown. now, i realize there is been -- well, i'll talk about it more in a minute. i'll talk about it more in a minute. and, finally, did anything that philip morris said or failed to say have a substantial impact on mr. brown's smoking? mr. shields just said, you can infer, you can infer that it did. why did he use the word "infer"? because there is no evidence. if he had evidence, he would not have said, you can infer it. he would have said, here's the evidence. but instead he said, you can infer it. but i suggested that you look for evidence in this case. i also said these words are not going to appear in your instructions. they are not going to appear in the verdict form. and they do not. and we now have the verdict form with the specific questions that you are being asked to answer. so let us just look at the verdict form. i think i'll put this one up over here, because we will leave this up. is that level? pretty level? level enough. all right. the first question you are going to be asked to answer is, "was rayfield brown addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer? yes or no?" 3570 3572 now, that is really two questions, is not it? you can put a period right here. there is a comma, but you can put a period right there. and the first question is, "was rayfield brown addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine?" now, you have heard a lot of evidence in this case addressing that very subject. there were three folks -- three experts who came here and talked to you about how physicians determined whether someone is addicted to nicotine -- cigarettes containing nicotine or not. now, judge jay is not going to give you an instruction -- you heard the instructions. he read them to you today. but there is no instruction that says how you are to determine whether someone is or is not addicted. these experts have been brought to suggest to you how they would go about doing it, but it is up to you guys to decide how you determine whether someone is or is not addicted. and then it is up to you guys to look at how mr. brown smoked and decide for yourselves whether he was addicted or not. but let us look at what the experts said. now, mr. shields mentioned dr. burns during his closing argument. and, yes, dr. burns said he did not have much trouble figuring out who is an addicted smoker. this is what he described an addicted smoker to be. he was talking about addicted smokers. he says, then when you stop, when you stop smoking, take your last puff, in about 40 minutes the nicotine levels have fallen down to half and they continue to go down. now, those receptors in your brain do not have any nicotine in them and now you start to feel bad; you do not feel right; you have difficulty concentrating; you feel irritable; you do not feel normal without the nicotine surrounding those receptors in your brain. so now in order to feel normal, you have got to have another cigarette. so every 30, 40 minutes, as your level starts to fall, you re-dose yourself, you get that level back up, so that you feel normal. so there you go. dr. burns -- an addicted smoker is somebody who is got to have a cigarette every 30, 40 minutes. you know -- you know what? you do not leave your common sense at that door. you live lives. you do not leave your common sense at that door. people -- there are people who have to have a cigarette every 30, 40 minutes. let me point this out. this is the trial transcript. what the court reporter is doing right now is taking down every word i say to you. and this gets typed up into a booklet. every page has 25 lines to it? the court reporter: (nods head.) mr. reilly: and every page, of course, is numbered. so we know exactly this was on page 1,002, lines 3 through 14, that he said that. right out of the transcript. no question about it. no debate. so for dr. burns, that is what an addicted smoker looks like. well, who do we have that addressed how mr. brown looked? well, we have his family; right? here is what michael brown said about his dad. my partner hassia was asking him these questions. said: "in fact your father was not the kind of person that had to have a cigarette; is not that true?" michael brown said, "you are right. you are right." "and your father, he was not an 'i've got to have a cigarette right now' type of person; right?" "you are right." trial transcript right there, page and line. "you are right." dr. burns, again -- mr. reilly -- oh, i found this so fascinating. you heard mr. shields stand right here, right about here, and tell you -- criticized dr. rosman for having used the term "recreational smoker." you just heard it an hour ago. i think the right word is lambasted. although people do not use that word anymore. but this is a question that mr. shields asked dr. burns. this is his words. he said, "are there any significant number of recreational smokers who are not addicted but just smoke socially?" that is mr. shields talking to his expert dr. burns. so why in the world is he so critical of dr. rosman for using the term "recreational smoker"? and did dr. burns have any trouble answering the question? did he say, "oh, my gosh. i've never heard of recreational smoker. i do not know what -- what are you talking about?" heck, no. what did dr. burns say? he said, "recreational smokers that are not addicted just smoke socially?" sure. yes, there are. there is about a little more 3574 3576 than twenty percent of that population. that is the smokers of this world, twenty percent. but there are individuals who either have never been daily smokers, that is, who have a cigarette when they are with a friend who is a smoker, but they do not smoke in between those times, or they are individuals who are trying to taper down. taper down. is not that what mr. brown did, taper down in 1983, in 1987, when he stopped smoking in front of his daughter in 1983; when he stopped smoking in front of his wife, son, except for two days in 1988, his best friend, kaiser thomas? but we have more from dr. burns. we know -- we know from the testimony of -- of jennifer brown what happened in 1983. and i'm going to talk about that testimony here in just a minute. mr. shields just described it as ambiguous, did not he? he used that word "ambiguous" and "vague." and he put up one little quote. i'll show you that same quote. but i'll show you so much more, so much more. here was dr. burns again. here he is describing what an addicted smoker cannot do. and you ask yourselves, is not that exactly what mr. brown did do? "we do not see a population of individuals who are addicted and smoke regularly 20 or more cigarettes a day and clearly were addicted who are then able to stop for a period of time and go back to only smoking on weekends with their friends." mr. brown, sam jones. is not that exactly what mr. brown did? he never smokes around his wife. he never smokes around his best friend. he never smokes around his daughter, his son. at work -- the only evidence in this case about him smoking at work is susan phillips who said, "i saw him smoke once a month." and she worked shoulder to shoulder with him in the same post office. just like an alcoholic, cannot go back to drinking socially. cannot go have one drink. cannot go drink socially with your friends. non-addicted people can do what mr. brown did. here's their dr. frazier, same subject, same situation. "addicted smokers cannot do that, can they? they cannot go from being a regular, daily smoker, an addicted regular, daily smoker down to being a casual smoker, can they?" "that is correct." but that is exactly what mr. brown did. that is exactly what mr. brown did. there is the trial transcript. that is their expert. mr. shields said, oh, well -- but you should -- there is no evidence of it, but you should assume or surmise that mr. brown continued to smoke lots of other times. but nobody came here and said that. there is no evidence of that. and who has the burden of proof in this case? mr. shields, mr. kalil. when they do not have evidence, they say you should infer it. that is the same as you should make it up because we do not have it. here's dr. rosman: "our folks who were at one point in time regular, daily smokers but who have become -- have been able to become occasional smokers smoking with friends, smokes mainly on the weekends or playing golf or going to lunch, after lunch, things like that, but who at the rest of the time do not smoke, are those folks considered to be addicted or not?" "not addicted." all three of these experts say the same thing, if you can do that, you are not addicted. and that is exactly the evidence in this case. exactly. is there any evidence in this case of mr. brown smoking other than with sam jones, except once a month, in the post office after 1987? and dr. burns just told you -- they all told you, you cannot go from being an addicted smoker to an occasional smoker. cannot happen. you will be like an alcoholic. you will be right back to where you were. now, dr. rosman said, look, before 1983 we have to look at sort of those instances in which mr. brown is demonstrating whether he can or he cannot control his smoking. now, mr. brown until -- well, expressed no interest. i asked mrs. brown this. mr. brown expressed absolutely no interest in quitting smoking, made no effort to quit smoking, straight on through until she said that she never saw him smoke again in 1987. so dr. rosman said, look, there are signs that i look for to see whether or not you appear to be addicted or not. now, they are not -- they are not the whole story. they are just examples of things that you would look for. 3578 you saw dr. burns, every 30, 40 minutes. there are smokers who cannot sit in church for an hour or two through a church service. they got to get up, they got to go outside, they got to smoke a cigarette. because every 30, 40 minutes addicted smokers got to go. so he did look to see whether or not mr. brown left church to go smoke. he did look to see whether or not mr. brown would not go to a nonsmoker's house because he could not smoke. he would look to see whether or not mr. brown did not ride in cars with nonsmokers or would ignore their wishes and smoke anyway. he did look to see whether or not -- there are some smokers who cannot stay in bed through the night. they got to get up, smoke a cigarette; right? and so they do. so you look for it. these are just signs. never smoked -- chain-smokers, you know, people that light one off of another. you are looking to see whether somebody looks like they are an addicted smoker. but now -- and mr. shields -- let me put some of these down. mr. shields has demonstrated just exactly how important what happened in 1983 is. he is basically made this a pivot of this case, so important that he is had to say that jennifer's testimony, jennifer brown's testimony was vague and ambiguous. do not trust her memory because she was only 11. do not believe her. do not believe jennifer brown because she was only 11. she does not know what she is saying, and she was vague and ambiguous when she said it; right? you heard all that. will that be on the screen? video technician: yes. mr. reilly: i'm just going to walk you through jennifer brown's testimony. it was so far from being vague and ambiguous that it is -- frankly, it is amazing to describe it that way, really. here's part of it. i thought it was important to have it. but after i heard this part of the closing argument, i decided to get a whole bunch more of it. because there is pages of it. "your testimony is, aside from the elementary school years when your father was smoking, as of 1983 you never again saw your father smoke a cigarette; correct?" "i do not ever recall seeing him smoke after that," period. is that vague? is that ambiguous? did she 3580 say, "i'm not sure. i'm hesitant. i do not know"? here's some more. page and line. "okay. and the time frame that it seems to you he had stopped smoking, that was about when you were in the sixth grade; right?" "yes." "okay. and you were in the sixth grade in about 1983; right?" "that would be correct." vague? ambiguous? now, because i did not know that that was going to be such a strong position in this case, the rest of this is going to come up on your screens. and i'm going to have to read it that way. here's some more. "and at some point when you told your father, 'you should not smoke,' he, in fact, agreed with you and said he was going to stop; right?" "he did not say he was going to stop." no, mr. brown did not say he was going to stop. "it appeared that he did." next page. "so around the time that you had the conversation, you are telling him to stop, he did not say to you that he was actually going to stop at that time?" "he did not say, 'i've quit.' i just did not smell the cigarettes anymore. i just remember it, having a conversation several times with him. and one day i just -- i did not smell it anymore. i did not smell it at some point, which was after my elementary days going into my middle-school days." next page. "and the time frame that it seems to you he had stopped smoking, that was about when you were in the sixth grade? you were in the sixth grade; right?" "yes." "you were in the sixth grade in about 1983; right?" "that would be correct." next page. "so it was not present in your senses anymore after that point?" "uh-huh." "so you were not smelling it in the car anymore?" "no." "you were not smelling it in areas of your house anymore; right?" 3582 "no." "you were not smelling it on his clothes?" "no." "his clothes would be in the laundry. you were not smelling it on his clothes in the laundry; correct?" "correct." "now, after that 1983 period where it seemed that he had stopped, you saw your father almost every day while you were in school before you went off to college; right?" "yes. yes." "and you saw him after school hours; right?" "yes." "you saw him on the weekends?" "i did." "and during those times he was still picking you up from activities sometimes in school; right?" "yes, that is correct." "and so all the times you were seeing him before you go off to college, you were still not seeing him smoke; right?" is this ambiguous? is this vague? did jennifer brown seem uncertain about her recollections? and is she 11 years old? 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986. she does not stay 11 years old. sadly, none of us can do that; right? "i do not recall seeing him smoking." is that about it? no, there is more. "and you saw your father faithfully in the evenings; right?" "yes." "okay. was not smoking then?" "was not smoking then." "also after that time period, you did not see any cigarettes laying around the house; right?" "no, i did not." my goodness. there is more. "you did not see ashtrays around the house anymore; right?" "did not. not being used by my father." "okay. when he stopped smoking, ms. brown, there was no change in his personality; is not that true?" "he was always the same person, in my opinion, yes." that is enough. thank you very much. this is that list. these are lots of moments when from 1983 to 1987 ms. jennifer brown would have been with her dad and he would not have been smoking. 3584 what kind of control does that show you he has? is that why mr. shields shied away from it, said it was vague and ambiguous and do not rely on it? of course. because that is control, ladies and gentlemen. that is enormous control. and this is the very time frame -- mr. shields said that his expert dr. burns says, if he stops smoking now, he will not get his lung cancer. all right. has -- has -- has mr. brown demonstrated his ability to control his smoking? he did not want to quit. he did not say he wanted to quit. he did not tell his daughter, "i'm going to quit." he did exactly what he wanted to do. but, my goodness. why in the world would you just put up that one little quote and say, "that is it, vague, ambiguous"? why would you do that? i think you have to be candid, tell the whole story. and that is the whole story. now, you know what happens in 1987? is it '86? is it '87? is it '86? is it '87? do not know. does it really matter? probably not. what we do know is that from that moment forward mr. brown has the ability to control where, when he smokes to an incredible degree. he goes for days without smoking; days, maybe weeks. go on vacation, no smoking. mrs. brown said they drove out to california. you know, that is days on the road; right? i have not driven to california, but it is got to be three days. i guess if you go break-neck all day, 12 hours a day maybe you can make it in two. no smoking. cruises. they took two cruises. days, no smoking. no smoking. did he continue to smoke with mr. -- with -- with -- ms. diolombi: sam jones. mr. reilly: sam jones. sorry. do not ever get to be my age. or, yes, please, all get to be my age. did he continue to smoke with sam jones? sure. sure. how much? i do not know. did he smoke with mr. jones in 1994? i do not know about that one. why? because, if you remember -- when hassia diolombi was cross-examining him, she said: "mr. jones, you did not even know that mr. brown had lung cancer, been diagnosed with lung cancer, had surgery, radiation? you did not even know that, did you?" he said, "no, i did not." mr. brown was out for -- you have the medical 3586 records. mr. brown's out for months. he is getting radiation therapy. he has lung surgery. so i do not know. you guys -- you guys are the judges of credibility. that is part of your job. you choose who you believe and who you do not. now, turns out mr. shields cross-examined -- oh, now, before i leave this, these are just an example of the times that mr. brown demonstrated the enormous control he had over his smoking after '86 or '87; right? you do not have to quit to demonstrate your control, do you? of course not. bless you. you guys can probably think of many more instances where a father around his daughter, or a husband and a father around their children and wife would have demonstrated that they were not smoking. now, yesterday dr. rosman was here, and he was cross-examined vigorously by mr. shields on his use of the diagnostic and statistical manual. remember that? and he was critical of him. he says, you cannot use it. it is not supposed to be done in a forensic setting. this is a forensic setting. and then it turned out that both dr. rosman and his expert dr. frazier both used it. now, why did -- why did mr. shields attack using the diagnostic and statistical manual by dr. rosman when his own expert had used it? why did that happen in this courtroom? well, it happened because dr. rosman's analysis was so much more on point than dr. frazier's. there they are. they both used the dsm in making -- this is the -- this is the slide they put up with dr. frazier. look at the title. "dsm substance dependence criteria applied to rayfield brown." why in the world would you criticize dr. rosman for using it when this is a slide that you put up with your own expert? why would you do that? is not that a puzzle? but that is what happened in this courtroom. this is the slide or the board that i used with dr. rosman, and he walked you through this. and he gave you item by item whether or not he thought -- based on the smoking history of mr. brown -- why mr. brown did not meet the criteria for being an addicted smoker. did mr. -- he said, "tolerance." dr. rosman said, "you know what? he went from being a half-a-pack to a-pack-a-day smoker or three or four cigarettes a day to a half a pack a day. anyway, early on he did increase. so he said, "i'll give 3588 him tolerance." it is interesting because at the end of his smoking career, the last dozen years -- if you go from 1983 to 1995, that is 12 years of smoking at a reduced rate; right? so tolerance is going in the other direction; right? but he still said, "fine. do it." withdrawal. here were the withdrawal symptoms under the dsm. depression. nobody said he was depressed. insomnia. inability to sleep? no. irritability, frustration, anger, none. anxiety -- oh, irritability. there was only one piece of testimony about irritability and that was the post office. sammie jones said that -- sam jones said that one time mr. brown got angry at a postal worker because a postal worker screwed up. and dr. -- dr. rosman said, that is not irritability. anxiety. mrs. brown said, well, she thought he was anxious because he ate candy, but she learned that eating candy is not anxiety. you saw it in the diagnostic and statistical manual that eating sweets was not anxiety. and you learned from both dr. rosman and dr. frazier that the reason why some people, when they do not smoke anymore, they do this (indicating), is because -- it is not because they are missing nicotine; it is just because they have a habit of having to put something in their mouths and so they do that. difficulty concentrating; there was no evidence of that. restlessness; no evidence of that. nobody measured his heart rate. increased appetite or weight gain. it was suggested that because he ate so much candy he might have gained a little weight. that is it. oops. let me go back to the rest of these, because this is where it gets really interesting. the substance was taken in larger amounts over a longer period of time than intended. was there any evidence that mr. brown smoked longer than he really wanted to? the evidence in this case is that mr. brown really enjoyed smoking. mrs. brown said he enjoyed inhaling. he found -- he told her he found smoking relaxing. he liked to smoke in social -- in social situations. that was jennifer brown -- and others observed he enjoyed smoking. kaiser thomas said it. barbara brooks said, "he loved his cigarettes." (board fell off easel.) 3590 3592 mr. reilly: yikes. was there a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control substance use? did not mr. brown demonstrate exactly the opposite? he had absolutely the ability and successfully cut down and cut back. cut down when he no longer smoked in front of his daughter. cut down when he no longer smoked in front of his wife, daughter, son, best friend. great deal of time is spent on activities necessary to obtain the substance, use the substance, or recover from its effect. that was described as being -- in smoking lingo, that was chain-smoker. nobody ever said he was a chain-smoker. important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced because of substance use. exactly the opposite for mr. brown. whenever -- i mean, for goodness sakes, if you can avoid smoking around your family for years -- how many years? from '87 to '90- -- what is that? if it is -- it is either seven or eight years, starting in '86 or '7, and if you go back to '83, it is a dozen years. now, the substance use is -- continues despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurring physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance. now, mr. shields, in his closing argument, talked about that event in either 1986 or 1987 where he went to the hospital. but it -- and it was just the vaguest suggestion that that might have been smoking related, but in this courtroom everybody said that was not smoking related, period, end of story. not smoking related. he had some sort of throat problem. he had trouble breathing. so what is the only time that he had a smoking-related physical problem? was his lung cancer; right? and the only person who said he smoked after that was sam jones in 1994. he said, "we went and played golf and smoked some cigarettes." now, you have to decide for yourself whether mr. brown actually did that, and then you have to decide for yourself whether, even if he did, did it make any difference in this situation for him on one occasion to go smoke some cigarettes when he is playing golf with a guy that he used to smoke with and play golf with and that sort of thing? in sum total, you got to have three of these to satisfy the criteria. and even if you said yes to that, based on sam jones playing golf -- claiming to have played golf in 1994, you would only have two. but there is more. why do people smoke if they are not addicted? well, there was total agreement among every expert that came here that people smoked, addicted or not, because it is pleasurable. people enjoy smoking. this is a board that was used by dr. frazier to talk about all the things that people enjoy about smoking. it is pleasurable. it modulates your mood. makes you relaxed. it arouses you. it has the ability to both arouse you and make you relaxed. gives you energy. makes you relax. for some people it enhances their memory and their learning, and it reduces anxiety and tension. it is pleasurable. there is no doubt about it. did mr. brown ever say he wanted to quit smoking? certainly not before nobody saw him stop -- nobody saw him smoke anymore. did he use any quit aids, gum or the -- of course, the patch does not come along for a while. you were told, well, he did not want to use the gum because he had dentures. he never told anybody he wanted to use the gum at all. it did not even come up. did he go to hypnosis? did he go see a doctor about quitting? none of that. there is no evidence of any of that. a smoking-cessation program? did he ever express interest in doing anything like that? none. was he more anxious when he stopped smoking? here's kaiser thomas. "and he did not appear to you to be any more anxious, did he, or nervous after he quit smoking?" "no." "did he lose any sleep to your knowledge?" "not to my knowledge. everything was normal." remember what dr. burns said, every 30, 40 minutes an addicted smoker's got to reload or they get irritable, anxious. that is their expert. and that is the trial transcript. how about michael brown? "but just talking about you, what you observed, your father did not seem irritable when he was not smoking; right?" "not to me." "in fact, he seemed to be the same old person to you when he was not smoking; right?" 3594 3596 "yes." trial transcript. jennifer brown. "when he stopped smoking, ms. brown, there was no change in his personality; is not that true?" "he was always the same person in my opinion, yes." "he was the same person? he did not seem more anxious to you; right?" "no." trial transcript. i want to take you to the elmo. where will the elmo come up? here. okay. let me put this down. mr. shields showed you a medical record, and he said this was filled out by mr. brown. and mr. brown said that he was a two-pack-a-day smoker, that he was still smoking. that is what he told you. what he did not tell you is that that form was filled out within days of mr. brown dying; within days of mr. brown dying. you are going to have all the medical records in this case, all that we have. and you are going to see, for example, if you care to look at it -- this is a document that was created about a month before mr. brown died. and it is -- it bears mr. brown's signature. this is a form from the hospital, the same form that was filled out on a different day. frankly, i hope that you compare the signatures. because i think you will find that the form mr. shields showed you has a very different signature from this one. what does this one say? "do you smoke?" "no." "have you ever smoked?" "yes, half a pack per day." half a pack per day. if you take the time to look at the medical records, what you are going to find -- and you -- you saw dr. wells. dr. wells, one of his treating doctors, one of those short depositions, video depositions, dr. wells said he quit seven or eight years before dr. wells began to treat him. the medical records in this case are going to indicate that mr. brown represented himself to have -- having been an ex-smoker by seven or eight years, going back to '86 or '87; ex-smoker to all the doctors. now, the doctor's report -- i think there might be one record where there is something about smoking. but i think you will -- when you look at the sum total of all the records, you are going to see that he reported himself to be a nonsmoker; that he had smoked. now, how much he would smoked over the years varies from -- from physician to physician. there is not uniformity on that. but he described himself as a nonsmoker. so why did mr. shields put up the one document? why did not he show you this one? why did he show you the one document days before -- created days before mr. brown dies, with a different signature on it? why did he show you that one to try to convince you that mr. brown was still smoking in 1995? this is in the record, ladies and gentlemen. think about this as you are all trying to figure out the answer to this question. no one said mr. brown was a chain-smoker. mr. brown controlled his smoking whenever he wanted to. mr. brown never smoked around jennifer brown after 1983. mr. brown smoked very little after 1987. was a social smoker. and all the experts agree that a social smoker is not addicted. what is the answer to this question, this first question? if your conclusion is that with all of this, with all of this -- and i invite you to look at all the medical records. i've shown you ms. brown's testimony. did it seem vague or ambiguous to you, or did it seem exactly the opposite? was there ever a passage in which mrs. brown -- ms. -- ms. brown said, "i'm not really sure about this. i'm unclear about it. do not rely on my memory"? never. never. but that is how important it is in this case. so what is the answer to this first question? the answer to this first question is "no." and if that is your conclusion, then you put an x right there and your work here is done. that is it. after all of that, who has the burden of proof? mr. kalil, mr. shields. after all of this, is there any other answer besides no? if you decide that, no -- unanimously all of you conclude that the answer should be yes, then you have to go to the second half of this question. "if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?" 3600 mr. shields has already told you that his expert dr. burns said that if mr. brown had quit smoking by 1983 that he would not have gotten his lung cancer most probably. okay. so what is the answer -- even if you get past this first question -- what is the answer to the second half? well, it is "no" too. now, it is possible that somebody could say -- some of you might say, "well, i do not think he was addicted," and others would maybe say, "i do not think it was a legal cause." it does not really matter. if, by answering either one of those questions, you-all conclude that the answer is no, then you put a "no." you do not all have to agree on which one of these questions you think should be answered no. you just have to all agree that the answer here ought to be no, and then the work is done. all right. your honor, this is a good time to take a break. the court: thank you, mr. reilly. ladies and gentlemen, we will take a break as we did during mr. shields' closing arguments. i had told you five minutes. it ended up being ten, so i will make it ten this time. so i would ask that you come back in ten minutes. it is -- it is about 12:47 now, so by 12:57. we will see you then. (the jury retired to the jury room.) (recess taken.) mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. now i'll say good afternoon. all right. i've already shown you as far as i think you are going to go in this case on this verdict form, but on the chance that you guys do decide that that is not right, that all this evidence shows that mr. brown was addicted and that his addiction was the legal cause of why he developed his lung cancer and died, then you would have to go on, so i'm just going to go on. here's what you would have to go to then. you would have to go to the next two questions. and they are: state whether philip morris's concealment or omission of material fact about the health effects of or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of rayfield brown's death. and the same thing regarding an agreement to conceal, there has to be a legal cause for 3608 3610 mr. brown's death. now, there, what is the requirement under the law of being a legal cause? here's the instruction on legal cause: it is called reliance. the next issue for your determination is whether philip morris's concealment or omission of material information concerning the health risks or addictive nature of cigarettes was a legal cause of the death of mr. brown. the only remaining matter for your determination on this issue is whether rayfield brown -- and this is key -- relied, to his detriment, on philip morris's concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarette smoking. they have to show that mr. brown actually relied -- actually relied on something that philip morris said about the health risks of smoking. and that is when mr. shields said you can infer it. you can infer that he relied because he has no evidence to show that he did rely. no evidence. what does it mean to be a legal cause? this is a -- this is a little shorthand that will help you think about reliance. in order for mr. brown to have relied on something from philip morris, he has to have heard it. it has to have a direct connection with him. he has to have heard it or seen it, and then it has to have a substantial impact on him. in what way? it has to have substantially impacted whether he began smoking, continued smoking, or quit smoking. and that is the only way it can work, right? and only then can it be a legal cause. so that is the concept of reliance. and it takes real evidence. it takes real evidence. and mr. shields said you can infer it. that is the same as saying i do not have any for you, real evidence. how will you know the answer to mr. brown, whether he relied on something that philip morris said about the health risks of smoking? well, you have got to know mr. brown's life, right? and in my opening statement i walked you through -- using these boards, i walked you through mr. brown's personal history -- which mr. shields did not do today -- because when you walk through it, you learn very quickly that there was never a moment in his life when mr. brown heard or saw anything from mr. -- from philip morris that he relied on in any way. in fact, what you learned is that, from the very first moments that mr. brown was smoking cigarettes, he was being told by the people that he loved and respected: do not smoke. smoking is bad for you. those are cancer sticks. those are addictive from the very first moments. where did that evidence come from? it came from his best, life-long friend, kaiser thomas, on those two videotapes. that is where we got all the information about mr. brown's early years. you remember that you heard through kaiser thomas that mr. brown's mom's name was queen? queen brown? that he had an aunt. and together those two ladies told mr. brown and kaiser thomas: do not you smoke. smoking's bad for you. and they did not want them drinking alcohol either, right? but he did both. mr. shields told you, and it is true, that they are not contending that there was any conspiracy of any kind before 1953. and he is just told you that the evidence is that mr. brown began smoking in 1949, '50, '51. all you had to do was read reader's digest in the '30s and the '40s or look in the encyclopedia. remember i cross-examined dr. proctor and pulled out the world book encyclopedia? is this some secret that smoking was bad for you? is it some secret that people were calling smoking an addiction? regular people, everyday people calling smoking an addiction. was mr. brown waiting to hear from philip morris something about whether or not smoking was bad for you or that smoking was addictive? or did he hear anything? did he see anything? was there one person that came here that said that mr. brown actually saw or heard something that he relied on from philip morris? one person? certainly not mrs. brown. neither of their children. kaiser thomas said: sure, we heard the jingle: call for philip morris. sure, we saw that. we heard the jingle. and the only person who said the jingles make you do anything was dr. goldberg. remember he is the guy that said he heard the "where is the beef?" commercial for wendy's and it made him go and eat a salad? you remember that guy? that is the only guy that came here that even talked about jingles. kaiser thomas. did advertising -- did 3612 mr. brown ever say that advertising influenced him in any way? i think we just heard it from some of -- oh, i'm sorry. this is -- i got myself ahead of myself. here's kaiser thomas talking about how they have heard when they are young men, just beginning smoking, that cigarettes are cancer sticks and addicting: "i think we just heard it from some of the older people around us calling them that, like: what are you boys doing with those cancer sticks? "and you heard that in high school when you were both in high school? "i would say i heard this in the old pool rooms and the concession stand when someone saw a young kid with a cigarette between his fingers." and you remember the coaches -- you remember the coaches telling him: "did any of those coaches ever tell you that cigarettes were addictive? "the coaches did not, but other -- we have heard it from other people. "when you were kids? "right." cancer sticks and addicting. advertising. this all comes from kaiser thomas: "you testified about advertisements in response to ms. bryan's questions earlier this morning. "in fact, you do not have any idea why mr. brown smoked his first cigarette, do you? "no, i do not. "and you cannot say that mr. brown purchased anything because of something he saw in an advertisement, including those little four cigarettes that you used when you started smoking, right? "right." mother is telling him: do not smoke. kaiser thomas's mother tells them: do not smoke. they disobey their mom's, they smoke, and they get caught. they have tobacco in their pockets. they get caught, and their mom's chew them out. more than ten times, kaiser said. the coaches. they hide their smoking from the coaches because they know that if they get caught they will be benched. i think kaiser thomas actually said: the coaches would have broken our necks. so there you go. graduates. goes in the army. you will have in 3614 evidence these articles. i talked to dr. proctor, i said: in the '50s, there was a virtual avalanche of information coming out in lay publications -- that is newspapers, magazines, radio, television -- about the link between smoking and lung cancer, is not there? and he said: there was a lot. mr. shields said nobody knew. here's there -- here's dr. goldberg, the salad guy. i asked him: "you are asked a direct question -- and we are talking about surveys -- and you heard that smoking causes lung cancer. "yes." and i said: "there were polls to that effect -- i'm sorry -- in the '50s?" and responds by saying: "yes. "i heard that was in the ninety percent range, was not it? "it may well have been, yes." that is in the '50s, with the american public learning about the advances that are occurring in medical science linking smoking with lung cancer. tv programs. i do not know. do we have "see it now" tuned up? tv programs. will this be on their monitors? a voice: no. mr. reilly: it will just be on the screen. you know, let us not do it because i do not want to take that much time. but there are tv programs, specials on what is going on. specials. did mr. brown ever say to anybody: i do not know what is going on? we know that he was intelligent. we know that he was strong-willed. you heard that in this room. you know that he was an avid reader. it took a little bit to get that out, but you know he was an avid reader. you know he read the paper in the morning, and if he did not have time in the morning to read it, he read it in the afternoon when he came home from work. you know they subscribed to ebony, jet, newsweek, life, time. i mean, the list of magazines was enormous. you know they watched the news in the evening. we know that. no debate about it. kaiser thomas said when he got in the military, they were calling them coffin nails. cancer sticks, 3616 3618 coffin nails, addicting. mr. brown never said: i've heard something from the tobacco companies and it is effecting me and my decision about smoking. mr. brown never said: i'm waiting to hear something from the tobacco companies so i can make a decision about my smoking. let us go to january 1964, the surgeon general's report. mrs. brown -- 50 years ago -- 49 years ago. remember, this is the surgeon general's report. that is how big that news was. the news coverage, the television coverage, amazing. "did you hear about the 1964 surgeon general's report? "yes. it was big news. "you saw the tv coverage? "yes. "was your husband watching the news with you at that time? "i cannot remember. we watched the news together, but i cannot specifically say at that particular time. "it would have been the norm for both of you to have been watching the news at that time if you were together? "yes, uh-huh." here's -- now, is this on -- is this on -- a voice: it is on the left screen. mr. reilly: it is on the screen. actually, this is the part of the news coverage that was played in this trial. mr. shields started to show part of it. let us just show it real quick. this is cbs special report. (a video clip was played as follows:) this is the "cbs news" extra on smoking and health. the findings of the surgeon general committee. almost from the moment the cigarettes were being introduced, they were attacked. but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says. cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not prove that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his; the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (the video clip was ended.) mr. reilly: now, lest i be accused of not showing you the whole thing, there is a segment, mr. shields showed it, where harry reasoner says: you might give an old friend a second chance, et cetera. you already saw it in this trial. i just do not happen to have it linked up on my presentation, but you saw it in this trial. i do not want to pretend that he does not say it, but there is a surgeon general's report. what i did not show you, i do not know if we have it, but there is the surgeon general -- this is an hour-long presentation, and in this hour-long presentation the surgeon general stands in front of a special committee and he announces to the american public: smoking causes lung cancer. now, did mr. brown ever say: goodness sakes, i'm confused; i do not know; i do not understand? no one came here and said that. no one came here and said mr. brown did not know about the health risks of smoking at any given moment in time or that philip morris influenced his decisions about smoking at all. the only story -- i'm not there yet. put this back up. you know that in 1966 caution language went on -- a warning went on every pack of cigarettes. public service announcements like the ones we showed you -- i'm just going to show you one -- began playing. will that be on the monitors or will that be . . . a voice: on the screen. 3620 mr. reilly: up here again. i'm sorry. this is just one example. (a video clip was played as follows:) this is the house we lived in. that is billy. he is pretty handy to have around. steve, home from college. barbie, looking after her brother, timmy. debbie, who will soon graduate from high school. susan, our youngest, and my wife, peggy, who looks after all of us. and that is me, bill talman, with a friend of mine you might recognize. you know, i did not really mind losing those courtroom battles, but i'm in a battle right now i do not want to lose it all, because if i lose it, it means losing my wife and those kids you just meant. i've got lung cancer. so take some advice about smoking and losing from someone who is been doing both for years. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you do smoke, quit. do not be a loser. (the video clip was ended.) mr. reilly: do me a favor. would you play the yul brynner one, too. (a video clip was played as follows:) ladies and gentlemen, the late yul brynner. i really wanted to make a commercial when i discovered i was that sick and my time was so limited. i wanted to make a commercial that says simply now that i'm gone, i tell you: do not smoke. whatever you do, just do not smoke. if i could take back that smoking, we would not be talking about any cancer. i'm convinced of that. (the video clip was ended.) mr. reilly: these public service announcements in the '60s, bill talman from the 60s -- are powerful. i asked dr. proctor, his expert: powerful? he said: sure. powerful. i asked dr. goldberg -- remember i asked dr. goldberg: powerful? he said: no. i showed him the -- the yul brynner one: powerful? no. this is what he said: there is soup commercials and there is candy commercials and there is tons of tobacco commercials, and in there, once in a blue moon, you see one of these. so yes, in court they are great; in reality, no. how many of those commercials do you need to see? how many times do you need to see it to 3622 understand that if you are smoking, it comes with a possibility of developing lung cancer? do you need to see it more than once? really? are you going -- are you going to not understand it or forget it because you saw a soup commercial or a candy commercial? i mean, really. you do not leave your common sense at that door. postal truck. he works at the post office. postal trucks have this ad on every postal truck: 100,000 doctors have quit smoking cigarettes. this is just one example. these are just one example. for every three cigarette ads, an ad like that, that bill talman had, were running. for every three cigarette ads on television. mr. shields says the cigarette ads were blanketing the evening news, right? for every three of those ads, a bill talman-type ad runs. wow. how many times do you need to see it? that is why no one came here and said that mr. brown did not understand that what he was doing came with a risk of developing of lung cancer, but they have to prove reliance. they have to prove reliance. 1970. mrs. brown begins teaching school on a regular basis. i asked mrs. brown: in 1970, you were a regular teacher? that is right. full time. and as part of the curriculum here in jacksonville in the 1970s, '80s, and '90s there were educational materials and lectures for students regarding the health risks of smoking and drugs, correct? correct. 1970. dr. proctor told you that they existed long before that, but that is when mrs. brown becomes involved, because that is when she teaches school full time. mr. shields said that his proof, his proof that mr. brown relied on something that philip morris said about the health risks of smoking was the fact that he smoked philip morris multifilter cigarettes beginning in 1972. well, the facts speak volumes differently. at the very moment mr. brown smokes philip morris multifilter cigarettes, he is still smoking his favorite brand, benson hedges. and kaiser thomas said he continued to smoke benson & hedges right on through. 3624 and i asked mrs. brown: you actually have no idea whether your husband thought it was safer to smoke a low-tar, low-nicotine cigarette rather than one that was not low tar and not low nicotine, do you? and her answer was: i have no idea. they have the burden of proof here, ladies and gentlemen. this is mrs. brown saying: i have no idea. but what we do know is that he stops smoking philip morris multifilter. when, exactly? nobody recalls. no one came here and said exactly when. but by the end of the '70s, he is not smoking philip morris multifilter anymore. what is he smoking? benson & hedges. benson & hedges, his favorite brand. his favorite brand. michael brown said: sometime in the mid-'70s mr. brown stopped smoking at the dinner table. we have already gone through all the places where he did not smoke. in 1970 the warning changes on all the packs. warning now says: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. you have an instruction that says philip morris had no obligation to warn anybody. after that, why would you? let us go to the '80s. it is in the '80s. you now know that jennifer brown begins to talk to her dad about -- she is in late grade school, late grade school, and she is talking to her dad about cancer from smoking. she said she did that for two or three years, and then in 1993 she has the conversation i've just gone in great detail about. i'm not going to do that again. i'll spare you that. 1985 -- oh, 1983. that is when mrs. brown tells kaiser brown to stop bringing those inexpensive or less-expensive cigarettes from up at the military base, the px. 1985. the warnings change. now they explicitly say that smoking causes lung cancer. oh, by the way, let us go back to 1981. mr. shields talked about how there was an ftc report -- remember i asked dr. proctor: is not that made by lawyers? and he laughed and he said: yeah, it is made by lawyers. but who is the guy that came here that mr. shields brought? dr. david burns, right? and 3626 this is what i showed dr. david burns. this is his own statement, january 17th, 1981. this is a quote from david burns. and i said: dr. burns, did you say that? he said: sure i did. and he was right. he wrote -- he said: it is not that smokers do not know the risks. in fact, 95 percent of them are thoroughly aware of the health dangers and ninety percent realize that their health could be affected. according to dr. david burns. that is 1991. look at those numbers: 95 percent know and 90 percent believe. ms. hassia diolombi talking to jennifer brown: "and when you would tell your father these things, when you would tell him it was bad for him and wanted to stop, your father, in fact, understood you, right? "he heard what i was saying and acknowledged: i hear you. i understand." here's mrs. brown's testimony. "and one of the reasons why you had not talked to mr. brown about not smoking during that, roughly, 30-year time frame was because you learned early on that people have their own things that they enjoy doing or appear to enjoy doing and you do not try to talk them out of it, right? "that is right. "you do not try to change people. "no." this is a recognition mr. brown enjoyed smoking and she did not try to talk him out of it. now, you know that as of the mid-'80s, mrs. brown says: i do not want you to smoke in the bedroom any more, right? he enjoyed smoking on the floor of the bedroom watching sports. and she said: you know what, i do not like your secondhand smoke, and i do not like being exposed to it. i do not want you to do it in here anymore. and his answer was what? his answer was -- i think she said he said something like, well, maybe i ought to move out or something like that. i'm sure he did not mean that, but . . . he did it. he stopped smoking in the bedroom, right? and you know about the rest of this story. and remember i asked mrs. brown this question: in fact, in that time frame if you spoke to your husband about his smoking, he had sort of a standard response, and it was: you have got to die of 3628 3630 something, right? her answer was: he made that comment to me. does that indicate that mr. brown does not know what he is doing? does that indicate he is waiting to hear from philip morris or that he is being deceived by philip morris? his answer was: you have got to die of something. and she is not going to try to talk him out of it because it is something he enjoys doing. that is the evidence in this case. rather than stand up here and say to you, you have to infer that he did not rely, i'm giving you all this hard evidence. i'm not telling you to infer it. here's the evidence. i'll put this up over here. we have already covered everything i want to cover here. this is when he begins socializing with sam jones. i'm not disputing that he smoked some cigarettes with mr. jones, but you know the rest of the story. here are things mr. brown never said to anybody. he never said he would felt he had been deceived about the risks of smoking, that somebody else was responsible for his smoking decisions other than himself, or that he regretted smoking, or that he blamed philip morris. never said one of those things. not once. that is the evidence in this case. you do not have to infer it. all right. they have to prove reliance. in order to answer these questions yes, you have to find that there was not just a little evidence, not just a tiny bit of evidence, but evidence that outweighs what i just showed you. i do not have the burden of proof on this. mr. shields and mr. kalil do. hassia and i do not have a burden of proof here, but i just brought you all this evidence. they have the burden of proving that mr. brown relied on something that philip morris said -- not the american public, not some segment of the american public, but mr. brown. the answers to these questions are absolutely no. i do not think there can even be a minute of debate about it. all right. mr. shields said i did not bring anybody to dispute anything that he showed. well, you know what? there is no evidence to support this claim. why would i bring you somebody? to take up more of your time? this story -- this case is about mr. brown. this case is about the things that mr. brown experienced; the things that influenced mr. brown. that is their obligation. that is their burden. all right. if you have answered question number one yes, you do have to come to this question. if you do not answer question number one yes, you do not have to come to this question. but if you do, you have to come to this question apportioning responsibility between philip morris usa and rayfield brown. every day when people wake up, they look in the mirror and they decide how they are going to live their lives. we are issued one body. who is responsible for the body that we are given except ourselves? mr. shields said mr. brown has minor responsibility in this case for the decisions he made. on the instructions you are going to see, it talks about his actions. he has minor responsibility for his actions. when someone looks in the mirror in the morning and they decide how they are going to live their life, is there really anybody else looking back in the mirror? really and truly? if you smoke cigarettes, if you drink alcohol, if you drink caffeine, is there really anybody else in the mirror looking back at you? really and truly? i leave this to your sound discretion. if you do think that there is anybody in the mirror other than whose body it is, put a percentage down. if you have answered question number one yes, then you have to go on here and assign dollar amounts. and i'm not even going to talk to you about dollar amounts. you heard mr. shields. you heard what he is claiming. and he wants 10 million and $3 and a half million. if you get here, you use your common sense and your sound judgment -- if you get here. i do not think you get here, but if you get here, use your sound judgment and common sense. mr. brown made his decisions about how he lived his life. i truly do not think you will get here, but if you do, that is -- of course it is your judgment. it is not my judgment; it is your judgment. only if you answered -- oops. i lost it. only if you answered these questions yes, one or both, do you answer this question. and that is: under the circumstances of this case, state whether 3632 by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against philip morris. a couple things i have to tell you about this one is that the circumstances that are being referenced there are whatever it is that impacted mr. brown. so you first have to find that something impacted mr. brown. you have to find that reliance. and whatever it is you think he relied on, that is the circumstances that we are talking about. because you cannot -- you have got this instruction from judge jay, and that is: you may not seek to punish philip morris for any harms suffered by any persons other than mrs. brown as a result of mr. brown's death, and you may punish philip morris only for those harms suffered by plaintiff as a result of mr. brown's death which were caused by philip morris's punishable conduct. what is their burden of proof on this issue? this has got to be done by clear and convincing evidence. an even higher standard than the burden they have on the whole rest of the case. what is clear and convincing? clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive. it is got to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and in such weight it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue. inference: lack of evidence. that could never satisfy precise, explicit, and lacking in confusion and such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter. one more thing. so what is the answer to this question? if you ever got that far, the answer would be no. mr. shields said: philip morris engineers its cigarettes to create and sustain addiction. the truth of the matter is yes, it is the nicotine in cigarettes. yes, nicotine has been in cigarettes. you go all the way back in time -- this is a question i posed to dr. proctor -- all the way back in time. remember, i took dr. burns all the way back to -- goodness sakes -- the turn of the last century, 1890s. nicotine has been in tobacco. it is grown in tobacco. it is part of the tobacco. it is the natural part. it is naturally in tobacco. the plant makes it. it is been in every tobacco product that is ever been made. and i said: if we go back all the way in time, 3634 you told this jury yesterday, i think, that there is generally about 2 and a half percent of nicotine in the tobacco that is in cigarettes. and he said: right. by weight. and i said: and this range of 2.5 percent of nicotine in the tobacco is really the function of the consumers deciding that is what they want to consume. his answer was: well, it is a mixture of that and producers trying to produce what they think will sell. and that is right. cigarette manufacturers make cigarettes that they think will sell to consumers, and consumers decide what they want to consume. so it is no secret that there is nicotine in tobacco. there is no secret that it is part of why people enjoy smoking and why they smoke. and there is also no secret it is in part why some people become addicted. it is just like alcohol in beer. alcohol in wine. alcohol in scotch. it is part of the reason why people like to use it. it is why people can get addicted to it. and it is part of the reason why people, when they go buy cigarettes or they go buy whatever -- scotch, beer, whatever -- they expect it to be in there. it is part of the product. it is part of why you go to the store and buy it. and it is in this range. it has been ever since the beginning of time. mr. shields said that tobacco put in paper, rolled, and burned cannot be inhaled. that is just nonsense. nobody said this in this courtroom. you can go out and buy roll your own tobacco and buy paper and roll it and smoke it right now. i do not know why he said that. there is no evidence to support that. all right. i'm done. you guys have been extremely attentive to my closing argument, and i greatly appreciate it. greatly appreciate it. hassia and i look forward to receiving your verdict. i'm going to sit down now. now, you know mr. shields gets to get back up again because mr. shields and mr. kalil, they have the burden of proof in this case, so he gets another bite at this apple. he gets to come back and say whatever he wants. i do not get to come back. hassia does not get to get up and start talking to you again. i would only ask that, as he talks to you in his -- i do not know how long he is going to take. i 3636 do not know if he is going to take ten minutes, 30 minutes, or another hour. but i would just ask you think about: what does this have to do with mr. brown. thank you very much. thank you, your honor.