mr. shields: can you still see the screen with this here? good morning, ladies and gentlemen. the jurors: good morning. mr. shields: this case is about addiction. and as dr. david burns told you, as our first witness, and as the 2010 report of the surgeon general confirms, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason smokers continue to smoke. and continuing to smoke is what causes lung cancer and other diseases. rayfield brown was just in his mid teens when he first started to smoke, buying four cigarettes for a nickel at the corner store. almost all smokers, then and now, start as teenagers and probably for the same reasons -- peer pressure, rebellion, wanting to be an adult, wanting to be cool. it was a different time and a different culture in america in the 1950s. smoking was everywhere. most men smoked. more and more women smoked. advertising for cigarettes was like wallpaper, with celebrities, athletes and even doctors promoting smoking. virtually all of prime-time television on the three networks was sponsored by the tobacco companies, sometimes with the shows themselves promoting smoking. by the time rayfield graduated from high school and joined the army with kaiser thomas on the buddy plan, he was a regular, daily smoker. he continued to smoke in the army and he was given free cigarettes. and after he got out, he pursued his career at the united states post office. he was addicted. he started trying to quit sometime in the early to mid '80s and struggled for ten years to stay quit. evidence is that he quit and relapsed, may have quit and relapsed on several occasions, but he could not stop 3497 smoking, even after he was diagnosed with lung cancer. he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1993, underwent surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and died of complications from lung cancer just before his 59th birthday in 1995, leaving mary brown, as his widow, and two surviving children. john and i are proud to represent mary brown in this case. it is been a long trial and it is been a lot of evidence that you have heard. we want to thank you for your service, thank you for your attention, thank you for sitting for a day or so in some pretty hard chairs to listen to all the evidence that is been coming in. we know it is been difficult. but this closing argument is our last opportunity to explain to you what the evidence is, how we think it fits together and how it proves our case. now, this case is to be decided only on the evidence. you heard that from the beginning of this case, from the court and from the parties. and i emphasize that, particularly now since you heard evidence from the last witness that, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, was flat-out contrary to almost all the evidence in the case. this case is not to be decided based on the assertions of counsel or even an expert witness that is not supported by the testimony and documents and other evidence that you heard. now, this case, as the court has told you, arose out of the engle class action. the engle class action was a suit on behalf of all florida smokers against the tobacco companies that went to trial in 1999 and resulted in findings by the jury in that trial that the engle defendants, including philip morris, one, had engaged in a civil conspiracy to fraudulently conceal information; two, had fraudulently concealed material information; three, had sold products that were defective and unreasonably dangerous; and four, that they were negligent. now, those findings made in the class action are binding on all members of the class. and in subsequent damage trials, such as this one, for members of the class, they are binding on the jurors that hear those cases, such as you. so the first issue you are going to have to decide in this case is whether rayfield brown was a member of the engle class, and we are going to talk a lot about that this morning. there are four remaining issues, as i told you. the first is this class membership issue, and the class membership, which we will talk about in more detail, 8 3499 3501 comes down to was rayfield brown addicted to cigarettes and because of that addiction, continued to smoke so that addiction is the legal cause of his death and injury? if mr. brown was a member of the engle class, you are bound by all those engle findings. the second issue you are going to have to decide is specific causation, which basically is an issue of whether philip morris's misconduct was the legal cause of mr. brown's death. now, as the court just instructed you, if you find that mr. brown was a member of the legal -- of the engle class, then you, in effect, have already decided causation -- specific causation in connection with the negligence and product defect claim. for the other two claims, the concealment and the civil conspiracy claim, there is an additional element of reliance, which we are going to talk about a good bit more later. but one important point of deciding that issue is that there need not be only one of those, and that goes to our third issue of comparative fault. under florida law, fault is not necessarily an all-or-nothing proposition and related only to one party. it is possible for a jury, such as you, to say both parties were at fault. and that is what philip morris has contended in this action, that mr. brown was at fault. and so one of the issues you are going to have to decide is whether you think he was at fault, and if you decide that he was, then you are going to have to allocate a percentage of responsibility between philip morris and mr. brown. that is the comparative fault issue. the fourth and final issue is the issue of damages. and the court instructed you about damages a moment ago. damages includes compensatory damages -- and the court just gave you the instruction about what compensatory damages there were -- and punitive damages. in this phase of the case, the question on punitive damages is whether mary brown is entitled to recover for punitive damages. so those are the four issues. and it occurred to me that what made sense in terms of talking to you this morning was to organize my thoughts and comments around those four issues because those four issues pretty much track the verdict form you are going to have. you will be sent out with a verdict form. it is going to have a series of questions on it, and those questions follow those specific four issues. and so let us talk about the verdict form. let us talk about those four issues and what the evidence was on those four issues. let us start with class membership. now, the issue on class membership is whether rayfield brown was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and as a result of that addiction, he continued to smoke so that it would be considered a legal cause of his death. there is compelling evidence that rayfield brown was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. the issue on addiction, ladies and gentlemen, is not whether he was still addicted in 1992 or '93 or even 1987. that is a red herring. that is an attempt to get you to look at the wrong time period. the relevant time period is whether he was addicted during those times of his life in which it would have made a difference if he had quit smoking. you recall dr. burns, beginning of this case, told you that had mr. brown quit smoking by 1983, he more likely than not would not have suffered from lung cancer. so the relevant time period for whether he was addicted or not is before 1983. now, dr. burns also told you another -- a number of other things about addiction. he told you, first of all, that addiction is a disease. it is a brain disease. and that was agreed to by the two addiction experts, specifically to this case, that is also testified. addiction is the result of nicotine in cigarettes and thus cigarettes are addictive. nicotine is a drug. it is a drug that acts like other drugs in hijacking the brain and addicting the person as a result of that. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason, as we go forward, as the surgeon general's reports indicates, that people continue to smoke cigarettes and continue to engage in the conduct that would result in injury and death. dr. burns also told you that that -- it was extremely difficult to quit smoking as a result of nicotine addiction. and you may recall the figure he used to explain that to you. figure 17, will you bring that up? dr. burns told that you the current data is that about a little less than eighty percent of all smokers indicate that they would -- are daily smokers. almost seventy percent of those smokers indicate that they would like to quit smoking in any given year, that 52 percent actually try to quit smoking in any given year. but only 6 percent are successful six months later; that is, most relapse and go back to smoking. and only 3 percent are successful a year or more. because it takes many attempts and many years for people often to succeed in 9 3503 quitting smoking. he told you, for example, that the figures here are current figures, but if you went back to the '80s, the time period we are talking about, then at that time period, only about 30 to 33 percent of smokers tried to quit smoking in a year. but their success rates remained that low. less than 3 percent succeeded in a year. as a result of the relapse, the fact that it takes many times to try to quit smoking, dr. burns told you that there is this addiction cycle that inhibits the ability of a smoker to actually quit. he also told you that 80 to ninety percent of all daily smokers were addicted to nicotine. now, you heard from dr. rosman that he thought the figure was lower today. it may well be lower today. but all of the publications and all of the data from back in the '70s and '80s, when it was important to this case, show that 80 to ninety percent of all daily smokers were addicted. and you will see that figure in the surgeon general's report, 2010 -- it will be one of the pieces of evidence that you have -- the consensus document of the experts that looked at all the data. finally, what dr. burns told you was it is easy to determine whether someone is addicted. it is really pretty much common sense. if they want to quit, try to quit, find it difficult to remain and relapse and make many attempts and continue to relapse, they are addicted. a clinician who sees patients does not have any difficulty in diagnosing someone who is addicted. and all of that is confirmed by the surgeon general's reports. and let me -- let me make a comment about the surgeon general's reports. the surgeon general's reports, by federal law, are required to be the consensus of current scientific opinion. and there is this elaborate process that they go through to make sure that they are the consensus of scientific opinion by having numerous authors, reviewers, editors. it is sent to all the federal agencies that are relevant to review the material. it is a process that takes months to years to get these documents published so that what comes out is what is universally believed by the experts in the field. and i want to say that to you because when we talk about dr. rosman, his views are totally contrary to everything written in the surgeon general's report, are totally contrary to accepted medical science on addiction. 3505 now, next, dr. burns and dr. proctor both told you that cigarettes, in fact, were designed for addiction and designed to keep people smoking. finally, dr. frazier confirmed all of these fundamental truths about addiction and told you that in her clinical judgment, rayfield brown was addicted. and that is based on his smoking history. so let us talk a little bit about his smoking history. now, going back to early 1950s, the precise time, we are not sure if it is 1949, 1950, 1951, but it is sometime, according to kaiser, when they were 13 to 15 years of age. they first started experimenting by smoking like all the other kids did and buying these four cigarettes for a nickel at the corner store. they continued to smoke, adding to what they were doing and buying them by the pack by the time they were upper classmen in high school, despite the fact that rayfield brown was the star basketball player on the city championship team. and so by the time they were graduated from high school, as kaiser told you, they were carrying a pack in their pocket. they were smoking a pack maybe every two or three days. they had become regular daily smokers. and when they went in the army under the buddy plan, they continued to smoke. and like all soldiers, they got free cigarettes from the army as part of their rations and reduced-price cigarettes in addition to that. they came out of the army and rayfield came back to jacksonville, ultimately got a job at the post office and continued to smoke. he married mary in 1960. she told you about how he smoked when she first met him and how he continued to smoke and the amount he continued to smoke throughout the time that they were married. michael, his son, also described how extensively he smoked, that he smoked literally everywhere and all of the time. the only thing that is slightly different than that is jennifer's testimony. we will talk about that in a moment. keep in mind, jennifer was 10 or 11 at the time period she was talking about. and you have to look at all the evidence together and ask yourself, what does the totality the evidence showed about smoking history? now, according to both kaiser and mary, following an incident with his throat in '86 or perhaps '87, he decided to quit and made a pact with kaiser to quit, and all the evidence indicates that at least for some period of time he quit. but then there is also extensive evidence that he 10 3507 relapsed. he relapsed because there is evidence from sam jones that from the time he saw him in 1988 through 1994, when they got together at work, they would go out on the dock and smoke. when they went out together, they smoked. when they went to meetings and conventions, they smoked. when they played golf, they smoked. so you have extensive evidence that he relapsed from his attempts to quit. and as mary and michael both told you, they suspected that. they suspected that because they could smell the smoke on him when he came home from work. and michael actually saw his cigarettes in the console of his car after that period of time. dr. frazier took all of this information to diagnose based upon her clinical judgment. and she told you that basically what she did to do her diagnosis was use the surgeon general's report, both the 2010 and the 1988 surgeon general's report. and she told you the four features of addiction under those reports were repeated and compulsive use, impaired control over use, a high motivation to seek the drug and the judgment of greater value of other reinforcements, as well as the physical dependence shown by withdrawal and tolerance. and she walked you through those and said that she thought all of those were met. she also went through the dsm, which is another way of reviewing it and said even under the dsm criteria, she clearly thought, in her clinical judgment, that he was addicted. now, contrast that with dr. rosman, the only witness that philip morris brought forward to testify. dr. rosman, i suggest to you, is not qualified. he may be an addiction specialist, but what he deals with, two days a week, would be methamphetamines, cocaine, hard drug addiction. he admitted that he hardly ever saw anyone for nicotine addiction. now, granted, of course, that most of those people that he saw may also be smokers and he told them to quit, but he did not treat them for nicotine addiction. dr. rosman has not published anything. he is not taught on nicotine addiction. unlike dr. burns, unlike dr. frazier, he is simply not qualified in addiction medicine dealing with nicotine addiction. and that was evident from the position he took, which is totally at odds with everything that is set out in the surgeon general's reports and other relevant literature. he uses the term "recreational smoker" to describe people in every one of these suits, whether they smoked two and a half packs a day for 40 years or 3509 four and a half packs a day for 40 years and whether they smoked everywhere. to him, the quote, just recreation smokers. now, maybe you use the term "recreational" when you are dealing with hard drugs and you say, this person that is doing cocaine occasionally is a recreational user. no one uses the term "recreational" in dealing with nicotine addiction. take this document in evidence. see if you find, in the entire document, the term "recreational smoker" even used one time. look at the 1988 report on nicotine addiction. see if that term is contained anywhere in there. i suggest to you that there is no one, other than dr. rosman, who would suggest that anyone was a recreational smoker with that sort of smoking history. now, also recall how he misstated the facts in order to reach his conclusion. you recall his demonstrative, mr. brown's smoking before 1983, and i walked him through what the actual testimony was and how it differed from his demonstrative. so let us do that again and look at the specific testimony that was made and not how dr. rosman misrepresented it. first, let us talk about mary. mary testified that rayfield would carry two packs all the time in order to make sure he did not run out. and you saw the photograph. you will have that photograph in evidence, where a pack in each pocket. she said he would sometimes roll them up in his shirt sleeves so he had two packs. you do not carry around two packs of cigarettes unless you are so concerned that you are going to run out and that you are going to smoke more than you intended that you want to avoid that. that is the hallmark of addiction. was not on dr. rosman's chart at all. that is the exact testimony of mary. mary also testified, contrary to the impression that dr. rosman tried to give you, that after the church service, he smoked, that he sang in the choir and the other people who were smokers in the choir would smoke as soon as the service was over. so to say to you, oh, he did not smoke in church is a little misleading. it is distorting what the real evidence is. of course, nobody smokes in church. have you seen the smokers in church get up ten minutes and then go outside, even when they are addicted? of course not. anybody, even an addicted smoker, can make it through a church service and smoke immediately after they get out. and that is exactly what rayfield brown did. mary also testified that he smoked in the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, that entire time, whenever he was 11 3511 driving. and that is the exact testimony shown on the screen during the '60s. the next screen deals with that exact testimony in the '70s. the next screen deals with that exact testimony during the '80s. so he smoked all the time, driving, when they went to the new york, when they went to pennsylvania, when they went to palm beach. he smoked constantly in the car. and that was confirmed by michael's testimony as well. mary also testified that he had ashtrays throughout the house. he had ashtrays in the bathroom, in the bedroom, in the den, in the kitchen, on the porch, everywhere, because he smoked throughout the house, contrary to dr. rosman's assertion that he controlled his smoking to certain places around the house. that simply was not the testimony. mary also testified that he smoked in family outings, that he smoked in restaurants, that he literally smoked everywhere. and all of that was confirmed by michael's testimony as well. dr. rosman, having told you that he controlled all of his smoking before 1983, then said, well, let us look at '83 to 1987, and you recall the demonstrative that he used for that time period. this demonstrative is solely based on one ambiguous statement from jennifer brown. they build their whole case on one ambiguous statement by someone who was 11 years old in 1983. and they ignore what she otherwise said. what she otherwise said -- and let us make it clear so that it is not being distorted. what jennifer actually testified to, when asked whether there was a time when she believed her father stopped smoking, was, quote, somewhere around my middle school, what would be sixth, seventh, eighth grade, i just remember that i did not see cigarettes or did not smell them like i would smell them all the time before then. that is the real testimony back in 1983. think about that. if you start school when you are six years old, like we all do, in the sixth grade, we are going to be 12 years of age. she was born in 1972. that makes it 1984 at the earliest. but she would never have through -- she said sixth, seventh or eighth. if it was the eighth grade, she would, at that point in time, have been 14 years of age and it would have been 1986. and, of course, you have got to reconcile the testimony, see how it all fits together. 1986 fits with all the other testimony. remember kaiser brown -- or kaiser thomas? he said, i'm sure it was october 10th, 1986, when we made this pact because it was the day after my wedding. a really good reason to be able to 3513 remember that precise date. mary thought it was 1987. whether it is '86 or '87, reconcile the testimony to see how it fits together, and it is totally contrary to what dr. rosman wanted you to believe. now, dr. frazier walked you through the dsm, just like dr. rosman did. and i'm not going to go through all of that in detail, but seems it me that there are a couple things that are unequivocal, even among both of those witnesses, that resulted in the conclusion that he was addicted to cigarettes. first, both of them agree that he had tolerance because the dsm, that diagnostic and statistical manual, says tolerance can consist of being able to smoke 20 or more cigarettes a day, when if that is what you started to smoke with when you originally started, you would have been very ill. you have become tolerant to that greater amount over a period of time. that is what it says and clearly that is applicable and that is why both of them agree tolerance was met. now, in addition, one of the other criteria was persistent desire to quit and unsuccessful attempts. you clearly have that here. he expressed the desire to quit to jennifer. he expressed the desire to quit to mary. he expressed the desire to quit to kaiser after the throat incident, and they entered into a pact to quit. and we know it was unsuccessful. we know it was unsuccessful because he smoked the entire time they drove back from california in 1988. he smoked whenever he was with mr. jones. he smoked when he was at the office, according to other employees as well. the only interesting thing here is we -- we -- it just defies logic. philip morris will say he was just an occasional smoker. and they base that on the fact that a witness says that he smoked every time they were together. why would you conclude just the reverse? if you were smoking every time you were together, why would not you conclude you are smoking even when you are not -- when you are not together? instead of, oh, the only time he smoked was when i saw him, when that witness sees him all of those times, over and over, for all that time period. their entire defense is built on distortion of what the evidence is in this case. so that second one is met. you only needed three to be exempt. and third one was -- and perhaps the most important -- that he continued to smoke after he had adverse consequences. now, whether or not the throat incident was caused by his smoking, the doctor told him to quit, that he better quit, suggesting that could be an adverse consequence. continued to smoke. he relapsed. and 12 3515 3517 clearly there were adverse consequences when he is diagnosed with lung cancer and he continued to smoke after he is diagnosed. that criteria is met. that gives you the three under dsm, so that -- it is clear that he meets the requirements. you know, dr. rosman also said that he looked at the records, and he smoked only about a pack a day. i want you to take a look at the medical records, in particular, the last medical record, even if you -- this is in 1995. it is a questionnaire that he had to fill out prior to getting medical treatment. and in that questionnaire, there is a specific question about smoking and how much. and the first question is: do you smoke? and the answer is yes. and the second question is the amount and it is two packs a day. now, that is consistent with the testimony that you heard from mary brown and from the children. mary said, i, all those years, went out on friday and bought a carton of cigarettes. if that is all he smoked, a carton a week, that is a pack and a half a day. but there was also testimony that in addition to her buying throughout the week, kaiser thomas brought him down cartons of benson & hedges when he came down. and there was also testimony from michael and jennifer that they would go out to the store and he would buy cigarettes. so it is entirely consistent that his smoking history is more like a pack and a half to two packs a day instead of what dr. rosman told you. now, philip morris bases its entire argument on whether he was addicted on this concept of, quote, control. and you -- you may recall that dr. frazier addressed that issue, what is really meant by control. and what she told you was that they were totally misusing the term, that control as used in addiction medicine meant highly controlled, compulsive use. that is, you continue to use the drug, despite the fact that you would like to quit and expressed the desire to quit. and, secondly, impaired control, meaning that you use it despite the adverse consequences and that you find it extremely difficult to quit. that is supported by the surgeon general's report. first, if we look at the criteria set out in the surgeon general's reports for the definition of nicotine addiction -- and you will have that, chapter 4 of this document -- read that chapter or at least the first few pages of it because you will see that it supports everything we are saying. the primary criteria are highly controlled or compulsive use. and then there is an additional use of the term called "impaired control," which is defined by the surgeon general's report. impaired control means repeated, unsuccessful attempts to stop use -- that is exactly what you have here -- or continued use despite the known harmful consequences. that is exactly what you have here, particularly in the latter period of time after he was diagnosed with lung cancer, quite earlier as well. control does not mean, i do not smoke in church. control does not mean, i'm not so rude that i go into somebody's house and smoke when they do not want me to. control does not mean that if my wife says, you know, my asthma is such that i wish you would not smoke in the bedroom that you no longer smoke in the bedroom. that is not what control means at all. and their entire case is built around misstating what it means. it comes down to this, ladies and gentlemen: do you think that rayfield brown smoked for 40 years, up to two packs a day, quitting and then going back, quitting and then going back, quitting and then going back, even after he was diagnosed with lung cancer, but he did it just because he was a casual recreational smoker? that makes no sense whatsoever. you do not abandon your common sense when you become a juror. and common sense clearly says, if anybody was addicted, rayfield brown was addicted. now, the second requirement for class membership is that that addiction be the cause of lung cancer. well, of course, smoking is the cause of lung cancer, but addiction can be the cause of his lung cancer if he continued to smoke because of his addiction. does not have to be the only reason he continued to smoke, but if he continued to smoke because of his addiction, then that is what constitutes legal cause, and that element clearly is met as well. dr. burns explained to you how difficult it is to quit by using a chart on the addiction cycle, which clearly applies to rayfield. it is the addicted smoker gets caught in the cycle of wanting to quit, trying to quit, relapsing, trying again, relapsing. that is why 90 percent plus of all people who quit smoking relapse on multiple occasions, and it takes them years to be able to quit. now, you have heard 50 to 60 million people have quit. oh, sure. over the last 50 or 60 years, that is true because even if you take those 3 percent figures and go through the years and years and years, it will add up to those figures. but the important point, as dr. burns told you, is despite all of our efforts, despite all those public 13 3519 service announcements, despite the current atmosphere in which it is restricted everywhere where you can smoke, fully half of all smokers are still smoking. that is how addictive this product is. all right. assuming you find, as we think the evidence compels you to find, that he was a member of the class, then the engle findings apply. because it is as if he was a member of the plaintiffs in that original trial. and so those findings that smoking causes lung cancer, that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, that they placed the market -- on the market products that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, that they concealed and omitted material information, the fraud by concealment count, that they engaged in a civil conspiracy by entering into this agreement with the other defendant -- and go to the next slide. -- and that they were negligent, all those findings will apply. all right. let us go then from class membership to the second issue. and on class membership, your -- your verdict form -- as to the first question. your -- your verdict form will have question number 1: was he a member of the engle class? now, if you answered yes, then mary brown can recover some amount. we will deal with that issue. if you answer no, the case is over. mary brown cannot recover if you say he was not a member of the engle class. so answer that first question yes. you move on to the other questions. all right. the second issue is specific causation. now, there is no dispute here that smoking was the cause of death. there is no dispute that if you find that he was a member of the engle class, causation for the negligence count and product liability count has already been established. and if you look at the verdict form, there is not even a question about causation for the negligence and product liability counts because class membership means causation has been proven for those two counts. it applies only to the other two counts for civil conspiracy and fraud by concealment, and that is what impact did their misconduct have? that is the issue you are going to have to decide. to decide that issue, you are going to have to review what their misconduct was. and we have offered an extensive amount of evidence on it, in addition to the legal findings. and what we told you and what the evidence shows is that their -- their misconduct -- and ultimately there are three areas. first, they targeted kids, knowing that their only 3521 source of replacement smokers for those who were dying and quitting were teenagers, and so they specifically over the decades have targeted kids as their customers. secondly, they designed their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction because if they are not addicted, people will not continue to smoke them and they could no longer sell them. so the way to keep people smoking was to design them, to make them addictive, to make them sustain the addiction. and, third, from 1954 forward, they entered into a conspiracy with the other tobacco companies to deny and conceal the real hazards of cigarettes, and the purpose of doing that was to keep smokers smoking. now, we have offered an extensive amount of evidence. they have offered nothing to refute it. did not bring a witness. the only philip morris person you heard from is because i went up and took the deposition of that representative so i could show you what they said because they did not call him. and they did not call any witness other than dr. rosman to refute any of the information dr. burns gave you, that dr. proctor gave you, that dr. goldberg gave. there is simply no evidence to contradict the extensive evidence we had of their misconduct. all right. let us walk through. targeting kids. now, we talked about the culture of smoking in the 1950s. everybody smoked. they smoked everywhere. do you think that happened just by chance? no. it is the result of the massive expenditures they made and the fact that their advertising and promotions were designed to target kids and get kids to smoke. and the evidence of that -- if you will bring up the next one. -- was provided by dr. goldberg. and what he told you is that the documents show they knew smokers start as teenagers. literally ninety percent of smokers start as teenagers. and the internal documents that we showed you established that. secondly, they studied teenage smoking to try and figure out how they could get teenagers to smoke. i'm going to show you a document about that in a minute. and, third, they used advertising that they knew would appeal to the teenage smoker and wanted to get them to smoke, advertising that emphasized rebellion, being like an adult, being cool, all of the things that a 15-year-old will find persuasive in deciding to buy a product. and so let us look first at the major consensus reports that deal with this issue. you will have all of that evidence. every one of them reached the same 14 3523 3525 conclusion. you start with the federal trade commission report in 1967 and that is exhibit 269. it noted that cigarettes reached virtually all americans but in particular, that the themes of cigarette advertising were directed to teenagers and that they targeted teenagers. the federal trade commission came back in 1981 with another report, which you will have in evidence, and that report also indicated that they targeted teenagers with their extensive advertising and that they continued to have pervasive advertising. and then in 1994, the surgeon general did a massive report on teenage smoking and concluded in that report that teenagers were targeted and that that advertising caused teenagers to start smoking and continue smoking. and then there was a national cancer institute monograph in 2007 -- dr. goldberg was one of the authors of it -- that set out the details of their concentrated advertising and targeting kids as the principal source of their ability to get new customers. and it is also pulled together by an important document from the national academy of science, institute of medicine. dr. goldberg told you about that document as well. we read from it. bring it up. this is a report from the institute of medicine of the national academy of science that deals with tobacco advertising and promotion. importantly, it says: "during the past 15 years, the tobacco industry has nearly quadrupled its marketing expenditures at a time when tobacco consumers has been declining. each year, each day, approximately 3500 people quit smoking, and an additional 1200 tobacco smokers die from a smoking-related disease. so if the industry is going to maintain its business, it has to get 5,000 new smokers a day, just to keep up with those that are dying from cigarettes and those that are quitting. its only source are kids because nobody starts smoking after about 21. they start smoking when they are teenagers. brand loyalty's about ninety percent. if you can get a 15-year-old smoking your brand, he is likely to remain a customer for years, typically because of the addiction. they are the only known replacement that will allow the industry to replace all those dead smokers and those that have quit and allow it to continue to sell cigarettes and make the outrageous smoking ad. now, the 2012 surgeon general's report also addresses they are targeting kids, and that will be in evidence as well. take a look at what it says about how quickly kids become addicted to cigarettes. they are much more susceptible to addiction themselves. they more rapidly become addicted, and they are more likely, as a result, to remain addicted. now, in addition to targeting kids, they design their cigarettes to make them addicted. now, cigarettes are not just tobacco rolled in paper. they are elaborately designed and engineered products. they are designed and engineered to make sure that smokers become addicted and thus continue to smoke because of their addiction. now, one of the documents i showed you -- and i cross examined dr. lipowicz about this -- was from the centers for disease control, regarding what -- the 2010 surgeon general's report. and centers for disease control out of atlanta, one of the premier agencies in the federal medical establishment, wrote: "nicotine is powerful and addictive. cigarettes are designed for addiction, that the cigarette makers had long known that nicotine addiction helped sell their products, and today they deliver more nicotine and quicker than ever before. they are more addictive today because of the continuing attempts to design and for addiction, to create it and sustain it." now, combine that with the fact that they are targeting our teenagers, that they are targeting 15-year-olds, and then they are designing their cigarettes to make sure that those 15-year-olds become addicted and stay addicted to their product so that for decades and decades, they can sell them. and almost half of them who have become and remain daily smokers will die from smoking-related diseases. now, there is no evidence to the contrary presented by philip morris. and there is no evidence because they cannot deny it. their internal documents show it. i'll show you one internal document. there are lot of them. but one of the internal documents we showed you was from dr. wakeham, who you remember, we also had a videotape of him. dr. wakeham was their head scientist at this point in time. and he did his analysis, which he presented to the philip morris board of directors. and in that, he indicated that the 16- to 20-year-old, which is where all of these smokers come from, begin smoking for psychosocial motivation, that peer pressure to be cool, to be adult, to be rebellious. you know, as kaiser thomas said, humphrey bogart smoked constantly in every movie we saw. we all wanted 15 3527 to be humphrey bogart. that was the cool image that would get kids to smoke. and we showed you the documents of how philip morris placed its product in the movies to make sure that those celebrities in movies were smoking. now, but this document goes on to say that is not why 16- to 20-year-olds continue smoking. it is not a very pleasant experience when you first start. they continue to smoke because they rapidly become addicted, and that is the explanation for continuing smoking. and because of that, they have designed their cigarettes to be addictive, and they have designed them in three ways. one, by making them inhalable. tobacco rolled in cigarette paper is not inhalable any more -- for most people, any more than a cigar is. if you do not inhale it, your chances of getting addicted are much, much less. it has to be inhalable to get all of these people to be addicted and to remain addicted. and how do you make it inhalable? one, you flue-cure the tobacco so that the ph is lower, it is less harsh and you can take it into your lungs. you select tobaccos that will more likely be inhalable and use it in the filter. you use flavorings and anesthetic agents so that the harshness is not felt in your lungs and you can inhale. you know, it is not just menthol cigarettes that have menthol in them. every cigarette has menthol in it. menthol cigarettes have a lot more, but every cigarette has menthol in it because that is an anesthetic, which allows you to inhale the drug when you would otherwise not be able to. and so they are designed and engineered to be inhalable. secondly, they have to have a threshold level of nicotine to be addictive, but tobacco does not have a uniform level of nicotine. you go out in the field, and one plant will have one level; another plant will have another level. and it may not be the amount necessary to create and sustain addiction so they have to blend the tobacco to make sure that the nicotine in it is at the level necessary to get people to smoke and become addicted. and an example we have of that was from the very document -- the very cigarette that rayfield brown smoked in 19- -- the multifilter, and we will look at that in a moment. well, let us go ahead and bring it up now, if we can. in 1965, this is a document dealing with the creation of the multifilter cigarette, which rayfield smoked. mary brown told you about that being passed out 3529 by a philip morris representative at a social gathering they went to, along with ads about how it was 95 percent lower in tar and the implication it was safer and healthier and so forth. they designed that cigarette to have a specific level of nicotine. all cigarettes have that. if you look at every brand, every brand of cigarette has design specifications. and among the design specifications is a precise amount of nicotine necessary to create and sustain addiction. now, how do you get that precise amount of nicotine? you blend. you also take stems and leaves and chop them up and create a slurry and make a little paper out of them. and then you spray on the level of nicotine that you want on that paper and chop it up to make it look like tobacco and fill part of the cigarette with it as well so that the nicotine level has the threshold necessary to create and sustain addiction. and finally, they also create and sustain addiction by adding ammonia. now, ammonia does not increase the level of nicotine. ammonia changes its permeability in the lungs so that it gets to the brain faster so that by adding ammonia, they could give more of a nicotine kick, to make it more addictive while they attempted to lower the tars in the cigarette itself. now, so they made them inhalable, they have manipulated the nicotine level, they have added chemicals to give them more kick, all of that to create and sustain addiction. and the third thing they had done was entered into and engaged in a decades-long conspiracy to conceal the real hazards of smoking. and that is what i want to talk to you next about, but this might be a perfect time for a break. the court: thank you, mr. shields. ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take a short break during mr. shields' closing argument, probably about five minutes, so i would ask that you stay in the jury room. we will start back in a little bit. (jury present.) (recess taken.) the court: are we ready to start back, mr. reilly, mr. shields? mr. shields: (nods head.) the court: mr. smoot, you can bring the jurors back in. the bailiff: jurors are now entering the courtroom. (jury present.) (the following proceedings were held in open court 16 3531 in the presence of the jury:) the court: please be seated. thank you, mr. smoot. mr. shields, you may proceed. mr. shields: thank you, your honor. i've told you that there were three bases for liability: one, that they targeted kids; two, that the design of the cigarettes to create and sustain addiction and, three, that they entered into a civil conspiracy to conceal the real hazards of cigarettes. that -- of course, that third item, was an engle finding, that they entered into an agreement or civil conspiracy to conceal material information about the real hazards of cigarettes. and we offered a great deal of evidence on that, and i'm going to walk you through that. but as a beginning point, there is no evidence to contradict all of what we provided you. they did not offer anybody to dispute it. mr. reilly, in fact, in opening statement, virtually conceded that they could not defend their conduct over the years. although when i took dr. lipowicz's deposition, he still would not agree that what they had done was wrong. he still would not agree that they engaged in a conspiracy, that they were negligent, that their products were defective, that they fraudulently concealed information. so let us look at the evidence. first, a civil conspiracy starts as a result of the growing evidence in the early 1950s that cigarettes caused lung cancer. dr. burns showed you a chart that indicated that there was a relationship between the amount of smoking and about a 20-year lapse, lung cancer. lung cancer at one time was a very rare disease, unheard of. but with the mass production and mass sale of cigarettes, it then became the leading cause of death in this country. and that is what dr. burns told you. as a result of that relationship, there were studies that were commenced to see if cigarettes caused lung cancer, and there were four major studies published in 1950 that he told you about. we are not going through those in any detail. it is undisputed that that is what those four studies said. they were followed in 1953 by the mouse painting skin studies. and dr. burns explained to you, the significance of that is that the skin of the mouse, the cells, are similar to the lining of our lung so that if you could produce tumors by putting tar on the mouse skin, it provided evidence that that might be the reason for that relationship between smoking and lung cancer. 3533 and when that came out, it was a major story. the stock price for all cigarette companies bottomed and they panicked. and you saw the telegram from the president of the american tobacco company, paul hahn, to all the presidents of the other tobacco companies, including the president of philip morris, saying, we have got to get together and figure out what we are going to do about this. and they got together at the plaza hotel in december of 1953, the presidents of the company, later the research directors of the company. and the documents show what they decided to do. what they decided to do was hire public relations counsel. they did not think of it in terms of this is a problem for smoke -- for our clients that are dying from our product. they thought of it in terms of how can we counter the adverse publicity of this so that it does not affect the sales of our product? and so they hired the biggest public relations firm in the country, hill & knowlton in new york. and hill & knowlton then met with them. and we have the memorandum of the meeting and what they suggested to do. and that memorandum talks about their interviews with the research directors of the companies, in which they acknowledge in those interviews the addictive nature of cigarettes, and they virtually acknowledge that they cause cancer. and that is important because we see what they publicly said instead of what they privately said. and hill & knowlton then put together a program for them of what they would do, including killing stories about the tobacco problem, including meeting with the editors and trying to influence them so that they would not write things that were adverse to the industry, including sending out information to make sure that the industry viewpoint got as much or more play than any adverse stories. and you will have those documents, in which hill & knowlton recounts all of its activities, who it contacted, with what success, what stories it killed, how it impacted everything in concealing the real nature of the problem. and the evidence will also show you that the first thing that they wanted to do following their meeting was to have this nationwide newspaper full-page article denying that cigarettes cause lung cancer. that is called the frank statement. and it is exhibit 175. you will have it with you. dr. proctor walked you through it and told you how it was misleading and fraudulent. it was published in every newspaper in the country of a city with more than 17 3535 50,000 people. it was reprinted and handed out by the industry, reprinted and put in tobacco stores. and that document is important, not because we think that rayfield brown, who was a high school student at the time, necessarily saw it and looked at it and thought about it, but because it is the evidence of the beginning of the civil conspiracy that continued for decades after that, creating a culture in which the american people did not understand, did not appreciate, did not believe the real hazards of cigarettes, as a result of the massive advertising expenditure and campaign done by the tobacco industry. and so that campaign consisted of three elements. first, for decades, they denied that cigarettes were harmful at all. second, they pursued what was called the "campaign of doubt," in which they said, oh, there is a scientific controversy here that needs to be resolved. and the purpose of creating doubt, as hill & knowlton wrote in that first memoranda, was to keep smokers smoking, by saying, you know, this is controversial; this really has not been resolved. and in connection with it, the third element of reassurance, which was to say to them, if there is anything harmful in cigarettes, we will find it. we will take it out before you are ever injured, so you might as well go on smoking. and look at the hill & knowlton document. that is exactly what it says and that is exactly what they did over the decades. they created, as part of that campaign, two front organizations to pursue this campaign of denial, doubt and reassurance. the first of it, it was called the tobacco industry research counsel, tirc, later changed its name to ctr. its purpose was to appear to be a scientific research organization, when, in fact, it never really researched that their cigarettes caused cancer. it researched everything else so that it could say to the american public, we spent $100 million, and we could not find that cigarettes caused lung cancer. because they never looked. they researched viruses. they researched genetics. they researched everything other than whether cigarettes cause lung cancer. the evidence that cigarettes cause lung cancer are these studies of populations groups that show the relationship and that there is no other explanation. and the entire history of the tobacco industry from 1954 forward, neither philip morris or anyone else has ever tried to do one of those studies. why not? because it 3537 would have confirmed years and decades ago what the scientific consensus was, that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. instead, they dumped hundreds of millions of dollars into what dr. proctor called "distraction science." the fact that this group was nothing more than a public relations front instead of a real research organization was acknowledged by their internal documents themselves. and here's -- here's an example, in which they admitted that it was set up as an industry shield in 1954 as a front organization and was not really the research organization they claimed. the second organization it set up was called the tobacco institute. it was its lobbying part. it had offices down the street from the white house. and we will see lots of documents of what the tobacco industry -- institute did over the years in successfully pursuing its campaign to keep people smoking by denying the harm, creating doubt and by reassuring smokers, if anything was harmful, we will take it out, so you might as well continue smoking. now, while there may have been some lingering doubt in the '50s, despite what dr. burns and dr. proctor said, it was a consensus of the scientific community by the mid to late '50s, there could be no doubt by 1964. in 1964, the surgeon general of the united states had an advisory committee composed of people that they could veto, that look at everything for two years and issued this landmark report that said, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in men and other diseases as well. now, that should have been the end of it. at that point in time, philip morris had a choice. it could have done what was right, acknowledged the scientific consensus, worked with the public health community to try and get people to quit smoking. and think about how the world would have been different, how our country would have been different if they would have done that in 1964 instead of, for the next 35, 40 years, denying everything and opposing all efforts to deal with the problem. the culture we have today, where you do not smoke in buildings and restaurants, you do not smoke in almost anywhere, could have been the culture of the '60s had they not decided on which path they were going to take. the path they chose was to continue their campaign of denial, doubt and reassurance. and you will see from documents that deal specifically with that. the most important, i think, is exhibit 252. it is referenced on our time line as the 18 3539 3541 psychological crutch line there. and what it is is a memo from a high executive of the philip morris company to the highest executive of the philip morris company, joseph cullman, saying "we must, in the near future, provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." that was their reaction to the surgeon general's report. and so what they did for the next 35, 40 years was issue press releases denying that cigarettes were harmful, gave statements and made speeches, engaged in extensive publicity and used tirc/ctr and the tobacco institute to continue the campaign of denial. and among the things they did, they issued these white papers -- and we have given you some examples of them -- that misrepresented what the evidence was about cigarette smoking. and we -- we have given you an example of things from each decade, but there were lots more of them. and what these were -- were were documents that they sent out to every doctor and to newspapers and editors and medical schools, in which they said there is no evidence that cigarettes are harmful and that they cause lung cancer, in hopes that those doctors would provide that information to the patients. and as dr. proctor told you, it worked. you know, after the surgeon general's report, fully half of all doctors were still smoking. even a decade later, a third of all doctors were still smoking. the american medical association refused to issue a statement that cigarettes were harmful because they had the representative from the american medical association committee that dealt with it. and you saw the document where he bragged about how he kept the committee from adopting a resolution that was adverse to the tobacco companies' position. think about what difference it would have made if in the early '60s they would have told the truth, not tried to persuade doctors, in fact, taken a position of trying to work with doctors to deal with the significant public health problem, how different our world would have been. now, in addition to issuing these white papers, they would go on television and deny that cigarettes were harmful, and we are going to show you an example of that in a moment. but they also denied that cigarettes were addicting, despite the fact that they could turn on the news that they were addictive and, in fact, designed them to create and sustained addiction. one of the documents you will have is exhibit 258, an internal document from the tobacco institute executive, in which the executive admits that cigarettes are addictive. if we could bring that up. here's the report, labeled "strictly private and confidential." "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms." and it says "with certain undesirable side effects, one of which is it causes cancer." now, keep in mind, when this internal document is written, they are publicly everywhere saying, there is no evidence it causes lung cancer. it is -- there is doubt. there is a scientific controversy. there is nothing harmful in cigarettes. if there is anything ever harmful, we will take it out. and, secondly, they are denying that it is addictive. they work to keep the first surgeon general's report in 1964 from saying it is addictive by convincing him that he should just call it a "habit" instead of an "addiction." the campaign is summed up by another internal document, a memoranda, exhibit 305 -- let us bring that up. -- from executives of the tobacco institute that acknowledges that they have been pursuing a campaign of creating doubt about the health charges for the last 20 years, and that is exactly what the evidence showed. now, let me also give you an example of their campaign of denial by showing you a clip from face the nation, in which the president of philip morris went on national television and denied that cigarettes were harmful. it pulls it all together. it is exhibit 247. you saw it. let us look at it again. (video clip was played as follows:) "unidentified speaker: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the finding of the surgeon general committee. in our studios" -- (video clip was stopped.) mr. shields: we are looking for face the nation, exhibit 247. while she is looking for that, i'll move on. we will come back to that in a moment. the 1988 surgeon general's report finally said publicly what the drug community had known for years, what the internal tobacco documents showed they had known for years, and that was that cigarettes were addictive. and the tobacco industry, the tobacco institute immediately ridiculed the conclusion. they referenced it as scare tactics. and they had a press 19 3543 conference, in which they labeled it as "scare tactics" and denied it. and as late as 1994, the president of philip morris went before congress, the congressional committee on whether cigarettes were addictive, held up his hand, swore under oath to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth and swore under oath that cigarettes were not addictive, despite all the internal documents of philip morris that said they were, despite the fact those internal documents, which you will all have in front of you, show that they designed their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction. now, a major part of the campaign of denial also dealt with filters and menthol cigarettes. starting in the 1950s, they started putting filters to imply to people that cigarettes would be safer. and they engaged in what later became the tar derby, in which they claimed that they had reduced the tar levels by great percentages in order to claim that those brands were safe. that is important here because rayfield brown ended up smoking one of those brands, in which they claim that they greatly reduced the tar, the multifilter. the multifilter claimed to have reduced the tar by 95 percent. a clear implication of that claim is that its safer; it is less hazardous; it will not cause the diseases you have been hearing about, while never admitting that it did in the first place. and as dr. burns told you, we now know that all of that was simply untrue, that reducing the tar levels had no impact. and a major scientific report came out called monograph 13, from the national cancer institute. you will have it in evidence. look at paragraph -- or at chapter 1. it is the summary chapter written by dr. burns and which goes through the evidence that there is no implication that low-tar filtered cigarettes, low-nicotine cigarettes reduced the risk of lung cancer at all. to the contrary, what happened with these machine-measured levels of lower tar is that people, because they were addicted and needed a level of nicotine, would smoke more to get the nicotine, would take deeper puffs and inhale deeper to get the nicotine, would cover the ventilation holes, which is the primary way in which they got the lower tar levels, so that it did not reduce the tar in them. philip morris knew that. we showed you the internal documents in which they recognized that is what was really happening back in the '60s. but they continued to advertise low-tar filtered cigarettes and 3545 give the impression that they were safer. now, philip morris wants you to think that all of these documents and all of this evidence about their conduct is ancient history, that it was decades ago. but the reality is that the denials continue today. you saw the deposition of dr. lipowicz, in which he said he stood by all of the statements that they had made during that time period, and he was evasive and would not answer the questions and was all over the board in trying to justify it. but that was in 2011. they still stood by the things they had said over the years. and so let us -- let us see the things they stand -- stood by over the years because i showed those through dr. lipowicz when i asked him those questions. let us start with the video of dr. wakeham. and remember that dr. wakeham was the head scientist at philip morris for a great deal of a period of time. and we showed you this video of an interview with him. (video clip was played as follows:) "dr. wakeham: none of the things which have been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful. "unidentified speaker: "but the components themselves can be considered harmful, can they not? "dr. wakeham: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. "unidentified speaker: i do not think many people have died from applesauce. "dr. wakeham: they are not eating that much. "unidentified speaker: people are smoking their own cigarettes. "dr. wakeham: well, let me say it this way: the people who eat applesauce die. the people who eat sugar die. the people who smoke cigarettes die. does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause?" (video clip was stopped.) mr. shields: that is the interview from the mid '70s. that is what they were publicly saying and engaging in a campaign to convince the american public. now, yes, it is true everybody dies. but you have the chart, in evidence, to retaliate that. rayfield brown died 22 years before his life expectancy. average smoker dies 14 years before their life expectancy. now, let us look at the next one, mr. bowling, executive vice president of philip morris at the time. (video clip was played as follows:) 20 3547 "unidentified speaker: as a manufacturer of the world's biggest selling cigarette, are you concerned that the world health organization say that cigarettes are the cause of a worldwide epidemic of a disease at the present, killed hundreds of thousands of smokers every year? "mr. bowling: am i concerned? i'm concerned but possibly in a different way than you might think. i'm concerned that people make claims, including those against our products, without adequate knowledge. there has not been the sort of research needed for everyone to say that." (video clip was stopped.) mr. shields: and then finally, do we have the face the nation clip that we can play? and this is the president of philip morris. (video clip was played as follows:) "mr. cullman: we are also very concerned about the charges leveled against our product. and we are very anxious to do whatever we can to clear the air in this matter. we happen to be optimistic about the future, and we happen to feel that this is a great industry and that this industry can face the future with confidence because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient." (video clip was stopped.) mr. shields: 20 years before then, one of the internal documents shows that they internally knew, understood and agreed that cigarettes cause lung cancer. and he goes on national television and says, there is nothing harmful, and if, when we discover anything harmful, we will remove it. why did he say that? to keep smokers smoking. you say that to a smoker to say, there is no reason for you to quit because if we ever find anything in here, it will be taken out before you are injured. it was designed to sell cigarettes. and so the question is what were they conceding? mr. reilly will say, none of this was a secret. the health community was saying this. mr. brown must have known that. the point is not that these charges were not being made; it is that philip morris denied them and never revealed the truth. what they concealed was what they really knew and believed. what they concealed included that they knew cigarettes caused disease and were addictive, that they knew that filters did not reduce the risk, that they knew that low-tar and light cigarettes did not reduce 3549 the risk, that they knew that there was no legitimate scientific controversy, while saying to the contrary, that they knew what was harmful in cigarettes. you will have a document from 1961, in which they identify the cancer-causing agents in cigarettes. they knew what was harmful. and they concealed that they knew they could not take it out at the time period they were saying, if we ever find anything harmful, we will remove it, so there is no reason for you to quit smoking. that is what was fraudulent concealment. now, none of this is disputed. they offered no evidence to dispute any of this. so then let us turn to the final piece of evidence that needs to be addressed regarding their campaign. and that is what evidence is there of reliance? the judge instructed you there must be evidence of reliance. all right. ladies and gentlemen, reliance can be inferred from all of the evidence. mr. brown is not here to testify. mr. brown died in 1995. he cannot come here and say, i relied on this; i relied on that; this is why i continue to smoke. so you are going to have to use your common sense to infer from all the evidence whether there is reliance. and the court will instruct you that you can make that inference from -- from the evidence. you do not have to have a specific statement from mr. brown. and what evidence is there to make the inference? it is this extensive campaign that dr. proctor told you about. it is the fact that we know what smokers believed because the federal trade commission did surveys. the roper organization, for philip morris, did surveys during the time period to show what people believed. and what they showed -- information showed you was that there was very little understanding of what cigarettes really did. and you have one document in which the federal trade commission pointed out -- says "the warning statement on packages has proved to be ineffective, mainly because few people pay attention to it." there is a later survey from 1981, which is right in the important time period we are talking about, in which the federal trade commission pulled together 14 surveys of smokers from around the country, including the surveys done for philip morris from the roper organization. and what it concluded was: "a large number of consumers do not know what diseases are related to smoking. a substantial number seriously misunderstand and underestimate the extent of the increased risk. that many seriously underestimate or 21 3551 are unaware of the severity of health consequences. and a significant number of consumers incorrectly do not believe the consequences are relevant to them." and think about this: dr. burns told you that slightly less than half of all smokers will have died from a smoking-related disease, some 440,000 americans a year. now, if philip morris had ever said to its customers, your chances of dying from buying our product are about fifty percent, what impact would that have had on whether people continued to smoke? what impact -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. mr. shields: -- would that have had on -- the court: hold on, mr. shields. mr. reilly: impact on people other than mr. brown. the court: the objection's sustained for the reasons i stated. mr. shields: what impact would that have had on mr. brown? you can look at that survey information and infer from that that mr. brown would have relied on this campaign. and there is more evidence than that. there is direct evidence of reliance from his switching to the multifilter cigarette. mary told you about this meeting in which a representative of the philip morris company gave out packages of the multifilter. there were ads there about the reduction in tar and the whole context of it is here is a safer, less hazardous cigarette that you can smoke. and mary told you that rayfield started smoking the multifilter in the belief that it was safer and less hazardous for him. that is direct evidence of his reliance on their fraudulent concealment. so you are going to need to determine that issue. the third major issue that you are going to need to determine is comparative fault. now, comparative fault is simply a question for you of whether you think that rayfield brown was also at fault in not quitting smoking earlier. and i'm going to be candid with you. you certainly can reach that conclusion on this evidence. that is your decision to decide whether he also was at fault. but that is not the end of it. if you decide that he had some fault, that he should have quit earlier, that he should not have continued to smoke, you can still find philip morris liable for their misconduct and allocate the responsibility between the two. that is what comparative fault is. you compare the fault of both. and so what you compare is rayfield brown starting 3553 as a 13- or 14-year-old at a time when there was massive advertising, targeting kids, to get them to smoke, in which the culture of smoking is that everyone was -- was smoking, that he rapidly became addicted, that he remained addicted for decades thereafter, that he struggled to quit and simply was unable to totally quit. and compare that with their purposeful misconduct. who controlled their actions? philip morris controlled its assertions that there is nothing harmful in cigarettes, when they knew to the contrary. philip morris controlled its claim that if we ever find anything harmful in cigarettes, we will take it out, so you might as well keep smoking, when they knew to the contrary exactly what carcinogens were in cigarettes. philip morris controlled its representations and implied representations that cigarettes with lower tar and filters were more safe, when they knew internally to the contrary. philip morris controlled that they designed their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction. they controlled that they targeted kids with their massive advertising over the years. compare all of that misconduct with rayfield brown. and i suggest to you, even if you find that rayfield brown had some responsibility for not quitting sooner, it is minor in comparison to the massive misconduct of philip morris. that is what you have to do when you have comparative fault. finally, you have to deal with damages. now, damages have two components. you will have a verdict form that has you set out components of the damages. one are called compensatory damages. and that includes the lost income, the value of services, medical expenses and those have been agreed to. you have your instructions, which sets out those exact amounts so that it is merely a matter of taking those instructions and putting on the form $137,750 for loss of income, $123,240 for loss of services, $114,287.41 for medical expenses. those are easy. but above and beyond that, as the court instructed you, you must determine the value of the loss of companionship and affection, the pain and suffering from losing her husband, the loss of parental guidance that jennifer suffered from. in order to do that, you are going to have to consider their lives together, and we offered you extensive evidence on that. mary, michael, jennifer testified about what they did, how they lived, how mary and rayfield were not just husband and wife, they were best friends, the kinds of things they did together and 22 3555 the kinds of things they planned to do together. you are going to have to work your way through that and assign a monetary value to those losses. now, there is no magic formula. i wish there were. i wish i could come up here and say, here's what you do to determine that figure. that is a figure you are going to have to determine. all i can do is say to you, as we have said from the beginning, i believe the evidence in this case justifies an award of substantial damages for those categories. and by "substantial damages," i suggest to you that an award of $10 million for mary brown's losses, in addition to these specific losses, is reasonable and appropriate. and i suggest to you that a figure of $3.5 million for jennifer's losses is reasonable and appropriate. now, why jennifer? because under the law, jennifer is a survivor victim recovering for wrongful death because of her age and dependency at the time of his death. so we have two claims to consider; mary's claim, jennifer's claim. when you go through the evidence, search your consciousness. see if you can reach an agreement among yourselves as to the value of that. and as we suggest, it needs to be a substantial amount. you also need to consider punitive damages. one of the questions on this form is specifically whether there is entitlement to punitive damages. the court instructed you. you will have the written instruction about the standard from which you can award punitive damages. what does it take to award punitive damages? and i suggest to you, if you look at that standard and you look at the evidence of their intentional misconduct in targeting kids, in designing cigarettes to create and sustain addiction, in engaging in a civil conspiracy for decades to keep smokers smoking, that if any case ever justified the award of punitive damages, it is this one. if any case justifies you answering that question of entitlement, it is this one. the evidence is overwhelming. and there is no evidence to the contrary. they did not put on a single witness to address their misconduct or to try and justify or to say that it did not justify the award of punitive damages here. they did not offer anything to contradict what dr. burns told you, what dr. proctor told you, what dr. goldberg told you. the undisputed evidence supports it. you should answer that question for entitlement yes, and then we will deal with the other issue. 3557 and let me say this as a final point about punitive damages: if you answer that question yes, then we go into a second phase -- it will be relatively short -- that deals with the amount of punitive damages and there may be additional evidence on that. we have spent close to three weeks here. you should decide that issue based on the evidence, the instruction of law, without any consideration of, gee, i'm going to have to put in another half a day of time. we did not all spend all this time to then decide it because we did not want to put in a little more time. and so we are getting close to the end of the week. maybe we have to go into next week. i hope not. but the decision has to be made on the evidence. it has to be made on the instruction from the court. so let me just conclude my opening portion by saying that you have four issues to deal with. the evidence is unequivocal, it supports us in connection with all four. he clearly was a member of the class. he is entitled to the benefit of the engle findings. clearly there is specific causation from a relationship between their misconduct and a result in death. in terms of comparative fault, it is up to you to make that decision and determine how you want to allocate it. and, fourth and finally, there is abundant evidence from which you can award the substantial damages that you think are appropriate here and that you can decide that this case justifies the award of punitive damages. i thank you again for your time and attention. i know i've talked a long time. a lot of evidence that needed to be discussed with you, and i'll be happy to talk to you again. mr. shields: good afternoon. the jury: afternoon. mr. shields: i spent a lot of time talking to you. i'll take a little more of your time. bear with me. there are some things i think i need to respond to and some testimony i want to show you. let me begin by making two preliminary observations. first is that mr. reilly virtually ignores ninety percent of the testimony that you heard in this case. just ignores all the evidence about the misconduct. all the extensive evidence we put on that they targeted kids because they knew that was their only source of replacement smokers for those that were dying and quitting. not one word from them. we showed you the internal documents that they targeted kids. we showed you the reports of the surgeon general that said that targeting worked. that it created demand. that the multiple studies from around the world from multiple disciplines show that the cigarette advertising caused kids to start smoking. and you will have that report with you. it is in the surgeon general's report. it is in the national cancer institute's monograph 19 report. even the 2012 surgeon general's report says that. just ignored by philip morris. secondly, we offered all of this evidence about how they designed their cigarettes to create addiction in the first place on kids and to sustain it on smokers. you saw the report from the surgeon general that said just that in 2010. that said the cigarettes today are more addictive than ever because of how they designed them. and what is mr. reilly's response? well, cigarettes have nicotine in them. people want nicotine. 3638 well, that is the whole point. there has to be a certain level of nicotine to get people addicted and to keep them addicted so that they continue smoking. and they elaborately design and engineer their products to make sure they meet that threshold level so that the 15-year-old that picks up the cigarette becomes addicted and thus will be a customer for decades to come. so that the addicted smoker finds it extremely difficult to quit and continues to smoke because of the nicotine is sufficient and is at a level for that to happen. that is what the surgeon general's report says. that is what the national cancer institute's report says. no response whatsoever from philip morris other than of course nicotine is in tobacco. but it is not the level necessary to sustain addiction unless you design it and keep it that way. it is not at the level to get kids addicted and keep them addicted unless you design it that way, unless you create your paper tobacco and spray nicotine on it and chop it up and put it in cigarettes, put it in the filters of the cigarettes, and all of the things that dr. proctor -- the court: mr. shields. mr. reilly -- yes, sir, mr. reilly? mr. reilly: objection, your honor. it is in violation of the engle findings. the court: overruled. you may proceed. mr. shields: all of the things that dr. proctor told you that they did to create and sustain addiction. and finally there was a massive amount of evidence about the civil conspiracy they started in 1954 and ran right through 2000 and through the last decade. all of the things that they did as part of that conspiracy. you saw videotapes of it. you have seen documents. there is a massive amount of evidence that is going to be sent out with you showing that civil conspiracy. not one word from mr. reilly in connection with that cigarette conspiracy. not one. now, the second observation i would make is that when he does talk about things, he cherry picks the testimony, just like his only witness dr. rosman did, to create a story that is contrary to almost all the evidence in the case. your obligation as jurors is to look at all the evidence and reconcile the evidence and not cherry 10 3640 pick a piece here to try and construct the story that is not consistent with all of the testimony. now, let us talk about that because that seems to me that is the beginning point. the best example of cherry picking is that cbs news report they showed you. and he got cut off during the trial because he cut out, right at the middle of it, the sense of the whole thing that changed the whole context of the statement. the statement implies one thing until you see what he cut out. of course by closing argument he had acknowledged he cut it out. let us show that again to show what the statement really showed and what he took out of it. (a video clip was played as follows:) there is no question but that smoking appeals to a great many people. an old smoker never forgets how he started. and through the lifetimes of a lot of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. in a case like that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then you give him a chance to reform. in this kind of a country it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his; the decision and the health that may depend upon it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (the video clip was ended.) mr. shields: that has a totally different meaning than when you see the first of it instead of just the last of it. by only showing the last of it, you cherry pick to give a different impression. that is what he did through closing arguments. let us look at the specific examples. first of all, class membership. the issue for you to decide is whether mr. brown was addicted to smoking and because of that addiction he continued to smoke so that it was a legal cause of his death. now, what were you told in closing? you were told that dr. burns said that every 30 minutes an addicted smoker had to have a new cigarette. really? was that what dr. burns said? if that were true, that would mean no addicted smoker could ever go to sleep at night. they would have to be 3642 getting up every hour and smoking a couple of cigarettes. it would mean that workers today could not work because they would have to be having a couple of cigarettes every hour, and cigarette smoking is no longer allowed. it would mean most of our daily activities could not be done by addicted smokers. what it would mean is that virtually no one is addicted. of course that is not true, and that is not what dr. burns said. dr. burns went on to say -- we can bring up that testimony. when you get up in the morning, the first thing you need to do when you get out of bed is dose yourself because all night you have not had any nicotine. not that you had to have it every 30 minutes like mr. rosman said. that happens day after day, and that is the reason why exposure to those cancer-causing substances is nearly continuous. now, what was mary brown's testimony? she testified, and i showed you the testimony during the first part of my argument, that he got up every morning, and the first thing he did was smoke a cigarette on the way to the bathroom. that is exactly what dr. burns was talking about. it is absurd to suggest that, unless you have a cigarette every 30 minutes, you are not addicted because, under that criteria, no one would be addicted. it is absurd to suggest, you know, if you quit smoking and therefore are not having a cigarette every 30 minutes, that means you were not addicted to begin with. that is contrary to all of the testimony in the case. he told you that the smoking that was done was only on weekends after 1986 and said that the only evidence of -- that he continued to smoke was from sam jones. really? mr. reilly: i object, your honor. i did not say that. the court: sustained. but it is proper argument. you may proceed, mr. shields. mr. shields: really? mary testified that she smelled smoke on him when he came home from work. his son, michael, testified that he saw cigarettes in the car. neither one of them believed that he had succeeded in quitting smoking. 11 3644 3646 and look at the medical records. we showed you the medical record from shortly before his death where he indicates that he was smoking two packs a day. so there is abundant evidence that he continued to smoke. not just on weekends, as mr. reilly wanted to suggest, but he smoked throughout that time period. attempted to quit, relapsed, and went back to smoking. sam jones described, for example, them going out on route inspections and being together for a week at a time in which they would constantly be smoking. so it is a total misrepresentation of the evidence to suggest that it was only on weekends. just as it is a total misrepresentation of the evidence to suggest that he totally quit smoking around jennifer starting in 1983. let us put back up on the board what jennifer actually said when asked the question: when was it that you thought he quit smoking? and she said: somewhere around my middle school, what would be sixth, seventh, eighth grade. all of the quotes that mr. reilly gave you, the 1983 figure came from the question, not from the answer. her answer was sixth, seventh, or eighth grade. in sixth grade, it is 1984; in seventh grade, it is 1985; and eighth grade it is 1986. that is the range that she was talking about. if it was 1983 she would have still been in elementary school, and she never said that. you are going to have to decide how reliable are recollections 30 years later and look at the totality of the evidence. and in looking at the totality of the evidence, you need to look at the specific testimony of mary. what mary testified to -- if you could bring up the next one. "can you tell us whether or not you have a clear memory of rayfield smoking in your home in 1983? "yes. "was he smoking? "yes: "and was jennifer living in the home in 1983 with you and rayfield? "yes, she was. "and in 1984 was rayfield smoking around the home?" "and in 1985 was rayfield smoking around the home." now is it conceivable that he is smoking around the home; he is smoking everywhere, as michael described; that he is got ashtrays everywhere that he is smoking -- other than starting in 1985 in the bedroom -- that he is not smoking around jennifer? well, look at the next testimony about mrs. brown when she is specifically asked about smoking around jennifer. and let us look at 29. "can you tell us whether or not you have a clear memory of rayfield smoking at some of jennifer's activities that you and rayfield attended in 1983, '84, '85, '86?" the answer was yes. according to mr. reilly, he never smoked at any of those activities. let us take another look at what she said. this is 28. "and in 1985, when he was at home, would he get up in the mornings and have a cigarette? "yes, he would. "and in 1986 when he was home, would he get up and have a cigarette? "yes, he would. "let us talk about the evening hours. when he would come home from work during the week while jennifer was there in 1983, would he come home in the evening during the week and have a cigarette: "yes, he would." see. you have got to put the totality of the evidence. mary's testimony, michael's testimony, and kaiser thomas's testimony. kaiser talked about coming down and staying with them and living at their house when he came down. was there one word from kaiser thomas about him not smoking around jennifer or not smoking anywhere in the house or only smoking on weekends? he said he continued to smoke up until 1986. he also described quit attempts; another example of cherry picking. mr. reilly said he never attempted to quit until 1986. never expressed a desire to quit until 1986. kaiser thomas specifically said: we made several attempts to quit before 1986 and, in fact, before 1984. he gave a specific example of where they had quit, where rayfield had quit, gone on a fishing trip, got in a confrontation or an argument with a labor worker, and because of that stress, went back 12 3648 3650 to smoking. just ignored by mr. reilly. simply cherry picked the testimony. he wanted to build a scenario other than what the total evidence shows. and he says what all this shows is that mr. brown had total control over his smoking. now, the point is that he continued to smoke because he was addicted. the question of control is not whether he can keep from smoking in church; it is not whether he can keep from smoking part of the time at work. the question of control is whether you continue to smoke after you have indicated you want to quit and tried to quit, relapsed, and been unable to do so. and there is just massive evidence of that in this case. now let us talk about legal cause. you heard mr. reilly say that legal cause meant that he smoked against his will. look at these charges from the court. there is not one word in there about it being against his will. that is not what addiction is, and there is no testimony to support that assertion. instead, mr. reilly tries to create an argument as opposed to dealing with what the issue is. the question of legal cause is twofold: one, did he smoke in part because he was addicted? and there is abundant evidence that he did. it does not mean that he was a hopeless addict that was unable to not quit, because he did try to quit and he did succeed for some time. it does not mean that he could not try to taper down. it means that he smoked because he was addicted. and that is what the evidence is. the second thing legal cause means is it does not have to be the only cause. if you will take a look at the legal cause instruction in the first part of section 10, it specifically says: in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction to philip morris's cigarettes need not be the only cause. addiction to philip morris's cigarettes may be a legal cause of injury and death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause. now, what does that mean? this is crucial. what it means is simply this: if you think that part of the reasons he continued to smoke was because he wanted to, that it was not solely because he was addicted, that is not the end of it. if addiction was one of the reasons he continued to smoke, that is all that is necessary. the question of how you compare those is a different issue. it is the comparative fault issue. but on the question of whether he is a class member and whether addiction is a legal cause, it just has to be a reason why he continued to smoke. and in that regard, i'm going to remind you of a couple things. one is that the consensus of the scientific community is that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason people continue to smoke. and you will see that in all those documents. secondly, dr. frazier's testimony was that, in her opinion, he continued to smoke because of his addiction. that is all you need to find to find class membership, that it was a reason that he continued to smoke because there is no question here that smoking was the cause of his death and injury. so once you have determined class membership, then you have resolved the issue of causation for the negligence and product defect claim. there is still an issue of reliance, but that issue arises only for the civil conspiracy and the fraudulent concealment counts. so let us talk about reliance. the court will instruct you and the court has instructed that you can decide these issues based upon inferences from the evidence in total. mr. reilly: object, your honor. that is not in your instructions. the court: sustained. mr. shields: the court has instructed you that you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions. you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. there need not be direct evidence of every point. you can take the evidence in its totality and use your reason and common sense to draw inferences that would be drawn by others in reaching those conclusions. and what inferences could we draw? well, first of all, we know from the survey information at the time that, as of 1970, two-thirds of smokers had little or no idea of what injuries might occur. we know that, a decade later, from the federal trade commission report in 14 surveys, including those done by the roper organization for philip morris of smokers, that there was very little understanding of the severity of smoking, of the likelihood that a person would suffer any degree of injury that could occur. look at those surveys. read that 1981 13 3652 federal trade commission report. mr. reilly says, oh, that was written by lawyers. of course it is written by lawyers. that is what the federal trade commission staff is. but what it is doing is reporting on what the surveys show. and the document -- it is 100-something pages long -- has charts showing the surveys and the responses. look at those charts and look at the responses. as dr. goldberg pointed out, fully two-thirds of the respondents ranked cigarette smoking as not very hazardous and on the order of slipping in the bathtub. so there was very little understanding. you can take that general evidence and use your common sense to draw some reasonable inferences about reliance. but secondly, ladies and gentlemen, contrary to what mr. reilly told you, the charge does not say that he had to rely on a specific statement by philip morris. instead, this whole concept is not about a specific misrepresentation; it is about what they failed to say. it is about the concealment or omission of material information. and if you will look at page 15 of your instructions, you will see that the instruction deals with concealment or omission of material information -- not as mr. reilly told you, reliance on a specific statement being made by them. what was concealed. what was omitted. i gave you that list of information that was concealed and omitted last time, just to give you some examples. they concealed that, in fact, they knew that cigarettes caused cancer. they concealed the fact that they knew that low-tar cigarettes, like the multifilter, were not safer as they suggested. they concealed the fact that they were designing their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction; they said exactly to the contrary. they concealed the fact that they spent billions of dollars on advertising designed to target children, to get them to start smoking in the first place. those are just some of the things they concealed. and i suggest to you, given the facts of this case, you can infer from what was concealed, you can infer from a 40-year period of time in which they denied the hazards, they created a controversy of doubt, and they reassured smokers that they should continue smoking because of everything -- if anything was ever found wrong in cigarettes they would take it out, all the while concealing what 3654 they really knew and what they really believed, that constitutes adequate reliance. now, mr. reilly also said there was no evidence that any of these ads ever really had any impact. really? you remember that marlboro videotape documentary we saw? that documentary was created by philip morris. in that documentary they bragged about how their advertising made marlboro go to be the number 1 brand in the world and took them from being a relatively obscure cigarette company to, at that time, the second largest in the world and now the largest in the world. they -- that -- that went on for 10, 15 minutes, with quotes from the president of the company and the ceo, and data showing how their sales went up with their advertising. the whole theme of all of that documentary was: look what our advertising did for us. it made us what we are today. their reports. you will have it in evidence. their annual reports that they send to stockholders brag about how they create demand for their product through their advertising. where is that demand coming from? 15-years-olds. because those are the new smokers that the new demand is being created. none of that denied by any evidence. and there is abundant evidence to that effect. and mr. reilly says: oh, but there was all of this evidence out there that cigarettes might be harmful. it was, quote, no secret. the secret, ladies and gentlemen, was not that people claimed it, because obviously you did not have to engage in a 40- or 50-year conspiracy if there were no claims being made. the secret was that they knew it was true and they were concealing the real information about it. that they were targeting kids, and that they were designing the cigarettes to keep people addicted. that is what the secret was. that is what was being concealed, and that is what mr. reilly refused to address. he mentioned the "see it now" program but he did not show it. i think he did not show it because if he had we would have shown you again what else was in that program. mr. reilly: objection. the court: mr. shields. mr. reilly? mr. reilly: objection; mischaracterization. the court: overruled. 14 3656 you may proceed, mr. shields. mr. shields: you remember when we showed you the "see it now" program? their head scientist, dupr, was interviewed at length, and he was interviewed in the philip morris laboratory where they were making cigarettes. and what he said at the end of it was what they repeated for the next 40 years: there is nothing harmful in cigarettes and we are doing all this research to find out if there is. and if we ever find there is anything harmful in it, we will take it out. the implication being so you might as well continue smoking. when that program was on the air, they already had isolated what cancer-causing agents were in the cigarettes. when that program was on the air, they already internally were acknowledging that cigarettes caused cancer and obviously were harmful. let me just conclude by saying mr. reilly started his presentation by saying this is about control and responsibility. ask yourself this in terms of control. there are two stories here: there is the rayfield brown story and there is the story about philip morris's activity. that second story they refused to discuss. what we know about the rayfield brown story is he started smoking as a kid; that kaiser thomas said one of the reasons was advertising -- whether kaiser said that or not, all the scientific evidence is that the culture of smoking at the time was the result of their massive advertising; that he quickly became addicted because the adolescent mind quickly becomes addicted; that later he switched to the multifilter in the face of advertising that it was a 95 percent reduction in tar, and the implication being that it was healthier and safer; that he tried to quit, succeeded for some period of time, relapsed; and the evidence is that he tried on multiple occasions thereafter and never succeeded in fully quitting, which is consistent with the statistical data about how difficult it is to quit: less than 3 percent try and succeed. it takes multiple years and multiple attempts for most people to succeed in quitting. that is what control he had. now compare that to them. what control did philip morris have? who controlled their decisions to target 15-year-olds? who controlled their decision to design their cigarettes to create a sustained addiction? who controlled their agreement 3658 to enter into a conspiracy with the other tobacco industry, and for 45 years, to deny that cigarettes were harmful; to assert that there was a scientific controversy; to claim that if anything was harmful in cigarettes they would take it out? who has the responsibility for them? to use mr. reilly's terminology, when the ceo of philip morris, mr. cullman, got up in the morning and looked in the mirror, who made the decision that we are going to continue to lie to the american public? when mr. cullman went on "face the nation" and said there is nothing harmful in cigarettes and if we ever find anything we will take it out, when he looked in the mirror the next morning, whose decision was it that he was going to lie on nationwide television? when the president and ceo of philip morris went before congress and raised his right hand and said i swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, and swore that cigarettes were not addictive when he knew that all of the scientists said they were and that they went through these elaborate lengths to design cigarettes that create and sustain addiction, whose decision was it? when he looked in the mirror that morning and went before congress, whose decision was it to lie under oath in the congress of the united states? yes, it is about control and responsibility. it is their responsibility. and if you think rayfield brown has some responsibility, you deal with that in comparative fault. i think when you put all of the evidence together, consider the massive amount of evidence, you will conclude that rayfield was a member of the engle class, the specific causation has been proven, and in terms of comparative fault, any fault he had is minor in comparison to their misconduct, and that the damages that we are asking for are appropriate and reasonable under the facts and circumstances of this case. and we look forward to getting your verdict and i thank you so much again for your time and attention. and i want to end by also thanking regan and leslie and john and all of the people of our team that have worked to put together the evidence for you to help you decide this case. thank you very much.