closing statement mr. gerson: may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. gerson: mrs. brown, i know it is hard to see you back there but i want to acknowledge you. and defense counsel and of course ladies and gentlemen of the jury. i would be remiss in i did not begin by saying thank you to each and every one of you for giving up your time to do this civic duty to sit here for the better part of two weeks to help decide the outcome of this lawsuit. i'm sure that you will be thanked by the defendants as well. and i will not dwell on that any longer than i need to. so let us start talking now about what the case is about. this, as you have been told, is a phase i trial. this case is part or a growth out of a previous class action that the judge explained at the very beginning of the trial. your job brown vol11 1178 today will be to decide whether or not my client is a member of the class. if she is not a member of the class, then the case is over, the verdict is for the defendant, and everybody goes home. if she is a member of the class, we will go on to phase ii. phase ii will be done in a very short time, probably one day, and will only involve the questions of what is the comparative fault or blame as between roger brown and r.j. reynolds tobacco company and what is the amount of damages. so if we get to a phase ii you are not going to be here another two weeks. we are going to finish the phase ii part of the trial before the end of the week. that is really all i want to tell you now about phase ii. i do want to talk for the balance of my time about phase i. and in phase i, to decide whether or not mrs. brown is a member of the class, you really have to answer one very simple question, whether roger brown was addicted to reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine and if so, whether such addiction caused his death. brown vol11 1179 that is what the judge's jury instruction will be. we know that because he is explained to us exactly while you were out of the room what his instructions will be. and we know it will be exactly that. so you do not have to write it down. you are going to see it over and over again, whether roger brown was addicted to reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine and if so, whether such addiction caused his death. well, you might think that this is so simple that the tobacco company would just agree that this evidence is so obvious in this case, but they have not. they have challenged both of the sub facts on that very simple issue. they have denied that he was addicted. they have denied that cigarette smoking -- that addiction to the nicotine in the cigarettes led to or caused his death. i'll talk more in a little while about what cause means. so -- do i have a cup of water here? so, we begin with the basic question that i told you about last week, why is it that people smoke cigarettes? well, i think what you have learned in this trial is there is a one-word answer to that, and it is nicotine. brown vol11 1180 nicotine is a powerful drug and nicotine is the reason that people smoke cigarettes. now, what makes them start may be peer pressure, may be some sort of an attempt to reach social status, may be some form of teenage rebellion. we do not really know in roger brown's case or for that matter necessarily in anybody else's case. but what keeps people smoking is this drug, nicotine. now, this lawsuit is a search for the truth. in exchange for your participation as jurors, your giving your time to be here with us, what we owe you is honesty and candor in finding the truth. and in doing your job to find the truth, it is not about who had the most witnesses, who had the smartest witnesses, who had the best prepared witnesses, it is about what you think the truth is using your own experience, judgment, common sense, and overall understanding of life applied to what has been presented in this courtroom. now, even though you probably came into the courtroom last week knowing that many people were addicted to cigarette smoking, i think you probably learned a great deal more brown vol11 1181 about cigarette smoking addiction than you knew before you got here. i say that because you all answered questionnaires and on those questionnaires there were inquiries about your own understanding of that concept. and we had a lot of different answers. the real evidence on this came from the surgeon general's report in 1988. and you can see it is the size of the yellow pages and i really do not expect you to read it all, but you can. i've referenced the pages that i've cited here, and i know this might be a little hard to read, so let me just read it to you. "the issue of tobacco addiction has been addressed in previous surgeon general reports and in the medical literature beginning in the early 1900s. because of the recent expansion of research in this area, a thorough review of this topic is warranted. despite the significant health" use -- "health risks of tobacco use outlined in previous reports, many smokers have a great difficulty in quitting. this report concludes that such difficulty is in large part due to the addicting properties of nicotine, which is present in all forms of brown vol11 1182 tobacco. the report further concludes that the processes that determine addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to other drugs such as heroin and cocaine. scientists in the field of drug addiction now agree that nicotine, the principle pharmacologic agent that is common to all forms of tobacco, is a powerful addicting drug. tobacco use as an addiction standard" -- "as an addiction standard definitions of drug addiction have been adopted by various organizations, including the world health organization, and the american psychiatric association. although these definitions are not identical, they have in common several criteria for establishing a drug as addicting. this report demonstrates in detail that tobacco use and nicotine in particular meet all these criteria. the term drug addiction and term drug dependence are scientifically equivalent". then there is a heading called major conclusions. and there are three of them. "cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacologic and brown vol11 1183 behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine". to help amplify and explain these findings of the surgeon general, we brought you the videotape depositions of the two leading experts in the world on nicotine and its addictive properties. dr. neal benowitz, and i will not repeat all of his background since you all heard it when we played the videotape, has studied this longer and written more about it than anyone else in the world. and what are some of the important things that he said which you should keep in mind when you measure whether or not roger brown was addicted? well, one of the things that he said was that the cigarette smoker undertakes or reaches a consistent amount of nicotine for his addiction. so when he reaches that threshold level, whatever it is for him, he stays with it. and for roger brown, obviously that the evidence is completely one hundred percent consistent, that level was about a pack or a pack and a half a day. it was not something that was brown vol11 1184 escalating from one to two to three to four to five to six or some other number as might be the case with other drugs of addiction, such as heroin or cocaine or pain killing pills or things like that. dr. benowitz said that the evidence is compelling that the earlier you start the more addicted you become and the harder it is to quit. he said that daily -- that the vast majority of daily smoker young people become addicted. that the addiction is to nicotine, the cigarette is just the delivery mechanism of nicotine. like i told you in the opening statement, no one would stand behind the back of a bus to inhale the smoke from burned diesel fumes or stand in front of a camp fire to inhale the smoke from burning logs. but people will and do get addicted to inhaling the smoke from cigarettes because the cigarettes contained nicotine. nicotine has an effect on the brain reward centers. dr. benowitz and to a lesser extent dr. cummings explained that that effect is more powerful than the logical reason that those of brown vol11 1185 us who do not smoke would think should influence everyone not to smoke. why is it that anybody smokes? even now in 2009, as much as we all know about the harm of cigarette smoking people are still doing it. and what is the reason? is it what the tobacco companies say, that people just like to smoke, they just enjoy it? there is just something inherently useful and beneficial about it that motivates them to do it? or is it really what the scientists say, what the surgeon general, the number -- the leading doctor selected by the president of the united states says about this product? and there are other surgeon general reports in evidence, too. we are going to talk about that. dr. benowitz went farther than just to say that it effects the brain reward centers. he told you about the actual hormonal interactions between the nicotine in cigarette smoke and the human brain. one of those was acetylcholine. and he said that nicotine mimics acetylcholine. and that causes the receptors in the brain to unlock and to open and then to release chemicals like dopamine, serotonin and others. brown vol11 1186 all of this has a scientific basis. this is not just a bad habit that people do because they want to do it. the brain undergoes structural changes. the brain circuits and pathways are altered by taking in nicotine, particularly in very young people. that may have something to do with the very common sense observation, i'm sure that all of you have made, which is that for some reason it is basically young people who start to smoke. who here knows somebody 40 or 50 years old who goes out and says, you know, i think i'd like to take up cigarette smoking? that almost never happens. what happens is that impressible young people start smoking cigarettes when they are teenagers, as dr. cummings said, almost all of them begin before age 20. and what happens is that the nicotine in the cigarettes creates new memory tracks, neuroplasticity was the technical word, neuropathways. and so once an addict, always an addict because these changes have been made. now, the effects on the body of the addiction to nicotine have been analogized to brown vol11 1187 cocaine and heroin. of course, smoking cigarettes and taking in the nicotine that is in the cigarettes does not affect our behaviors or our experiential feelings the way that heroin and cocaine do. and we never meant to try to communicate anything like that to you. all of these drugs are very different in many ways. however, they are very similar, almost identical, in very -- in one very important way, and that very important way is the way in which they affect the human brain so as to create this phenomena that we all commonly understand to be addiction. that is how they are the same. so was roger brown addicted? well, if roger brown was not addicted to nicotine, probably nobody was. we have the overview that dr. benowitz gives us where he says that ten cigarettes a day for ten years, that is the threshold. once you are passed that threshold you are probably addicted. even though dr. tucker this morning picked and chose what he liked and what he did not like from the dsm-iv, the dsm-iv said that, i believe, 70 to 80 or 80 to ninety percent of brown vol11 1188 cigarette smokers are addicted. what other explanation would there be? why would all of these people continue smoking cigarettes through their lifetime if they were not addicted? so, what are the facts about roger brown and his addiction? he started at a very young age, which according to the experts is one of the classic indicators of who is going to become addicted. he smoked for maybe more than 50 years. we know for sure more than 40 years. and he did it every day, seven days a week. he took that dose of nicotine. no days off. even when he was sick. even when he was dying, he continued to smoke every single day to take in that dose. well, at night when he was not smoking his body was going through a physical withdrawal from the very effects, the pharmacological effects on the brain that nicotine had. so what did he do? he got up in the morning and he smoked a cigarette right away. was it before or after he brushed his teeth, i do not know. i do not think that matters. certainly by that first cup of coffee he had a cigarette. brown vol11 1189 now, that was not something unique or distinctive that we tried to prove to you about roger brown. i would suggest that the 80 or ninety percent of cigarette regular -- long-term cigarette smokers all do it the same way because they are all experiencing the same thing. what were some of the other factors that were involved? well, did he use the drug regularly according to a pattern on a long term period of time? yes. he did. in fact, if you go by the dsm factors then he meets the three of the four criteria. now, why did not we bring in an 80,000-dollar psychiatrist? because the real science is right here. you are intelligent people who can connect the dots once you are given the background. you know what the scientific background is. you know what the experts say is needed for someone to be addicted. you know what the government and the surgeon general's report says is needed to be addicted. and you know the way that roger brown lived his life. it would be an insult to your intelligence for us to hire a cheerleader brown vol11 1190 like this witness this morning to come in and tell you that addiction to nicotine requires someone having a diagnosable mental illness or disorder. that is just what reynolds wants people to believe when they look at their use of their product. they want people to think that nobody's really addicted to cigarettes. it is just a choice. it is just something that they want to do because they like to do it. so that is the decision that you will have to make. one of the interesting things i thought was that little video clip that we were allowed to play yesterday of the president and ceo of reynolds who was testifying before congress in 1994, a year after roger brown died, and what he said that was interesting was that back in the 1940s when roger brown started to smoke cigarettes, the nicotine content was three to 400 percent of what it was in 1994 when he was giving his testimony. so, we did not need a psychiatrist, especially not one who does not even know any background about the subject that he is testifying on, especially not one who never did any research, like dr. benowitz or brown vol11 1191 dr. cummings, one who just comes in and reads the medical records and some of the testimony that you heard in this courtroom, in this trial, and says, well, based on all of that i can tell you that roger brown was not addicted to smoking cigarettes, but he never gave any reason. he never gave any explanation. he just said, well, that is my opinion and you should believe it because i gave it. so, on this first question, we rely on your common sense, your experience and judgment. to look at scientific evidence, to look at the history of this man's life, and to put the two of them together and decide whether or not roger brown, like almost everybody else, was addicted to nicotine in the r.j. reynolds cigarettes that he smoked. the camels, the pall malls, and winstons. now, they made an issue of the second part of class membership too. they said, do not let roger brown in this class, exclude him from this class because his addiction to nicotine was not the cause of his death. why? well, assuming his addiction to nicotine was what made him smoke cigarettes, brown vol11 1192 according to them smoking cigarettes did not cause his death. now, if you had not been in this courtroom for two weeks to hear this, you probably would have just been able to make a gut judgment. from the gross facts that here we have a guy who was healthy his whole life, never had anything else going on in his life, and the one thing about his life that stands out the most is that he smoked cigarettes every day for 50 years. that ought to be enough. but what reynolds does is hire a bunch of paid witnesses who come to court and tell you that cigarette smoking was not the cause of roger brown's death. and it is a pretty interesting roust. you can look behind the evidence and use your common sense to understand the motivations and what people have to gain or lose by the outcome of this lawsuit, and by what means the parties to this lawsuit go about selecting the evidence that they are going to present for you to hear. they do not want roger brown to be a member of the class because if he is a member of the brown vol11 1193 class then they may have to pay his widow. they want a way out. they want a bailout. not from the government, but from you. reynolds wants you to bail them out of the liability that may arise if we get to phase ii. so can they come in here with a straight face and say, cigarette smoking was not the cause of lung cancer in roger brown? not in 2009. no one can do that now. twenty years ago, 30 years ago, even 10 or 15 years ago they might have gotten away with it. but today nobody is going to believe that cigarette smoking in a 50-year smoking lifetime was not the cause of lung cancer in the smoker. so what they do -- in fact, i think it was dr. nichols yesterday admitted that the data was somewhere at least 85 percent of all lung cancers are cigarette smoking related. so, because there was a finding that there was esophageal cancer, they decide that they can defend this case by trying to convince you that roger brown never had lung cancer. roger brown instead they say had esophageal cancer. now, more than fifty percent of esophageal cancer is caused by smoking, too. but not brown vol11 1194 everybody knows that in their gut like they know that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. so, reynolds decides that if they can convince the jury that it was only esophageal cancer and not lung cancer there is a chance the jury will bail them out by agreeing with a group of paid experts who will say that esophageal cancer has many risk factors. and perhaps one of the others besides smoking is the real cause. and they list 25 different things hoping that one or more of them will tempt you to bail them out. but 21 of the 25 are so remote in association, that they then decide, well, we are going to highlight four and we are going to say that these are the major ones. and so let us discuss what the evidence was about those risk factors for esophageal cancer, knowing from the very beginning that more than fifty percent of esophageal cancers are cigarette smoking related. the clerk: you have used 30 minutes. mr. gerson: thirty. thank you. okay. they say first, let us look at the four sort of in reverse order. hpv, human papillomavirus. is there any evidence in the brown vol11 1195 case that roger brown had the human papillomavirus? nothing. reynolds says, well, how do we know that he did not have it? well, we do not know that either because he was not tested. they are right. we do not have any evidence one way or the other. so how could they ask you to decide that that was a likely cause when there is no evidence at all that mr. brown had that. now, there is no reason to test for something that the doctors are not suspicious about in the first place, and the doctors who were taking care of roger brown never considered this a possible cause. these doctors, 16 years ago, were not forensic doctors. they were just medical doctors who were trained to do what they do, not trained and actually certified -- two of their witnesses, the dr. tucker this morning and dr. nichols yesterday and i'm not sure about dr. bertino, but they actually received a certification in forensic pathology and in forensic psychiatry so that they have been trained and schooled in how to come to court and to present in court. brown vol11 1196 and we had dr. patel, who has never been in court. dr. patel was here to explain what he did, when he did it, not for forensic purposes but for medical purposes. and since no one ever thought there was any reason to consider hpv as a cause of mr. brown's cancer, no one tested for it back in 1993 when he was sick. there is no evidence of it. and frankly, it would be wrong for you to even speculate or give that any serious consideration in your deliberations. you will want to turn that on in just a minute or two. okay. what was the next risk factor of the four. it was gerd, g-e-r-d, gastroesophageal reflux syndrome. now, mrs. brown and her daughter both testified that roger brown never had any problem with indigestion. what does the tobacco company tell you? they say well, you know, there is evidence in the record that he had stomachaches, that he took over-the-counter medications, that he used alka seltzer, but that does not mean that he had gerd. gerd or reflux is a symptom-driven brown vol11 1197 process. in fact, it is pretty understandable and logical as to why it could give you cancer because if over a long period of time you have got acid from your stomach going back up your esophagus the wrong way, that this would irritate and annoy the tissues in your esophagus probably in much the same way that cigarette smoke when it comes down from the other direction does the same thing. but the evidence is that roger brown did not have gerd. the fact that they gave him zantac when he was in the hospital did not mean that he had gerd. dr. patel said that if you come in with a complaint that is related to your stomach, we give you zantac routinely. it is just a standard protocol. and the only evidence that he ever had any zantac was then. there is no medical -- there is no medical evidence that this was ever used before and there is no evidence in the case that giving somebody zantac is diagnostic for their having gerd. what was the medical evidence? what did the medical literature say? remember dr. bertino, he was here last week and i got brown vol11 1198 the articles out of his file. and i read to him from the article that appeared in the journal of the american medical association in april of 2002, entitled gastroesophageal reflux barrett esophagus and esophageal cancer. and i read him this one little sentence, no association was found between reflux symptoms and squamous cell carcinoma risk. now, there is association between gerd and other types of cancer cells. but according to this study, there was no association with squamous, which was the type that roger had in his esophagus. and what did dr. bertino say, well, i disagree with that article in the journal of the american medical association even though it was in my file. so, let us go to the next piece of evidence. that is what the medical literature said. what did they do in this case? they gave him a scan. now, this was january 25th. and this was a doctor who was not here forensically trying to convince you of anything at all. this was a doctor who was trying to figure out what was wrong with mr. brown. and he said, the esophagus is suspicious for brown vol11 1199 neoplastic change, which means cancer. there was no evidence of gastroesophageal reflux. i do not know what more i can say about this. mr. upshaw and mr. kaczynski must think if they say it enough times somebody will start to believe it, even though there is no evidence. mr. upshaw: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. no more arguments like that. mr. gerson: even if there is no evidence of it and the test that was done to find it was negative. all right. let us go to no. 2. what is no. 2? no. 2 is alcohol. dr. patel and dr. nichols agreed that for alcohol to be a factor there must be heavy, excessive, more-than-moderate drinking. dr. bertino disagreed. dr. bertino said, even occasional drinking was enough. a couple of beers on the weekend was enough, according to dr. bertino. the records show that the very same history was given to four or five different doctors about the amount that mr. brown drank. the testimony of the family members was consistent with what was in the brown vol11 1200 medical records. you saw that dr. tucker gave us a list of depositions of family members and friends that he read, any one of those witnesses could have been subpoenaed and brought into court to testify if they had something different to say. now, what did the literature say about this. the american cancer society said, "using any form of tobacco raises the risk of this cancer", the title of the article was what causes cancer of the esophagus. the longer a person uses tobacco the greater the risk. more than half of all squamous cell esophageal cancer is linked to smoking. that is the american cancer society. that was in dr. bertino's file. when i told him about that he said, i do not agree with that. this is just some dumbed down, those were his exact words, "this is just some dumbed down explanation for the public, that the american cancer society puts on their website." what did the american cancer society say about drinking? they said, alcohol, long term, heavy drinking is a major risk factor for cancer of the esophagus. for people who both brown vol11 1201 smoke and drink, the risk is further increased. that was the american cancer society. we went through several others. we went through the american journal of epidemiology, which was another one of the articles that dr. bertino brought in his file. and what did it say? it said that alcohol only counted as a risk factor for people who had more than eight drinks per week. and when i asked dr. bertino about that, he said, that even though he considered the journal to be authoritative in general, even though it was part of his reliance materials, he disagreed with that and he did not think that there was any minimal threshold and any drinking was enough to be the cause. the article said that the dose dependence relationships that were found between esophageal cancer and drinking ranged with the eight to 14 drinks per week group and was highest among the 36-plus drinks per week group. that heavy alcoholic use meant 35 or more drinks per week. that is what the science is on the association between drinking and esophageal brown vol11 1202 cancer. but there is one more thing. roger brown had an enlarged liver. his liver was enlarged by some -- actually exactly unmeasured amount. they did a liver scan and they did labs. and this is what the labs were. and dr. patel explained yesterday that this particular finding of 137 was slightly elevated over the normal range of 126, but they found nothing specific in the liver study that was diagnostic of anything. now, it is -- just as it is widely known that cigarette smoking causes cancer, it is also widely known that excessive alcohol drinking causes liver disease. but the doctors who were there at the time, not forensic doctors, treating doctors who were there to make him better, never did anything to work up or develop any liver disease. dr. patel ruled that out as something that they did not consider important, even though they did a scan, and they looked for disease in the scan, and they did not find any, he ruled that out as unimportant. so, when you balance the evidence, what is the most likely explanation for the esophageal brown vol11 1203 cancer? this is what the surgeon general said in 1982, this year 8300 deaths due to cancer of the esophagus are expected. it is one of the poorest survival rates of cancer. and only 4 percent of the esophageal cancer patients live five years after diagnosis. most die within six months. cigarette smoking is estimated to be a factor in over half of esophageal cancer deaths. smokers have a mortality ratio of four to five times higher than nonsmokers. the use of alcohol has a synergistic interaction with smoking that greatly increases the risk. cigarette smoking is a major cause of esophageal cancer in the united states. the risk of esophageal cancer increases with increased smoke exposure as measured by the number of cigarettes smoked daily and is diminished by discontinuing the habit. use of alcohol in combination with smoking acts synergistically to greatly increase the risk for esophageal cancer. it goes on and says that there have been numerous studies about the synergism between alcohol consumption and esophageal cancer. brown vol11 1204 now, i think the weight of the evidence, the greater weight of the evidence is that the cause of both cancers was cigarette smoking, not alcohol or anything else. the judge will instruct you that in determining cause that we do not have to prove that cigarette smoking was the only cause, that addiction may be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with some other cause, if the other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and if the addiction contributes substantially to producing the loss. the clerk: you have used 45. mr. gerson: forty-five? okay. so, like i said at very beginning, we cannot prove this case one hundred percent. we would like to have an autopsy, too. we would like to have the tissue because we would want you to have as much evidence as you possibly could. but we do not have it. it is not our fault that we do not have it. you have to decide the case based on what we do have and what we do have is the evidence from the government, from the studies, and from the medical records that the most probable cause of both cancers was brown vol11 1205 cigarette smoking. now, remember these in opening statement, lung mass, probably malignancy, possible metastatic disease; metastatic carcinoma, lung and abdomen, probable metastatic carcinoma. i warned you in opening statement that things would be taken out of context to try and suggest that roger brown had a metastatic cancer relationship between his esophagus and his lung cancer. but that is not what the doctors said. and that is why i took dr. patel through the records one by one to show you those notes and to prove to you that what those doctors were thinking at that time was not that there was anything going on between the lung and the esophagus, but that the metastatic process they were thinking about was whether or not the lung cancer had metastasized to the adrenal gland. because if it has metastasized to the adrenal gland, then it was already in his lymphatic system and it was going to spread to lots of other places around his body. and the court reporter typed up the testimony for me last night and i just want to brown vol11 1206 reread to you now the things that dr. patel said about that that puts it in context. at page 29, and the radiologist says suspicious for metastatic spread of disease. as a pulmonologist, when you read that what does that mean to you? "answer: well, it means that if you are seeing a mass in the lung, there is a high probability we are dealing with cancer. and when you have an enlargement of the adrenal, there is a high probability that the cancer has gone to the adrenal gland. "question: that is what metastasis means? "answer: yes." that is what the doctors were talking about. not about metastasis between the esophageal cancer and the lung cancer like dr. bertino suggested. page 46. "question: let me stop you for a moment. when you say possible metastatic disease what are you referring to?" this is all dr. patel's testimony from yesterday morning. "answer: the finding on the cat scan. brown vol11 1207 "question: and you are suggesting that what cancer was primary? "answer: the lung cancer. "question: and you are suggesting that you think it may have metastasized to? "answer: to the adrenal gland." any other reading of these medical records is a distortion. page 40. "question: and what does dr. schwartz's note say? "answer: pathology report positive for large cell cancer. ct with apparent adrenal involvement. "question: ap means what? "answer: ap means assessment and plan. "question: okay. so he is noted there there is a large cell cancer with apparent adrenal involvement and what is the assessment and plan? "answer: probably metastatic carcinoma, questionable primary. questionable gi versus bronchogenic. needs oncology evaluation and full metastatic workup. patient not a candidate for resection. brown vol11 1208 "question: now, the reference to probable metastatic carcinoma is relating to metastasis from what organ to what organ? "answer: his answer, his reference is metastatic from lung. his reference is in reference to the adrenal metastatic disease." now, because the notes are very hard to read we asked dr. patel to interpret what dr. singh, the gastroenterologist said. and he said at page 41, line 23. "question: and just look at the signature and tell me who this is? "answer: this is a note from dr. singh the gastroenterologist." the court: slow down, mr. gerson, please. slow down. mr. gerson: yes, sir. "question: and let me try and just read this. let us get down to the impression next. "answer: endoscopy done. findings, large ulcerated mass in the mid-esophagus. biopsy brushings washings done. compatible with the esophageal malignancy." and then he gives his impression. if i can get it on the screen. there we go. brown vol11 1209 what is dr. singh -- dr. singh has now diagnosed the cancer of the esophagus based on the esophagram, correct? "answer: on the basis of endoscopy he thinks the finding compatible with malignance. "question: what is his impression? "answer: his impression is a, secondary primaries." i think that is a misprint, i think it is second primary. "esophageal cancer. and b is lung primary and radiating into the esophagus. "question: is his impression that there was a cancer in the esophagus that metastasized to the lung? "answer: no. "question: his impression is that there were two primaries." there was an objection that was sustained. "question: what is his impression about whether or not there are two primaries? "answer: his impression is that there is a possibility of two primaries as far as first notation. "question: and are there any other brown vol11 1210 possibilities that he identifies there? "answer: in his notation he says that the lung primary was invading the esophagus. so from the lung to the esophagus that is what he was considering." now, finally, i'll make this the last -- well, the next to the last one i read at page 45 at the bottom. "question: will you read what dr. singh writes on the 29th, the day after the note we just looked at from dr. schwartz? "answer: noting in the stages esophageal biopsy squamous cell cancer. patient has two malignancies. that is two primaries, lung and esophagus. not a candidate for surgical intervention." and finally on page 47. "question: but what is dr. singh noting in this record about whether or not these two cancers are related by metastasis or whether they are separate an independent primaries? "answer: well, his impression is that they are independent primaries. there are two primaries here." now, you probably remembered that brown vol11 1211 testimony even without my reading it to you. but it is such an important part of what we are dealing with today that i wanted to reinforce that these are not forensic doctors. dr. singh and dr. patel are doing these things to take care of mr. brown in 1993. they have no idea that you will be sitting in those chairs today unlike the witnesses who were called for the tobacco companies to suggest to you that the probabilities cannot be determined on the relationship between cigarette smoking and cancer i'm going to save some time, the rest of my time. it is about lunchtime and i know you all are probably hungry and i've talked long enough. at the end of the day, i'm going to ask you not to leave jimmie lee brown out of the class. i'm going to tell you that she is a member of the class and that she is entitled to participate just like everyone else. and that both her husband's life and her husband's death met all of the criteria. that concludes what i wanted to say before lunch rebuttal argument mr. gerson: may it please the court -- the court: yes, sir. mr. gerson: -- and all those who still have enough patience left to continue listening. the good news is that this will be the last time that you will be addressed by the brown vol12 1281 lawyers in this phase of the trial. so let me talk first about what is really in the big picture. and then i'll address the specific points that were made by the defendants' lawyers. the big picture, the burden of proof is whether or not it is more likely than not that roger brown was addicted to reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine and whether that addiction resulted in his death. just more likely than not. another way to put it is 51 percent. i do not know if any of you saw the basketball game last night. i was busy reading dr. patel's testimony. but i turned it on at the end and the final score was the lakers 105 and the nuggets 103. well, that is the burden of proof. that is all we need. another way that -- the court: are you saying you need kobe bryant? is that what you are saying? mr. gerson: what? the court: are you saying you need kobe bryant? mr. gerson: no, i'm saying we have 105. brown vol12 1282 court: oh, oh, okay. mr. gerson: another way that some lawyers have put it is if you took the scales of justice and they were perfectly balanced at the beginning of the trial, and if after hearing all of the evidence you put a feather on one side so that the scales tipped ever so slightly in favor of one side or the other, that would be the burden of proof. now, i think it is clear that there has been a strategy here on the part of reynolds to simply raise doubt about things which most likely are true. and let me just begin where mr. kaczynski began. what was the doubt that he tried to raise? he said, well, you know, no one knew roger brown in this courtroom in the '40s so we do not know what kind of cigarettes he was smoking in the '40s and maybe they were not reynolds cigarettes. now, that just asks you to speculate in the first place. but what is the question? was he addicted to reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine and if so was such addiction a legal cause of his death? it does not matter if he was also addicted brown vol12 1283 to other cigarettes made by other manufacturers. it only matters whether he was addicted to reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine and if so whether such addiction was a legal cause of his death. and that is just one example of how they have tried to raise doubt. what is the most likely inference that you can draw from this evidence? that would be that he was smoking camels because what we do know about mr. brown is that he was brand loyal. over a smoking career that is known exceeding 40 years, he only smoked three brands. so if you had to make a judgment one way or the other, would not it be more likely than not that he was smoking camels back in the '40s? and as you have seen from looking at the verdict form, it does not really matter anyway. it is just an attempt to raise doubt. now, i do not want to go into all of the specific evidence any more than i have to. i will in a few instances here. but summing up what mr. kaczynski had to say, essentially what he did was attack mr. brown because mr. brown did not try to quit. the question in phase i brown vol12 1284 is not whether or not mr. brown was at fault for not trying harder to quit. that question will come up in phase ii. and we will address it in phase ii. but mr. kaczynski has argued that because he did not try harder to quit, that that must mean that he was not addicted in the first place. perhaps you understand that logic but it just does not make any sense to me to think that because somebody did not quit or try to quit that they were not addicted in the first place. i think those are just two separate ideas and the idea of whether or not he deserves some of the blame for what happened to him in this case is what we are going to do in phase ii tomorrow and is not a reason to decide that he was not addicted here. now, he goes through -- mr. kaczynski goes through all of these so-called factors, and i've got the list here somewhere i think. if i did not lose it. well, i do not know what i did with it. it was the seven factors. well, let me just comment on them. some of those factors -- two of the seven dr. tucker conceded. some of the others just obviously brown vol12 1285 had no relevance to a cigarette smoking kind of addiction. would somebody go to extraordinary lengths in order to obtain the substance, that was what -- oh, here we go. thank you. let me just put this here. and then i'll talk about this. okay. a maladaptive pattern of substance abuse, the clinically significant impairment, three or more of the same in any 12 month period. well, we certainly got the 12 months covered, do not we. no. 1, he concedes so i will not talk about it. no. 2, withdrawal. there was withdrawal every night when he stopped smoking while he slept and then he ramped up his smoking again the next day. that is the only way that you could apply this to a cigarette smoker. no. 3, substance is taken in larger amounts over a longer period of time than was intended. that is not in there because of cigarette smoking. that is in there for people who abuse pain pills. and that is why i wrote pain pills in there. people who are taking medications brown vol12 1286 that they are given for prescribed limited use and they abuse it by overusing them and as they become more addicted, that escalates and that is what that is talking about. and by saying roger brown did not meet that criteria does not disqualify him from the addiction definition that is given in the dsm. the same is true for no. 5, a great deal of time is spent trying to obtain a substance. that is not applicable because it does not take any time to obtain cigarettes. what is meant by that is somebody who is a heroin or cocaine addict who spends a lot of their time trying to make connections with people who can supply them with the drug. and it is just a distortion of the intent of the manual itself to say, we, for the cigarette smoker there was no evidence that he spent a lot of time trying to obtain it because anybody can obtain it. the same thing, activities are given up or reduced because of substance abuse. well, there is no evidence in the case that roger brown did anything different in his activities because of his addiction to nicotine. but why would there be based upon his life and based brown vol12 1287 upon the general freedom that there is in this country to smoke, no matter what the circumstances are. i do not know about you, but every day when i go to lunch, i find death row right down there in front of the building with all those people-- mr. upshaw: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gerson: i find many people lined up alongside the outside of the courthouse smoking cigarettes there because they are not allowed to smoke in the building. so it does not require that. now, there is no magic definition for addiction. the judge will not tell you in the instructions that you have to accept or apply the dsm, the fagerstrom test, the definitions given by dr. benowitz or anyone else. it is simply up to your collective judgment and common sense. and, yes, we believe that there are certain things in the dsm that are relevant, and things that you should think about when you evaluate this. there are things in the fagerstrom test. there are things in brown vol12 1288 dr. benowitz's testimony and dr. cummings' testimony. and all of that together adds up to only one conclusion. it is more likely than not that roger brown was addicted to cigarettes. the first thing he did in the morning was smoke a cigarette. he started smoking when he was a young teenager, maybe as young as 12. the length of time he smoked was also relevant according to benowitz, and that was 40 to 50 years. he smoked a consistent level. he had his daily dose of a pack or a pack and-a-half over the course of a day. that is what it means. does it really mean that he had a mental illness? is everybody who smokes cigarettes mentally ill? is that what we are required to find? that is what they would like you to see this as being, as a case where you have -- where addicted people are so narrowly defined that they have to be people who have a mental illness. now, the dsm-iv says 80 to ninety percent of daily cigarette smokers are addicted. dr. tucker says -- oh, well, he thinks that is wrong. and that is just one example of the dangers of dealing with these forensic brown vol12 1289 witnesses. because what helps their case that they are advocating for is right, and what does not help their case they just say, well, i disagree with that part of it. and the author of that disagrees, too. and the real number is a lower number. even though the very source that he is referring to, the book that he pins all of his opinions on, says 80 to ninety percent are addicted. now, if that is so, even if the percentage is lower, why is roger brown different? what was there about his life that makes him any different from any other cigarette smoker who did all of the things that he did smoking cigarettes literally down to his dying day? now, they make a crude attempt at epidemiology of their own by saying, well, according to dr. bertino the esophageal cancer is up and smoking is down; therefore, they are not related. they say, well, there was four times as much nicotine in cigarettes in the '40s as there is today; therefore, he was not addicted because he smoked a level amount. this is not scientific. the science -- the science is here. i mean, our government brown vol12 1290 spent millions of your dollars and mine to develop the science about these diseases and to put it in peer-reviewed official reports of the government and that is what is in evidence. not these offhand kind of things that they thought up or made up on the airplane riding here to come to testify. what does mr. upshaw say at the end of the day, his sort of final argument, is the best person to look back and to give you an opinion about whether cigarette smoking is the cause of this man's cancers was dr. nichols. and what did dr. nichols say in the deposition that i read to you that was given on april the 29th of this year? "question: would not you agree based upon the limited information that is available to you that the most likely cause of roger brown's lung cancer was cigarette smoking? "answer: yes. "question: now, three weeks ago based upon all of the data that you have seen, all of your experience as a physician, and the limited information that is available in this case is you would not agree with me that the most likely brown vol12 1291 cause of mr. brown's esophageal cancer was cigarette smoking? "answer: of what we know with our limited amount of knowledge, yes." now, in a perfect world we would have a videotape of everything. every criminal trial would require no judgment or decision-making by a jury, because in a perfect world we would have everything that happened on videotape with picture and sound. and we would not have to put the responsibility on the shoulders of jurors to make important and difficult decisions. the gatekeeper for whether or not there is enough evidence for the jury to make a decision in this case is the court. not me, not them, but the court. you will be given this case to decide. that does not mean that the court is telling you that it has one feeling one way or the other about how you should decide it. it only means that the court is the gatekeeper. and that you will be given the decision to make based upon the evidence, is it more likely that we are right than that we are wrong about what happened? just a couple other technical little brown vol12 1292 points. dr. bertino says, it is less than a 1 percent chance of esophageal cancer being synchronous, existing as a second primary, with an independent lung cancer. did he have any data to back it up? no, he did not. but you know who did? dr. nichols did. dr. nichols had a study that i questioned him about. you remember this yesterday. from 1979 to 1992 1,294 patients with esophageal squamous cell cancer and 3.2 percent had associated primary lung carcinoma. now 3.2 percent is still a fairly low incidence, but you know, it happens. and according to the doctors who were involved in the care in this case, that is what did happen in this case. and what it says about dr. bertino is that he is willing to just make up a number off the top of his head to support the conclusion that he is here to advocate for. when we look back, the real doctors who were just as subject of subpoenas from reynolds as they were from us, the real doctors, dr. singh -- dr. bass left the country as patel told us yesterday so we could not get him -- but dr. singh, brown vol12 1293 dr. schwartz, all these doctors who were taking care of roger brown back in 1993, who had no idea there would ever be a lawsuit in this case, who are not forensic evaluators, who were simply doing their job and making the call in the way that they saw it. every one of those medical umpires said it was two primaries. i read a lot of that to you in my first opening. and the reason i read those parts was because the handwriting is so difficult to interpret. but i did not read to you the typewritten stuff or the rather legible handwriting from dr. bass where he agrees with all of the colleagues and says there are two separate diagnoses, lung cancer and esophageal cancer the clerk: ten minutes, mr. gerson. mr. gerson: thank you. now, let me just say a few more words about the risk factors. this has been very interesting. mr. upshaw tells you that, well, there are 21 possible risk factors but we agree that most of them do not really apply. well, if they do not apply, why did he tell us about them in the first place? what do they have to do with brown vol12 1294 this case if they are things that do not apply? is not it stretching your credibility to suggest that because mrs. brown worked as a presser in a dry cleaners that somehow she got chemicals on her clothes or her body that she brought home, and then somehow transferred those chemicals to mr. brown and that somehow those unidentified chemicals are actually what caused the cancers that occurred in this case, not the 40 to 50 year history of cigarette smoking? i suggest that strategy, that argument is just one more way of trying to raise doubt and challenge and question what reasonable people hearing all of this evidence must necessarily know in their hearts and minds, that this man had cancer caused by his lifetime of cigarette smoking and that his lifetime of cigarette smoking proved that he was addicted to cigarette smoking. now, they have talked about the jury instructions, and i agree with everything they said about those jury instructions. let me just point out one thing that was left out. and i highlighted it. this was the instruction brown vol12 1295 that mr. upshaw showed you. and the last sentence is, you should not speculate on any matters outside the evidence. and by that we mean hpv. we do not have any evidence of hpv. chemicals from the dry cleaner, we do not have any evidence of that. what we have is evidence of cigarette smoking for a lifetime, which the government says, which the experts say is the usual and most common cause, which the doctor in this case says is probable cause. finally, one more instruction that i want to show you if i can get it on here. and that is all this argument about alcohol. liver disease is much more complicated than they make it sound. if you would believe them, you would think that all you need to do is find an enlarged liver and then you have got an alcoholic. doctors do not need to do anything more than that. there is no such thing as hepatitis or any other disease process that could be involved in somebody having an enlarged liver. they were not limited in what experts they could bring us. and if they had one that was actually going to say something brown vol12 1296 about that liver, really meaning that roger brown drank one drop more than his family testified to or that he told every single doctor separately and independently while he was in the hospital, they could have done that. but if somehow you were willing to agree that other risk factors played any role at all in this case, you should still answer that question yes because the legal cause need not be the only cause so long as it acts in combination with other causes such as any of the things they have listed. it is still a legal cause. so, there is more than i could say -- that i could say. there are going to be some stipulated facts in the instructions. make sure you look at those very carefully. they say a lot about what the truth in this case is. and at the end of the day, i thank you again for your service to this community. i ask you not to exclude mrs. brown from this class -- for you to find that she is a member of this class and that she is entitled to the benefits of membership in this class.