1 are the judges of the facts and no one but you are the judges of the facts. and i and ms. brown and mr. ledlie and everyone who has been here thank you for that. we thank you for your service, we thank you for your attentiveness. we thank you for how closely you have studied the evidence in this case and we thank you for giving ms. brown an opportunity to be on equal footing with the philip morris corporation. so what i'm going to do over the next 45 minutes or so, maybe a little longer, is lay out for you the evidence as i have seen it and what we have to prove. and judge savage has created a form that has some very specific questions that you have to answer. it is called a verdict form. and he will give you some instructions this afternoon about the law and what the law is comes from him. what the facts are come from you. now, i am going to go over a lot of evidence and go over it in some detail. and you may think, mr. finch, it is getting close to lunch, i've heard this before, stop, i got it, do not need to hear any more. but we cannot do that. i have a burden to represent ms. brown to the absolute best of my ability and to make sure each and every one of you understands all the evidence on her side of the case and how little evidence there is on philip morris's side of the case. there are basically three questions you have to answer. and i'm not gonna try to work off of that, that was 1602 what i drew up last night. but the question boils down to: was donna brown addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. that is the first question you are going to get. the second: was donna brown's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her pvd? and a third question is: was smoking philip morris's cigarettes a legal cause of her pvd? and on each of those questions and, indeed, on almost every question in the case, plaintiff has the burden by a preponderance of the evidence. and what that means, you are going to hear an instruction from the judge, is you have scales, remember the lady justice has scales, starts out even steven. ms. brown is here and philip morris is here. where else but in a courtroom can people start out even steven with corporation. even steven. so there they are. and ms. brown has brought you a ton of evidence on each of those questions, on addiction, on addiction causing her repeated smoking, which caused her pvd, and that smoking philip morris caused -- cigarettes caused her pvd. i think that the evidence is overwhelming on that and i'm going to take you through it in some detail. if you answer those first three questions yes, 1603 then certain factual findings apply. the judge is going to read what those findings are. and you have to accept them as true. no matter what you think, whether you disagree with them or agree with them, you swore an oath at the outset of this case to apply the law to the facts and you have to accept what the judge says as the law as true. 8 those factual findings are: that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; that smoking cigarettes can cause peripheral vascular disease; that philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous; that philip morris was negligent, careless; that philip morris omitted, knowingly concealed or omitted, material information, information that a person would want to know, information about how addictive their products were, information about what kind of risk are you really running when you pick up your first cigarette at the age of 16 when all the label says is caution, may be hazardous to your health. may be, may not be. getting in a car may be hazardous to your health, but would you get in a car if you knew that you had a two-thirds chance of getting addicted and if you kept on driving, a fifty percent chance you would die? that is a material fact that was not disclosed. and then, finally, that philip morris was engaged 1604 in a conspiracy with other defendants to conceal or omit material information. you have to accept that as true, if you find that she was addicted to nicotine, smoking cigarettes, that the addiction was a legal cause of her pvd and that smoking cigarettes made by philip morris was a cause of her pvd. so on question one, addiction, what is the evidence that you heard on that? well, you heard donna brown's testimony. you heard annelisa smith's testimony about donna told you when she started, how she started, how long she smoked, how many times she tried to quit, how desperately she tried to quit. she tried to quit again and again and again using every device known to modern man. annelisa smith talked about that talked about how donna was serious about trying to quit. the medical records in this case. we put in some medical records, they put in some medical records. i want you to look at all the medical records. but we are the only people that brought you three medical doctors to explain to you what those medical records mean. not just the ones that we submitted to the jury, but all the medical records. and then other things you should consider on the question of addiction is dr. werner's testimony, dr. harding's testimony, and the surgeon general of the united states. we stand with the surgeon general on all 1605 points as it relates to smoking and disease. philip morris when it is not in a courtroom, points people to the surgeon general's reports as reliable and authoritative for people to look at if they have to make decisions about smoking addiction and health. well, you are people that are going to have to make a decision about smoking addiction and health very soon and one's life is in the balance. you should rely on the surgeon general. not what philip morris might say elsewhere. rely on the surgeon general. philip morris has a long history of disagreeing with the surgeon general. in a courtroom, we stand with the surgeon general, we stand with the surgeon general outside of it. so what does addiction mean? the only medical doctor that testified in this trial who was an addiction specialist was dr. werner and she said that addiction, as defined by the national institute on drug abuse is chronic relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful consequences. that fits donna to a t. this is a pack of cigarettes. this is a pack and a half of cigarettes, which is about what donna smoked for most of her smoking life. think about smoking all of that every day. this is 120 packs of cigarettes. three of these 1606 is 360 packs of cigarettes. that is 360 pack years, 360, which is one pack year. remember, she smoked for over 40 years. if we were to make boards for all the packs of cigarettes she smoked, it would cover the entire courtroom. she smoked heavily because she wanted the drugs. that definition is a definition that the medical doctor who testified in this case used. and while there was a suggestion to you, well, there are different ways to define addiction or different ways to assess addiction, dr. werner, the lady from florida, who has treated people for addiction in all kind of contexts, drug addiction, nicotine addiction, was quite clear and says whether or not addiction -- whether or not someone is addicted is a medical question and she provided and the doctors who treated donna brown provided the only medical doctors who gave you evidence or gave you information that she was addicted. how powerful is addiction. in 1988, the first time the surgeon general said that nicotine was addicting, despite the fact that the tobacco companies in their internal secret documents were saying that nicotine was addicting back in the '50s and early '60s, that led to that big mutton chop guy, c. everett koop, coming out and saying, hey, cigarettes are really addicting, we have to treat this as a serious medical problem. and think about all of the 1607 medical devices available to treat nicotine addiction that have become available since then. what do they say? cigarettes are addicting, nicotine is a drug, and processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to heroin and cocaine. that is a powerful addiction. so what else does the surgeon general report 1988, and this was in the exhibit that you will get to see. it is exhibit 174. they say that recognizing tobacco use as an addiction is critical to understand in knowing how to treat it. then, that is a watershed event in this country. people for the first time really started to wake up as to the power of addiction. before that, well, smoking is a habit, i can quit, choice, free choice, free country, why, you know, what is the big deal? so what else do we know about from the surgeon general of the united states about addiction? what do we know about what the power of addiction is on young people? do you remember yesterday we put into evidence -- this is the 2012 surgeon general's report. and what that says is of every three young smokers, only one will quit and of one of those remaining smokers will die from tobacco-related causes. most younger people never consider that when they start. think about that. you are a young person and you start smoking, a kid like donna was, 16 years old, started 1608 smoking cigarettes, you got a two-third chance of getting hooked for life and, if you get hooked for life, a 50/50 chance of dying of a smoke-related disease. is that material information? is that information that if you are going to pick up that first cigarette you would really like to know? so what was annelisa smith's testimony about donna? she talked about how her brand was -- she knew it was marlboro lights, she smoked a lot, pack and a half a day, first thing when she got up, smoked when she went to bed, she was smoking marlboro consistently, and she would smoke when she got up in the night. she testified that she went with donna to her very first visit with dr. harding and dr. harding told donna, your problems are caused by smoking and you got to quit. and donna tried to quit. she testified -- donna testified she tried to cut back before that. but now she tried every medical device available to man to try to quit, chantix, wellbutrin, zyban, she tried this shot behind the ear, she tried all kinds of things to quit. and annelisa told us that donna was motivated to quit, and every time she tried to quit it was real. finally donna quit in 2014. what did you learn from donna herself, both last week and when they read some of her prior testimony today? well, donna is an amazing person. she is the type of person 1609 that this country wants our children to grow up to be. she is a successful person. she was all-american in softball, she ran track in high school, she was the first cable -- female cable splicer at her job, she was successful in her job. she continued on to keep on working. and what was her fatal flaw? what was her one fatal flaw? she was addicted, addicted to nicotine. that is the thing. that is the only thing that makes sense, this proud strong-willed woman, who has fought her injuries for years. she is a fighter. addiction, addiction is the only reason that makes sense. remember, not only did donna talk about having that first cigarette as a teenager when she was 16 years old and how she smoked because marlboro was the cool thing, marlboro was the it brand. that is what everybody was smoking. she talked about how she tried to quit and she talked about how she tried everything to quit. and you heard testimony from her sister, remember they put someone else in the box to play ms. brown's sister. there was testimony that during the '80s and '90s, before she ever got pvd, she was trying to cut back, trying to quit. so we have that is the background. those are the ways she tried to quit. who, what medical doctor, came here and told you she was addicted? dr. werner. qualifications are enormous. she diagnoses and treats addicts for a living. she testifies in both civil and criminal cases about addiction. 1610 she used three different ways to diagnose donna as being addicted. she was very clear that addiction is a medical brain disease and that if you are going to decide whether someone has a medical disease, you rely on a doctor. you use three different ways to addiction, cage questionnaire fagerstrom test, dsm-v. under all three of them, she was severely addicted, high under fagerstrom, dsm-v she was severe. the medical records in this case prove addiction. that one from relatively recent, 2005, heavy tobacco use, up to two cartons a week, that is 6005-v, as in virginia, 6005-b, as in basketball. they actually have tobacco use disorder diagnose code. so i think there is no doubt that donna was addicted to nicotine from smoking cigarettes. so when filling out the verdict form, check that question, yes. remember, dr. werner said there is a consensus in the medical field that addiction is a disease. what doctor did philip morris bring to rebut that? the only evidence on that side of the case, the only medical evidence, is from dr. werner and donna brown's doctors. for philip morris to be right on this question of addiction or in order for you to say no, all this has to be wrong, deny definition of drug abuse, surgeon general, donna brown's doctors who prescribed the patch, donna brown's doctors who prescribed chantix, 1611 whoever the doctor was at st. vincent's that diagnosed her with -- gave her tobacco use disorder. remember, before a doctor is going to do a treatment to a person, dr. harding explained, you have to first do no harm. you are not going to give a drug to somebody else, they need it. you are not going to give them a drug that is designed to treat addiction like chantix unless they need it. she was addicted. so next question. addiction as a cause of pvd. again, evidence you should look to on that is dr. werner's testimony, dr. harding's testimony, dr. jackson's testimony, the medical records in evidence, all of them, but particularly 6005-a, as in apple, and b, as in basketball. and the 2010 surgeon general's report. that is the one that says nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason people persist in smoking cigarettes and it is this persistent smoking that causes the smoking-related diseases. that is the one that mr. jupe fenced around with my colleague when he was asked questions in the deposition. i do not understand chain in causation. well, the surgeon general understand the chain of causation, the doctors understand the chain of causation. now, you are going to hear the definition of legal cause from the judge. and what i say the law is is not the law. and what she says the law is is not the law. the 1612 judge fives you the law. but it is a legal cause, not the only legal cause. there can be multiple legal causes of the same injury or event. if for something -- you will hear words but for and necessary. if you recall, my questions to all the doctors were along the lines but for her nicotine addiction would she have persisted in smoking 40 years? and dr. werner said, she answered yes to that question. now, the question is not the evidence, but if you answer yes to the question, that is the evidence. so if you think about it as a flashlight, substantial contribution or being necessary, you have a flashlight that has four batteries or three batteries in it and this applies to both addiction, it applies to both addiction and cigarette smoking causing her pvd. even if you believe addiction is only one of the three batteries, and i think for donna brown addiction was the primary reason she smoked just like everybody else that is addicted. not everybody smokes gets addicted, that is clear. but for the people who do, nicotine is a fundamental -- nicotine addiction is a fundamental reason that drives them. so without that addiction, she smokes far less. she does not -- you know, she could quit if she is not addicted. and the ability to quit or attempts to quit, just because someone is able to quit or just because someone has 1613 the ability to quit does not mean they are not addicted. heroin addicts quit. you heard that from dr. werner. so addiction is the dominant cause of her repeated smoking. and addiction, remember it is connect the dots, dr. werner said that but for her addiction she would not have engaged in repeated persistent smoking for 40 years. dr. harding and dr. -- and dr. jackson both said that it was the repeated persistent smoking which was the main, primary, dominant substantial cause of her pvd. and i'll get to exactly what they said in a few minutes. but this is what the 2010 surgeon general's report says: nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people persist in smoking. and it is the fundamental reason that donna continued to persist in smoking. what did dr. werner tell you? that nicotine addiction was the fundamental reason donna brown repeatedly smoked cigarettes for 40 years and but for her nicotine addiction, donna brown would not have engaged in heavy smoking for as long as she did. that is but for causation, substantial factor causation, however you want to phrase it, that is a legal cause. and what did dr. harding say? dr. harding treated her for 20 years. the man with no dog in the fight, he came here to testify, because he is a treating doctor and probably knows more about her than anyone. and remember what annelisa and donna said about what he told them at the time. he said, donna, your smoking caused your disease and you got to stop smoking. did he get on her about diabetes? no. 1614 she did not have diabetes. did he get on her about hyperlipidemia? no. at that time she did not have hyperlipidemia. did they get on her about high blood pressure? no. it was smoking. and what did he say? remember what he said when i asked him, i asked the questions -- i asked him, was smoking medically significant to you? yes. i asked him, did donna's smoking cause or contribute substantially to her pvd? and his answer was, it certainly contributed, yes. then i asked him, but for her smoking, would her pvd be different, a different disease in terms of severity, progression, when she got it? and he said, yes. i said, what do you mean by that? and then he used the analogy -- remember the risk factors, he used the analogy of kerosene on a fire. and this is the chart from 1998 that he filled out, the risk factors, diabetes, hypertension, tobacco severe, hyperlipidemia, unknown. that is peripheral vascular disease. and that -- and his testimony, i just told you that donna smoking was like throwing kerosene on a fire. you throw kerosene on a fire and the fire rages out of control, is that a substantial factor? is not throwing kerosene on a little match fire necessary to blow it out of 1615 control? it is huge. so not only do we bring dr. harding, who was her treating doctor, knew her for 20 years, and also told you that in his view donna was interested in trying to quit and was seriously trying to quit and was trying to take his advise. well, why did not she successfully quit until 2014? she was addicted. dr. jackson, published many articles on causation of cardiovascular disease. she came in and talked to you a little bit about epidemiology and about risk factors and about the mechanism, how smoking causes peripheral vascular disease. and she agreed with dr. harding that smoking cigarettes was a substantial factor in causing donna's pvd. and she -- these are the risk factors. she -- for donna, smoking was definitely there, she was definitely not diabetic. these other ones, hypochondria, hyperglycinemia, reactive protein, they are much lower. potential risk factors. it defies reality, you have to shut your eyes to reality to say that smoking was not the dominant cause. it is like if there were elephants standing in this room that were cigarettes, you have to say, no, no, no, do not look at the elephant. look at the high blood pressure readings that she had after she was diagnosed with pvd. look at the hyperlipidemia readings that she had after she was diagnosed 1616 with pvd. dr. jackson looked all her medical records. and remember, she was trying to figure out what caused her pvd. the lady got pvd in 1992. and dr. jackson's testimony was smoking was the dominant factor in the cause of her pvd, it was necessary to the severity of her pvd. now, do you remember yesterday the defendants showed you a lot of medical records from donna brown that had notations about hypertension, hyperlipidemia. do you remember how i asked them to publish the date on every one of those records? all those records, 2002, that was defendant's exhibit 726-d, ten years after she got pvd. 2002, 2003. december 1998, this is the one i want to talk about, it is the only one of theirs that i want to talk about. that is even close in time, six years after she got pvd. 2006, 2005, 2006, 2006, 2010, 2014, you can look at them yourselves, none of them were anywhere close in time to when she was diagnosed with pvd except for this one which, is 734-a. and about past medical history, it says contributory for heart disease, low blood sugar, rheumatic fever. but there is nothing about hyperlipidemia, there is nothing about family history. they have a family history of atherosclerosis, but there is nothing about her history. and, remember, at -- at the end of the day, we brought you two medical doctors that said -- that repeated 1617 persistent smoking was the dominant factor, substantial factor, a real factor, kerosene on a fire. you think they both just got it wrong? for something to cause something else, whether it is diseases or physics, it is got to happen before. in order for hyperlipidemia or hypertension to be a role, have a role in causing disease, it has to be present before you get the disease. she got the disease in '92. only thing she was doing before '92, only health risks she said at that point that were persistent by that point, 30-year pack history of smoking. there is a jury instruction that says when you are evaluating evidence, use your common sense. you do not check your common sense at the door when you walk in here and say, oh, for a lady who smoked 45-year pack history of smoking and then after she gets disease she starts to have other health problems, did those other factors cause her disease? no, you cannot say that. and then i asked dr. jackson, there was no -- no medical doctor came in here and said that smoking was not the cause of donna's pvd. no medical doctor came in here and disputed this, that nicotine addiction is a fundamental reason that she kept smoking and that persistent smoking caused her pvd. what doctor disputed that causal link? was she able to quit smoking? that is not the question. did she choose to smoke? that is not the question. was the smoking 1618 pleasurable? of course it was, it is a drug. was she able to control her smoking? that is not the question either. the question is was she addicted. all the medical evidence says she was. and was she so addicted if she had quit in '92 her disease would not have progressed? that is not the question either. she got disease and smoking was the dominant factor. all the medical doctors told you so. so on jury question 2, and jury question 3, was her addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her vascular disease, the answer is yes. was her smoking cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by philip morris a legal cause of her peripheral vascular disease. well, her testimony was marlboro was her brand. occasionally, she got winstons, but it was all marlboro. so clearly the answer to that question is yes. so one, two, and three are yes. and lest you have any doubt about that, that is a repeat of dr. harding's testimony, and those are what the risk factors dr. harding was looking at. dr. jackson, dr. jackson was looking at -- she was trying to figure out the cause. remember, at the very end of her exam i asked her, even if donna brown was somehow predisposed, because of family history or anything else, to develop pvd, was her long-term smoking history substantially contributed to causing that? answer, absolutely yes. in the real world and in this courtroom, to ignore the smoking as a substantial, dominant, but for cause of her getting disease when she got it and the severity that it had, there is just -- we have overwhelmingly proved the case on 1619 that. so if you answer the first three questions yes, which i suggest to you that beyond a reasonable doubt the evidence is yes, the first three questions, the factual findings apply, and those are the factual findings that philip morris was addictive -- that nicotine is addictive, philip morris was negligent, you have to apply those findings once you find the addiction led to -- the smoking led to the pvd. someone may say, well, i do not know if i agree with those findings. if they do that, your duty as a jury is to say, hey, wait a minute, the judge told us what the law is and we swore to follow the law. this is law of this case you must find applies. so then you get to this question, question 4, percentage of fault. and here, when you are comparing fault, i want you to think about who knew what, when, and what did they did with that knowledge. move this a little closer so you can all see it. philip morris knew in the '50s that smoking caused cardiovascular disease and lung cancer, yet it chose to tell 1620 its customers for 40 years after that, cigarettes had not been proven to cause disease. they knew that and they kept telling their customers that and they kept choosing to sell a dangerous and defective product. it is a dangerous and defective product. that is what that finding is. if they kept -- they kept choosing to sell it year after year after year. every cigarette donna smoked was made by them was defective and unreasonably dangerous. every cigarette donna smoked was defective and unreasonably dangerous and kept getting her more and more addicted and was more and more contributing and causing her pvd. did they try to degree call their cigarettes off the market in the '50s or '60s? no. they knew by the late '50s there is no way to remove all the harmful chemicals from the smoke. mr. jupe, who was not born until the year i was, 1967, came in here and tried to say, well, we were trying to remove chemicals, but i want to look at some of the documents in evidence. look at exhibit 166 and i'll show you at the very end of this. but basically they knew by 1961 there was no way getting harmful chemicals out of the smoke, yet they kept on. and that nicotine caused cardiovascular disease. there is no way to fix it. so instead of, you know, putting people's health paramount, as they promised in their big newspaper ad in 1621 1953, 1954, they kept selling cigarettes. they knew by 1959 or earlier, probably 1954, that nicotine was addictive and it was addiction that was driving people to smoke, yet they kept telling their customers up until 1999, you are not addicted. do not worry. it is a choice. imagine if budweiser were to go into an alcoholic anonymous meeting and come in and say, oh, you guys are not addicted to alcohol, do not worry, it is just a choice, it is not an addiction. think about that. what else did they do? they chose to set the nicotine level at a level designed to create and ensure addiction in the products. what else did they do? they marketed marlboros to minors. they knew you hook them young, you got them hooked for life. and you heard the testimony of dr. kyriakoudes, but you also saw their documents that talked about how they were focusing on teenagers. and joseph cullman, remember that video that dr. kyriakoudes showed talked about how advertising made marlboro -- made it the cool, the cigarette. repeatedly for 40 years, philip morris and other cigarette companies told their customers to believe that cigarettes were not harmful and were not addictive. and remember, they also tried to interfere with dow's efforts in 1984 to develop nicorette gum? that is bad conduct. 1622 so that is philip morris's fault. all of those things i said. the scales of justice, whom you are weighing fault, you put far more of it on then than on donna. what can you really fault donna for? can you fault her for trying marlboros by age 16? we all met children, 16 years olds, we do not let them join the army. they are not allowed to make informed decisions about taking prescription drugs or have surgery for a reason. you cannot make a reasonable rational choice as well at 16 as you can when you are 25 or 30 or 40. so how much fault can you really put on her for that? a little bit, one or two percent? remember, when she picked up that first pack of cigarettes, said caution smoking cigarettes may be hazardous to your health. may be, what teenager is going to pay attention to that? may be hazardous, may not be. the tobacco industry used that to a great effect in its advertising and its public statements. to have a real appreciation of the risks, you have to know all the information. and donna testified she certainly did not know as much about the health risks of smoking when she picked up that first cigarette that she does 40 years later. and nobody did, because i mean, think about the difference between somebody saying, well, the government is just saying that, you do not have to worry about it, and defendant saying, well, yeah, my product is 1623 pretty bad, it is killing people. defendant comes in and says, my product is bad, it is killing people, you are going to believe it, because they made the product. otherwise, the government is the government. you can listen to the government, you can ignore the government. a lot of people, government says there is global warming, i do not necessarily buy that. some people do, some people do not. the government says this, the government says that. but if a person who made the product come out and says, yeah, my product will kill you and it is two-thirds chance if you smoke it as a teenager you are going to get addicted, that changes your view about that. so becoming addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, can you really fault donna for that? that is exactly what they want america to do. every cigarette they sold had nicotine in it. the whole goal was to get people hooked so they would buy more cigarettes. can you really put any fault on her for becoming addicted? when two-thirds of teenagers who start to smoke become addicted? how can that be a fault? how can you assign legal fault and blame for that? not breaking her addiction until 2014. people, classic definition of addiction is to continue smoking despite knowledge of harmful consequences. donna knew when she first started smoking marlboros, yeah, 1624 there were some potential harm there. she did not have a full and sane appreciation for the real risk she was running. so, yeah, maybe you should tag her for some fault for that. but you know what? she got addicted real fast. and once -- and she tried everything to break her habit. and she eventually did. years too late for her, but she did. is it fair to fault her for not being able to break her addiction earlier than that when their whole goal was to addict her, keep her addicted, reassure the public health community, dispute the public health community messages? and the surgeon general of the united states did not call nicotine an addiction until 1988. what -- imagine a world where if philip morris had sent the 1959 memo i showed you yesterday that says nicotine is addictive -- i think that is exhibit 100, i'll show it in a minute. what if had they sent that the surgeon general, saying -- in addition to saying smoking causes lung cancer, maybe you should say smoking is addictive. what do you think would happen then? would donna have -- the world would change. it changed a lot in 1988, did not it? lots of product came out no 1988. so as between philip morris and donna brown, i'll let you make that call, but i suggest to you that if you are going to put fault on her, it ought to be in the single digits. they did, they were reckless, they were careless, 1625 they did wrong, they do things that people have known since the bible not to do wrong. do not throw a stumbling block in front of a blind man. do not mislead youngsters into trying deadly and dangerous products. that is wrong, that is really wrong, morally wrong, it is a big, big wrong. put more of the fault on them. put some on her, sure. but i suggest to you it should not be very much. so this question i'm gonna leave blank, but it ought to be heavily weighted on them and very little on her. now, once you answer this question, then you get -- there is some other questions on here about the intentional, did the defendant, did -- is philip morris liable to donna, her claim is defendant, philip morris, concealed or omitted material information about the health effects or the effect of the nature of smoking cigarettes. well, the finding you have to apply say that they clearly did that. and so the question is: did she rely to her detriment in some way on that? and it is a funny thing, how do you rely on something that is not said? what was omitted, what was important? what would have been really nice to know, if you pick up this cigarette, you have a two-thirds chance to get addicted and you have got a fifty percent chance of dying. and you know the old saying a picture is worth a thousand words? in 1966 philip morris could have put the big skull and cross bone on that pack if it wanted to. did 1626 it? might have affected sales, would not it? so as to the intentional -- what they call intentional course, i suggest to you the answer is yes. there is a question about were statements made before and after 1982. remember that philip morris disputed the 1988 surgeon general's claim that cigarettes were addictive in 1984. they made statements to dow saying, you guys, we do not like it that you are calling our product addictive, stop messing around, stop trying to sell nicorette gum. so i think the answer is both before and after 1982. question 7 is a similar type of thing, yes, before and after. but even if you -- let us say you get into a debate about, well, what is fraud, maybe this does not -- make some of these statements maybe she did not rely on anything after 1982. i think clearly did, it was clearly important to her when the surgeon general said nicotine was addictive. that is the only thing she remembered. and remember, it is the omission of information. the omission of material information, information people had a right to know and should have known. everybody in america was exposed to cigarette advertising in the '50s and '60s. so i think the answer is well beyond preponderance of the evidence that they did engage in intentional misconduct that did cause her 1627 detriment. and even if you disagree with me, as to the first four questions, was she addicted, did addiction cause her repeated smoking, did smoking cause her disease, that is a slam dunk. that is between their fault and her fault. it ought to be much more on them and much less on her. so i'm not gonna go through all the evidence you have scene in this case. it is right there. well, it was right there. the exhibits were on the table there, you will get to look at the exhibits if you need to. there was documents showing that advertising mattered. that is exhibit 580. i showed you some ads that were common in the '40s and '50s. it was a cigarette culture. dr. kyriakoudes talked about that. joseph cullman, marlboro, marlboro man advertising, the ftc report, cigarettes were pervasive, and major conclusion from the surgeon general's report in 2012, where we stand with the surgeon general on all issues, is that advertising and promotional activities by tobacco companies have been shown to cause the onset and continuation of smoking among adolescents and young adults. and if you do not believe the surgeon general, which you should, because philip morris said you should, absolutely the case. look at their internal documents, look at exhibit 527. i'm not gonna take the time to read it. when 1628 you get to it, read it. they are short documents. they are short documents because back then somebody typed them up, they could not just edit them repeatedly on a computer the way we can today. somebody typed them up, a senior executive signed them. they were focusing on young smokers. read exhibit 527 where they say, the surgeon general estimates that 4500 youngsters begin smoking every day. if this is true, it means that 45, fifty percent of potential new smokers are smoking and does not imply a significant reduction. then there is a look back document, exhibit 846, where they say, it is important to know as much as possible about teenage smoking and attitudes of today's teenagers, tomorrow's potential regular customer, and the overwhelming majority of smokers first being smokers while still in their teens. they talk about how marlboro became the brand of choice among teenagers in the '60s. that is why marlboro is so big today, there were people hooked who still are smoking marlboro. if you need demographic evidence, exhibit 1755 shows you that effect. i told you in evaluating fault, you got to go back to 1953, think about who knew what when. the plaza hotel meeting, they knew that smoking was a habit, cannot break it, cigarettes cause cancer. by 1959, philip morris knew that people smoked because of addiction. by 1959, one of the 1629 main reasons people smoke is to experience addiction, september -- that is a document never given to the surgeon general. they had the document, exhibit 165, a cigarette is not the problem, it is the package, the product of nicotine. and that all these documents show they knew exactly how to set the level of nicotine. even mr. jupe admitted they can put their nicotine at whatever level they want. what did they choose to do with that knowledge besides lying to congress? besides interfering -- this is exhibit 34, that is when they interfere with dow's nicorette gum. they kept selling a defective, deadly, and dangerous product and denying it was addictive. as the tobacco institute's own documents say, exhibit 94, you cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. go back to 1953. again, they promised they are going to put public health paramount over every consideration in their business. judge them by their own promises. what did they do the next 45 years? this is a document, exhibit 1754, in evidence, that is the one where philip morris was sending -- having a doctor go out and collect world literature, indicated again that cardiovascular problems would probably turn out to be the more serious problem. read that whole letter, two-page letter. if nothing else proves knowledge, that does. 1630 exhibit 166, again, that is a document where they talk about cannot get cigarette smoke out of the cigarettes and cannot get harmful constituents out of the cigarette smoke, and that nicotine causes -- nicotine causes cardiovascular disease. what was the response of the tobacco companies to the surgeon general and public health's messages? overwhelm them with advertising. and it worked. this is exhibit 1755. if you want to take a ruler and draw some lines, smoking rate in this country in 1980 was about where it was in 1960 despite the surgeon general warnings, despite all the public advocacy ads, despite everything that was out there. what happens in 1999? it starts going down, really down. starts going down before that, but in 1988 the first drugs are starting to become available in the '80s to treat nicotine addiction. so what is philip morris gonna say? they are probably going to say she is not addicted, they will probably say that the hyper -- hyperlipidemia was a cause or the cause or she had a family history that caused her pvd. she did not get hyperlipidemia or hypertension until after she already had pvd and most of those records were after she had her legs amputated. and there is no doctor who is going to come in here, who came in here, who told you that she was not addicted. we have burden of proof on that, we accept that 1631 burden, we proved it overwhelmingly. they are going to say that their conduct had nothing to do with her pvd, but think about this: outside of the courtroom, if somebody said, hey, you gonna be asked a question whether smoking cigarettes caused this woman's pvd, we know it caused pvd, she smoked 45 pack years of it, tried everything under the sunday to quit, could not quit. what would you say to that? that sounds crazy. you should not give their arguments any more weight in the courtroom than you would outside the courtroom. and as to the argument that their conduct had no impact on her life, they created an environment where cigarette smoking was cool. they omitted material and important information from their cigarette packages and from their advertising. they did everything's they could to get young people hooked on cigarettes and people on smoking. the scales of justice, justice weighs heavily, heavily on my shoulders, and soon it is going to be on your shoulders. it is going to be your job to write the last chapter of donna brown's life. this i think is the hardest question on the form. it is the damages. because you do get to the damages questions if you answer one, two, three yes, and if you find that philip morris is at fault. you got to measure the full and fair measure of damages. and as to that i can only give 1632 you some guidance. what do we know from the evidence? the jury verdict form looks a little bit different than the slide, because judge savage, in his wisdom, separated out the different categories so that it is clear what you are finding as damages and what you are not. as to past medical expenses, this is medical expenses that have been paid to treat donna's pvd. that number is not in dispute, $439,728. that is not in dispute. i'm going to go on to skip the bodily injury, pain and suffering figure for a second, which i regard as by far the most important and hardest question for you to answer. but remember dr. raffa came in and did some calculations as to her past and future loss ability to earn money. and if you add the two up, it comes out to $423,759. do not rely on my memory, check my math, check your notes, but he broke it out. and earning capacity in the future he said was $76,039. and past was 423,000 -- excuse me, 347,720. and the only decision you have to make about that is did she stop working because of her pvd? she testified she loved her job. you could see how excited she was about that. the doctor gave her a disability rating. sure, she got a buyout from bell south, but you think more likely than not if she had not had pvd, this is a woman who was all-american softball player, who 1633 was active and vigorous and loved to be outdoors and loved her job. you think she would sit on her can and not work? i mean, come on. really? so i think -- i think as to the past and future earnings, that is -- you know, they may dispute that, but i suggest to you that the number is what the number is. the other two categories of damages are very difficult. past bodily injury and resulting pain and suffering, disability, mental anguish, inconvenience, ability to enjoy pleasures of life, and disfigurement. and this is why it is very hard: you are going to get an instruction that says sympathy can play no role in your verdict. donna brown does not need your sympathy she does not want your sympathy. she wants justice. but to do a full and fair measure of justice, you have to look at all the harms that she experienced as a result of their bad conduct. and all of us, me too, we do not like to do that. we block it out. whether it is people dying from diseases in africa or being killed in wars in the middle east and europe or brutality and violence right here in florida, yeah, we see that stuff happen, but do we really think about the pain and suffering that those people go through from a real judgmental analytical way? if you are like most people you probably do not. but here, your job, you swore an oath to do that and that is what makes this very hard. 1634 dr. harding talked about some of the 20 surgeries that he did on donna. he talked about how a lot of them resulted in a lot of pain. you know, maybe for carotid artery. what you have to do to give a full and fair measure of damages, you have to talk about each type of surgery and say, well, how much pain and suffering was associated with that one? you know, maybe for the carotid artery surgery, maybe they say that is $100,000. maybe that is $50,000 worth of pain. but for the aortic bypass surgery, where she was curled up in a ball and almost died? maybe that is half a million or million dollars of pain. what about having legs amputated, each leg amputated twice? what is that? how much pain and suffering and disfigurement and loss of the enjoyment of life? if outside of this courtroom you heard all-american ballplayer lost his legs, cannot play anymore, you think, man, that is millions of dollars potentially. well, donna loved to be an athlete. she ran track, she was an all-american softball player. what her -- losing her legs meant to her might be different to other people. it had tremendous value for her. she is a fighter. she sucks it up when she is in pain. she -- her doctor figured she was going to be dead years ago. she is still here. but look at some of those medical records, look at the pain in the medical records. what is losing a limb worth? a million dollars, 1635 $2 million? what is losing the essence of what makes you you? both annelisa smith and dr. harding talked about -- and, donna, i'm sorry to say this, but talked about how much she is been hurt by this terrible disease. how she is lost part of her personality. had a stroke, had severe health problems. she is lost part of who she is. and so for the past bodily injury and resulting pain and suffering, i'm not gonna suggest a number to you, but i do suggest the conversation ought to start somewhere in the middle with the doctors. we are not here for the $400,000 in medical bills. this woman has lost far more than that. you have to give a full and fair measure of justice, you have to value her pain, you have to look at it. and that is gonna be hard. you have to all have different views about that. some groups of people may say 20 surgeries, that is millions of dollars right there. others may say, well, maybe not, let us talk about it in more detail. but she lost her legs, that is worth a lot of money. not only is it worth a lot of money to compensate her for all the harms and loses they inflicted on her. so i'm not gonna suggest a number to you, because that is what you are here for. she is putting your judgment, you get to make that decision. you get to say what is her past pain and suffering worth, her past loss disfigurement. and as to the future, she may be here another 1636 week, another month, maybe another year. donna, i'm sorry to say this, but odds are you are not going to be here that much longer. you get to write the final chapter of her life. her doctor, dr. harding, knows her better than anyone, is surprised she is still here. but she is going to be here, she is here today, and there is some future value for what she is facing down the road. do not -- do not ignore that. last question: state whether punitive damages are warranted against defendant, philip morris, under the circumstances of this case. and the judge is going to give you some guidance as to what punitive damages are and how you award them. basically we have to prove by clear and convincing evidence that they engaged in outrageous and reckless intentional conduct that hurt donna brown. did they engage in intentionally reckless misconduct that hurt people? you bet. they did not care whether they hurt donna brown or not. they did not care who they hurt. they knew their products were bad, they knew their products were dangerous and they just kept on selling them. they kept on selling them. so the answer to that question is yes. and if you have any doubt about that -- john, can i have exhibit 166, please? this is a presentation by dr. wakeham of the r&d 1637 committee. and can you go, john, to the page that -- go to page 16. go to bates page -- go to bates page 16. blow that up. smoking and cardiovascular diseases. belief, just the top part, belief. you can read the whole document, read it, read it ten times while you are back there. cardiovascular ailments which may arise from smoking are due to the physiological effects of nicotine. and then, john, if you could go on to page 20. remember how mr. jupe was saying, we tried and tried to get carcinogens out with cigarette smoking, we could not do it. they knew in 1961 they could not do it. to achieve this objective will require major research effort, because carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. the best we could hope for is to reduce a particularly bad class. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. they could not do it. they knew in 1961 they could not do it. what did they go and do after that? this was five years before donna picked up her first cigarette. what did they do? john, exhibit 325, clip three. if you want to watch any of these videos -- you cannot watch a video deposition, but if you want to watch any of the videos that were played to you in court, you can ask the clerk to make arrangements. exhibit 325, number three. this is same helmut wakeham who wrote that memo in 1971. this is what he has to 1638 say in 1976 on tv: 7 (video played as follows:) i think that if the company as a whole believed that cigarettes were harmful, we would not be in the business. we are a very moralistic company. i think the management of philip morris is sincere in its position. i think there is a great deal of doubt as to whether or not cigarettes are harmful. if you read both sides, not only the point of view of the people who are -- who have missionary zeal to make the world stop smoking, but the people who are trying to be objective with respect to this question, you will discover there is a great deal of doubt with regard to whether or not smoking causes all these diseases which are alleged to be caused by smoking. (video concluded.) mr. finch: that is punitive damage-type conduct and behavior. how do you adequately punish them for the death toll inflicted upon america that donna brown is swept up in? how do you punish a company that is worth three billion dollars? no way to punish a company that is worth that. but you can maybe send them a message by thinking about it like this: whatever you decide the compensatory damages are, whatever that is, whether it is five million or ten million, whatever that is, multiple that by five. and there -- there is ample reasons to do that. you guys can 1639 decide. the verdict you return today or tomorrow will be written down and be in the halls of justice forever. and six months from now, you will have forgotten my name and probably know more about cigarettes than you used to, but you will have forgotten names of the other lawyers. a year from now, you may not even remember donna brown's name. but what you do here today, she will remember every day of the rest of her life, however long that may be. it is a privilege and honor to represent donna brown and justice is in your hands. may it please court, that concludes the plaintiff's closing statement. mr. ledlie: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, i'll be the last lawyer to address you today and the judge is going to instruct you on the law. and before i even begin my speech, i want to remind you that what the lawyers have said in this case and their view of the evidence, it does not mean anything. you have heard the testimony from the witness stand, you have heard the depositions in this case, and you will have with you the evidence that has been admitted by the judge in this case for your consideration. and that is what you will consider in deciding the case of ms. donna brown. and the evidence in this case is that this is a case about addiction. and to understand donna brown you have got to understand -- john, can we pull up -- -- that donna brown, who started smoking when she 1685 was a young high schooler in the 1960s told you she did not intend to be a lifelong smoker. that is not what she went into it believing and understanding. she did not go into it understanding that there -- how hazardous, just how dangerous smoking was. she, like a whole generation of people growing up in that time, in a far different time than we have today, were exposed to an unprecedented unleash of information from philip morris about how great their products were. and it did have an impact on her and a whole generation of her colleagues. she told you that. she told you that she smoked because it was the thing to do. and we started this case with information that happened a long time before donna, because we had to set the stage for you, that when a person was growing up in that era, they did not understand. the information was not out there that while there were health claims about cigarettes, everybody was doing it. but as the information increased, the cigarette industry, philip morris in particular, decided we have got to recruit youngsters, because there is more information coming out there, we have got a coffin nail that we are selling, how are we going to get people to buy it? that is a tough product to sell. how are you going to do it? well, you do not talk so much about what the product is, you wrap it up in a lot of advertising. their own witness, came in through deposition -- i'm sorry, not 1686 deposition. joseph cullman explained that while there is information coming out there, we focused our efforts on advertising, that is how we built the marlboro brand. and once donna started to smoke, as the 2012 surgeon general's report will tell you, as a youngster, she was more likely to continue smoking, to become heavily addicted, be unable to quit, and to suffer a serious injury or death. donna is here today. she has suffered a serious incurable injury. so she is just like that. and counsel referred to litigation and what i am going to be talking about in litigation science. mr. jupe tells you that outside the courthouse, go to the surgeon general's report, we agree with all them. well, please do. that is in evidence in this case. and what did they say about whether choice -- what role choice has in a smoker when it comes to the power and the grip of nicotine addiction? the 2014 consumer booklet, which i published to you yesterday, is a nice short booklet and in that it describes in succinct word, which we have not been as succinct as we would like in this trial, because this case is very important. but that is a document that i would recommend to you to start off with, because that is what this case is all about. and what that document shows us is that addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is 1687 characterized by compulsive drug seeking and drug use despite harmful consequences. on this board, the reason i left it up, why, if donna is getting all this information -- and you heard the evidence, i do not know that all this is exactly what we heard in court, but you will be the judge of that, you are the judge of the facts. but in any event, we are not going to dispute that there are times in donna's life where she was given information that smoking could be hazardous. now, did donna accept that that was going to happen to her? she did she accept that she was going to develop pvd? the testimony was, no, i did not even think that i -- i did not know about pvd until 1992 when dr. harding told me, you have pvd. there was some suggestion that dr. harding did not believe that smoking caused it. it is the very first thing that he told donna. donna you have pvd, it is caused by your smoking, you do need to quit. but donna was an addicted smoker, like ninety percent of teenagers who -- and that is one thing dr. werner testified, that fifty percent overall of people to ever smoke might become addicted. but if you start smoking young, if you smoke at least ten cigarettes a day, and donna was, by the time you turn 18, ninety percent chance, ninety percent of those people more likely than not ninety percent of those people are going to go on to become addicted smokers. more importantly, dr. werner told us this smoker, donna brown, 1688 she is addicted. now, luckily donna in the last year has finally broken the shackles of addiction. but when you are are evaluating what happened over the time and the information being out there, ask yourself, was she, in making her choices, suffering from an addiction? and was that addiction substantially contributing to the choices that she made. and if you look like dr. jupe tells you at the -- i'm sorry, mr. jupe tells you, outside the courtroom they will tell you, look at the surgeon general's reports. the surgeon general is quite clear, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason, the substantial contributing reason, why people persist in smoking and it is that process of continuing to smoke pack after pack, year after year, that leads, that substantially contributes to causing pvd. and that is what happened in donna's case. that is not in dispute. well, it is in dispute, but the evidence has overwhelmingly shown that donna smoked for many, many years. she started early and she became addicted, that when she was faced with information about the hazards of smoking that she did not really believe it applied to her. she did say she was hardheaded. that is not proof that she was not addicted, that is proof that she was. compulsive drug seeking and use despite knowledge of harmful consequences. that is donna 1689 brown. 3 could i get the elmo for one second. now, the only medical evidence that came in in this case from the doctors, let us start with dr. harding. now, we have already said that dr. harding was -- said in no uncertain terms, he was asked the question, did donna brown's smoking substantially contribute to causing her pvd? and he said, yes, it certainly contributed. it did substantially contribute. that is what i told her, he said. i do not exactly remember our first conversation, but with donna brown at 40 years old coming in with the level and severity of her pvd and i'm the doctor that did all the surgeries on her and i've cared for her over the years and i've looked at her risk factors. if there were other things that i had to be concerned about that we could control with donna, you do not think dr. harding would have told her that? the only thing that he told donna is you need to quit smoking. and the evidence in this case and it came -- more of it came in today, is even prior to seeing dr. harding from 1992 when she was diagnosed, donna had already started trying to quit smoking. that is what lindsay testified through deposition today. that is what donna testified when she was on the stand. did not work. it did not work. but donna kept trying. she kept trying. she kept trying. she tried chantix, she tried literally everything in the book. and there is no question that she was serious about wanting 1690 to quit. so earlier counsel said that the sole legal cause of donna's injury was donna's choice to smoke. so it seems like in the litigation setting they are admitting that smoking was the sole cause of her disease. but they are also telling us we need to look at all these other things, all these other medical records, which dr. jackson referred to looking at a stack of records this thick. you are getting about a dozen of them that are coming back with you. and when you look at those documents, and they are in evidence, ask yourself when are they? and why did these records -- why these people have these various ailments? and did this chart show, as evidence did in this case, that ms. brown, she is a smoker. ms. brown's mother, yeah, she had all these things going on. she was a smoker. ms. brown's brother, he is a smoker. that is not on here until i added it. so in the courtroom, they are suggesting that there is all these other reasons other than smoking why donna suffered her illness, but the evidence in this case from every doctor that came in and from every witness that spoke at this trial all of the evidence, not counsel's comments, not litigation comments, but the evidence that came from the mouth of the witnesses is that smoking matters. it is the most 1691 substantial risk factor that she had. now, after donna started to suffer from injuries and from surgeries and grafting procedures and have charley horses in her legs and going through all the various things that she had prior to her amputation, was donna able to maintain the same level of mobility and physical activity that she had before? no. she testified to that. annelisa smith testified to that. when you go through serious medical procedures over all parts of your body over a series of years, we cannot always keep ourselves up in quite the same way. but i will also point out that that does not mean that her continued smoking, her continued addiction, did not substantially contribute to the progression of her disease. it could not have come more clear from the witness stand that when it comes to progression of peripheral vascular disease in donna brown, her continued smoking was like throwing kerosene on a fire. dr. harding in all his years of practice of medicine had never seen anyone whose pvd progressed as quickly and horrifically as donna's did. and he attributes that, most significantly, the most substantial contributing factor, is the fact that donna continued to smoke, she was not able to beat her addiction at that time. but that is all evidence of addiction. that is not contrary to addiction. the only other medical record there was suggestion 1692 that we did not show you, and the whole record is in evidence, you can go back and look at it. this is exhibit 605-charlie. but once again, this medical record what does it really tell us from 2003, the year that donna's health had gotten so bad that her legs needed to be amputated? she had high lipids at that point. does that really defeat cause in this case? is that really what this case is about? i submit to you that it is not. and if we have proven, which we have by the preponderance of the evidence -- and that is all we have to prove as to the first three questions on the verdict form, is it more likely than not that donna brown was addicted? there is nothing in the verdict form, there will be nothing in the instructions about the strength of addiction. that is not a question that you have to consider. the evidence is that donna was severely profoundly addicted. but the question you have to answer is just was she addicted? did it matter? did it have anything to do with substantially contributing to her continued smoking? and did that continued smoking substantially contribute, does not have to be the only cause, did it matter, did it substantially contribute? and every witness that came in here told you that it did. so when you decide those questions mr. finch -- and you will have to determine fault. now, we bear the burden 1693 of proof on the first three questions. on the question of fault as to donna brown, philip morris bears the burden of proof. they need to show you what donna did wrong when she started smoking as a teenager at a time that they were -- i showed you -- i'm not gonna go through all the documents, we have been through the documents, you will have the documents, but they were polling kids in the '50s and figuring out how do we -- how do we attract those smokers? how do we market our products to them? mr. cullman could not have been more clear about, you know, we wanted this pack and how important this pack was. and, you know, within one month of putting out this material campaign, we moved from the number six tobacco company to the number one in the new york city market, and within a few years we were number one in the country and we moved up and up and up from there. does advertising matter? did we prove more likely than not that somehow donna was the one person in a bubble that that whole advertising campaign did not affect? because what do we know? she said she saw ads, she said that that is one of the things that she considered. but she also said my peers. look at exhibit 806. i showed it in evidence in this case. that was part of philip morris' marketing prowess. if we can become the brand of choice among this generation, it is gonna feed on itself. the next generation of smokers, we are going to be the brand. and they are the brand. so was she impacted by that? did she rely on that advertising? i'll submit to you the question is yes and you need to consider that in determining 1694 fault in this case. but i'm not gonna put a number on it either, but just keep in mind when a person starts with that type of information environment, they make that choice not based on what is being said, what is being not said. that is what this case is about when it comes to reliance. they said, how can -- how can she rely on something she did not hear and it was not said? well, the point of the matter is a manufacturer needs to tell the truth about its product, especially if it is an addictive drug, especially if it is an addictive drug that you know that 88 percent of your long-term customers are gonna start using that product before they turn 18. if you are selling a product that you know is dangerous and defective, hazardous and addictive, and you know that 88 percent of your customers are gonna pick that product up before they are of age, before they are legally 18, to vote or do other important things in life, and that as a result of that they are likely to become customers for life -- and look at the 1981 philip morris sales documents where they actually look at that and say, today's teenager is tomorrow's regular customer, they are the most important part of our business. and philip morris is going to suffer more because the number of teenagers was declining. what about the suffering of those teenagers. 1695 take that into account when you go back. ms. gallagher: objection, your honor williams-state farm. 7 the court: sustained. mr. ledlie: of this teenager, take into account the damages and suffering that teenager suffered as she became addicted and grew up and continued to smoke and continued to smoke and hated it. she testified that she did not want to keep smoking. donna struggled with some problems in her life. she knows what a drinking problem is. she was able to break that addiction. but when it came to cigarettes, donna was not, not until recently. and that is the truth. that is the evidence that came in in this case. the power of the nicotine addiction was just too strong for her until she was finally able. and what happened? what happened? donna tells you that -- we know that donna quit smoking -- i'm sorry. we know that lindsay recalls donna quitting smoking in the '80s to '90s. we know that donna recalls the ugly guy, the sea captain coming out, because when c. everett koop came out and said nicotine is an addiction, it is a medical problem, it is something that you need medical help with, 1696 and from that point on, as is in evidence, that was crucial to understanding better ways to treat addiction and better ways for doctors and people to convey to smokers why it is so difficult to quit, that it is not just a matter of willpower, that there is more going on there and you need to just be prepared that some people are going to need a little more help. donna needed more help. she was the kind of person that needed some pharmaceutical help and some other things to finally get through it. and thank god she did eventually. but what if that information had not been kept within the internal walls of the philip morris company from 1959 forward? what if they had been forthright about that information? and they shared it so that the doctors and medical community could understand exactly why it is that so many people are continuing to smoke, even after these health dangers are being broadcast? why are they making that choice? because they are addicted. they are compelled to use the drug and some of them are going to quit and, unfortunately, some of them are not. and the one that we are here about, donna brown, who is in this courtroom, she was not able to quit in time to avoid her disease. and so the question is, in light of that and in light of the evidence in this case, who are you going to put at fault and how much fault are you going to put on the 1697 parties? well, you decide that. you decide that question based on all the evidence. but it is not fair to say that the company that sold the cigarettes, manufactured them and put them out there, and advertised and kept internal information that they knew, that somehow it is all my client's fault, that she does not deserve justice, a just verdict taking into account the evidence in the case, not the arguments of the lawyers. as to the damages, the only thing that i wanted to point out is that this verdict form combines many elements of damages into a single -- into single lines, past bodily injury, resulting pain and suffering. when you retire to the jury room and consider evidence, you need to consider not just in 1992, but you need to consider all of the harms and all of the losses and what went into each of the procedures as best as you recollect from the evidence that came in. this chart will not be back with you, but you will recall that donna had not one, but multiple procedures to both sides of her neck, that she had this aortic procedure, that she had multiple -- could not even draw them all on her, but multiple. remember dr. harding talking about having to do this on multiple occasions on both legs. eventually the disease progressed to such a point that she did require an amputation and it was actually three different times, three different times on each leg, because the disease was just 1698 that far gone. dr. harding tried to do as best he could, but it did require three different procedures. and think about not just the surgical pain, but the other elements of damages, the disability, the mental anguish, both knowing from 1992 forward that if i cannot give up these cigarettes, it is gonna cost me my legs, and not being able, not being able to successfully do it. think about what that must have been like for donna. you heard the guilt that she had. and she does. but do not confuse guilt with fault. guilt is a recognition that an addict is going to continue to use despite knowledge of harm. that is addiction. that is what this case is about. there are inconveniences. how did this inconvenience donna. each and every time you will have to consider that, ability to enjoy the pleasures of life and disfigurement, future bodily injury and resulting pain and suffering. and on that question, you know, i never disagree with my good friend, mr. finch, on many things, but donna brown is a fighter. and i cannot tell you how long donna brown is going to be here. you have seen her and you will have to evaluate your interpretation of the facts as to what her future pain and suffering is going to be based on your consideration of everything that you have learned in this trial. lastly, the questions on the verdict form dealing 1699 with punitive damages. there are multiple questions, but they all revolve around the question why did this matter to donna brown. did it really matter, did it really matter that philip morris did engage in the unprecedented advertising campaign that donna brown was swept into? did that have anything to do with donna brown's smoking? did we prove by clear and convincing evidence that by 1967 when the special report, no. 248 -- i wish i could remember the exhibit number, but special report, exhibit 248, the health filter document which we put up on the board earlier that said in 1964 we see some adults are quitting. not that much, but we really are not too concerned, because we have got 4500 to 5,000 youngsters every day that are picking up smoking and they are going to be -- we are going to recruit them that is what the document says not my word, 527 is that document. you want to talk about relating this to donna brown, this is 1967. donna brown's in high school, donna brown is smoking marlboros. it is no accident. it is no question about that. we have talked about relying on the admission that if all this information had come out, even mr. jupe, who by the way, philip morris and their statements, they are talking about in 1999, we changed our ways, we are a different company. we are here about what philip morris was doing in 1965, '66, '67, '68, '69, and all 1700 the way down the line, okay? because we are here about donna brown. if you decide that philip morris needs to be punished in this case because of their omissions in failing to tell the truth about their product impacted her in a real way and the evidence is that when the information got out there when surgeon general koop got out there, when they came up with better treatments donna brown got them, she got every one she could. so there is evidence out there that information mattered to donna brown, and she acted on that information. so there is more than enough evidence, there is more than clear and convincing, there is no contrary evidence that information like that mattered to donna brown and that information was kept secret from her and from the public health community like her doctors in developing ways to help her deal with her addiction. the time has come for the lawyers to quit talking. the time has come for you to embark on the things that you have been waiting for since day one, which is to talk about this case, to talk to one another about this case, and when you retire to the jury room you will have a voice. you will have one voice. you will determine what the evidence has proven in this case, you will determine what justice requires in this case. and we and donna brown thank you for the attention that you have given to all counsel in this case, 1701 through all the evidence in this case. the burden of proving the case i have shouldered. now you share the burden of judging this case and ensuring that when a verdict is read in this case, that justice is fully done. there is no half justice. that is not justice. we need our full measure of justice as you determine it. thank you.