mr. henk: on the economic status issue, samuels versus torres, it is 29 so.3rd, 1193. pinpoint is 1196. it is a 2010 fifth dca case and i'm quoting. "the law has long required that the rich man and the poor man stand before the jury as equals, so that all parties receive a verdict unaffected by their economic status." this is the issue we discussed pretrial, no david versus goliath. and only moments into the closing statement, obviously indicating that it was intentional, was the reference to the rich and powerful not being able to run roughshod. the court: did you find that? mr. henk: i can find that very quickly, it was at the beginning of the opening statement -- i'm sorry, closing argument. in my realtime, it starts at page 71 and then runs over to 72. the court: is there a way for me to get back to the page faster than scrolling up page by page? mr. henk: the passage starts, "and we will ask you to do that, to send a message to corporations." the court: anything further? mr. henk: just one other issue, your honor, which is a number was thrown out in the initial closing of not more than $10 million. there was no detail provided in terms of how one would come up with any number at all, let alone $10 million. and florida law is clear that you cannot throw out a number, mention a number and then essentially details to follow in rebuttal closing. so we just wanted to alert everyone to the issue that it would be completely improper in rebuttal closing to say, now, let me tell you how we suggest you arrive at a number, and provide at that point any sort of calculation, whatsoever, no matter what it would be based on. it cannot be done. florida law is real clear that that is sandbagging because there would be no opportunity for the defendants to respond to that calculation because it would be made after the time that they were able to give their closing. the court: anything further? mr. henk: no, your honor. thank you. the court: ms. ruiz? ms. ruiz: no, your honor. the court: plaintiff? mr. gustafson: i would only respond that mr. henk brought up this one issue, so i'll just say that there was extensive evidence in this case, for weeks, about large, powerful companies that made and spent billions of dollars on a message of deceit for 50 years. and this is a punitive damages case. and i'm fixing to do a rebuttal argument, and i'm really not looking up case law. i have not seen the case that mr. henk has provided to the court, but in a punitive damages case, there are arguments that are available and proper that may not be in a compensatory damages case. the court's well awar of that. i would urge the court to deny the motion. mr. henk: very briefly, your honor, actually, the fact that a punitive damages claim is asserted in a case does not broaden the nature of the arguments that can be made comparing the size of the parties. in fact, if anything, it constricts the arguments that can be made. the court: anything further? mr. henk: no, your honor. mr. kelly: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good afternoon. mr. kelly: good afternoon, counsel, mrs. buchanan. nice to talk to you directly again, it is been a while. we have got a lot to cover and i'm go to get to it. first off, by thanking you for your patience over the course of these weeks. i know at this time this case has seemed like perhaps a history class. going back in time 50, 60, even maybe more years, sometimes a couple hundred, w respect to columbus. and maybe sometimes it is seemed like a science class. but maybe more often than not, it seemed like you were away at recess, because we were not doing much in here, but i want assure you we did a lot. when you go back in the jury room, you are going to see the evidence that you saw while you were in the jury room and the in the courtroom. but while you were gone, we also put in a whole lot more evidence without witnesses that will be available to you, and i'm going to talk to about that as we go through the evidence. okay. remember in opening statement i used the box analogy? that over the course of the case, as evidence is going to come in, your going to put it into the boxes and you can take it back into the jury room. when you start now in the jury room, and you got these boxes of evidence, you got the instructions from her honor, you have heard the arguments of the lawyers and you have got to figure out, under the burden of proof, which evidence has the greater weight of persuasion when you consider all the evidence. i want to point out that it is not the greater weight of the persuasive force of the attorneys or the lawyers argue, but the evidence. and our job is to try and highlight the evidence that you should consider, from our point of view, when you are weighing it and seeing what is persuasive and convincing to you, because it is the plaintiffs burden of proof to establish persuasively and convincingly the elements of their case. now, on that point, i want to mention just a couple things. over the course of the closing argument from mr. -mr. norton: norton. mr. kelly: i was going to say bill. mr. norton: no, norton. mr. kelly: from grandpa, sorry. mr. norton: there you go. mr. kelly: kept referring to the defense's position, the defense's position. and the defense in this case has no burden of proof, none. the burdens of proof that are contained in the elements of the instructions are entirely on the plaintiff. the defense has no requirement, no obligation to present any witnesses or present any evidence if the plaintiff's case does not meet the burden of proof that is imposed on it. so, just one example, mr. norton said the ads worked on ike buchanan. well, if that is one of the claims that is a basis for their seeking money damages, then they have the burden of prooj on that. there are no ads, none, in evidence from philip morris. so it is impossible for the plaintiff to prove that any philip morris ads concerning marlboro lights "worked" on ike buchanan. there is no evidence that ike buchanan ever saw any advertisement. there is no evidence. when there is no evidence, the issue has to be resolved against the party who has the burden of proof. so, when counsel, mr. norton, argues philip morris takes the position on the defense that mr. buchanan was aware. well, we have no obligation, at all, to prove that he saw ads or not saw ads, that is all on the plaintiff's side. we will talk about that as we work through the evidence. that is how the burden of proof works. it is not a position you take, it is elements of the case. and plaintiff has all of them in this case, the defense has absolutely none. when you go into the jury room and you start taking out the evidence and putting on the table, you stack it up to see whether or not it meets the burden of proof. the defendants' evidence and the plaintiff's evidence, you consider all of the evidence before reaching your decision. now, we cannot get back in a time machine and go back to the 50s and 60s and talk to the people who wrote some of these documents, and i agree with mr. norton on a couple of things. one is the documents say what they say and mean what they say. remember he said that in closing argument? the documents say what they say and they mean what they say. so every time i objected when their paid witnesses were on the stand that the document speaks for itself, that is what that means, that the document says what it says, it means what it means. you do not need well-paid witnesses to offer opinions about what they think the author meant by the words in the document. mr. norton now, apparently, agrees with me on that point, but he is the one who called the well-paid witnesses. both dr. cummings and dr. burns, have become millionaires testifying in these types of cases. i raise the money because as you saw in the instructions, it is your obligation to assess the credibility of the witnesses and the weight you are going to give their testimony. and if they have some bias, if they have something that is going to influence them, you are to take that into consideration. one of the bases for motivation for the opinion from a paid witness is amount of the mone they have made. much of what you have seen in this case is new for all of you. hopefully, it is been a little interesting as we have gone back in time and the things we have learned, but it is certainly not new to dr. cummings and dr. burns. they testify and have testified for the last 15 years, for one, and the last 30 years, for the other, in cases just like this, on issues just like this, about documents just like this. dr. cummings has actually testified twice in one week while we were in court here and he testifies about once a month on cases just like this, saying pretty much the same thing. but it is all knew to you. so you can take that into consideration and i urge you to. and, you know, mr. norton suggests you should, too. because when he argued to you, he said what about dr. mabry? dr. mabry is well credentialed, has no ax to grind, does not even remember the buchanans, first in his class, always first in his class. but you know the best thing about dr. mabry? he is not paid. well, why wou counsel think that is so important? because he is paying his witnesses to come in here. he knows that when you are paid millions of dollars for your testimony, people are going to look at it a little askance. dr. mabry, i agree, well credentialed. you are not going to hear any criticism from me at all regarding dr. mabry's credentials or the treatment he provided mr. buchanan. are the witnesses biased? dr. cummings admits that he refers to himself as an anti-tobacco advocate. i did not call him that, that is what he calls himself. that is what his self referral is. if somebody is that biased that they anti one of the parties, that is something that should be revealed right from the onset. something that you are going to be able to take into consideration, but he did not and i had to bring it out on cross examination. it absolutely should be revealed when a witness takes the witness stand if they have some bias, either by money or personal views. there is absolutely nothing wrong or improper about having strong views about these issues that are on the table here for us, many people do, that is why it took us so long to pick a jury, to make sure we got a jury of unbiased, objective jurors, who do not have strong personal views about tobacco, tobacco companies, smokers or both. but when a witness i on the witness stand and has those strong views, of course you have to take that into consideration when you weigh the opinion that he or she offers. those are the expert witnesses, the paid witnesses that the plaintiff called. let me talk about the regular folks who were called as witnesses. you are going to look at their testimony. i know you made good notes. i want tc assure you i'm not going to talk about all the evidence you have heard over the past three weeks. it may seem like that after a while, but i promise i'm not going to cover everything because i know you took good notes. if you look at your notes and think about the evidence and you recall, you are going to put that evidence on the table, see if the plaintiff meets her burden of proof and then you are going to consider the rest of the evidence. give you a couple of examples. when the plaintiff says that mick buchanan saw his dad smoke marlboro lights from a white pack, that should go on the table and start building up the stack to meet the burden of proof for the plaintiff. but then when you learn that in deposition, under oath, when asked the same question, he said i just remember it was a red pack and not a white pack. then you reach over, you take that off the table, and it is no longer there. if there was some explanation for why he changed his testimony from one time to the next, then perhaps you would keep it on the table. that is what i'd suggest you do with the lay testimony. let me give you more examples. when the plaintiff claims that the testimony that mr. buchanan's fingers were stained yellow by smoking so many cigarettes and that came out on a number of witnesses because they are trying to establish that he smoked so many cigarettes, and then mick buchanan comes in and in response to a question that had nothing to do with the staining, just his playing the upright bass, he says, well, his fingers would come back bloody and he would put iodine on them. whoa, hmm. an< the claim now is from mr. norton that that was somehow -- we knew that was coming. that was somehow staged by the defense with the plaintiff's son, when there is no indication that we even talked to mr. buchanan before his testimony or that that ever had come out before. but now there is an explanation on the table from certainly not a witness associated with the defense, blurts it out and explains why mr. buchanan's fingers would appear to some people to be yellow. and then you always have the biggest tool for truth in the jury room, you have your common sense. and many, many times as we go through the evidence, i'm going to ask you to step back, take a breath, look at it with your common sense. and one of the things might be the claim that he had yellow on his fingers, when he is supposedly smoking a filtered cigarette for many years. the claim that mrs. buchanan testified here that mr. buchanan smoked a pack to a pack anc a half when they first met and then increased that up to three packs per day. on the other side, though, is what she said at deposition, where she said that he smoked one pack per day when they first met and after several years, increased to one and a half, and then eventually when he got to the state department, he was up to two packs a day, on occasion. there was never any explanation why there was a change in that testimony. and what do you do, i'm going to say like the scales of justice, where one witness says one thing and then the same witness says exactly something else, how does that move the scales at all? when one question was put to mrs. buchanan about what year approximately did your husband realize that cigarettes may be hazardous to his health? she responded i'm unable to identify that. i'm just unable to identify that, i'm sorry. on the other side, her sister, sally fair, ms. fair, came in to testify and she reports two important things when she comes in to testify. first, she says there was an incident back in the 60s, i think around '67 or '68, when we lived in lake city, and the boys were in junior high and they came home from junior high from an assembly on the dangers of smoking and the three of us were there, mrs. buchanan, mr. buchanan and ms. fair, and the boys came in and told them they had just had an assembly on the dangers of smoking. and the response of the adults, all of the adults, including mr. buchanan, was we were aware of that that is 1967, '68, seven or eight years before there was any claim he started smoking marlboro products. and then we asked ms. fair, did you ever talk to mr. buchanan about quit attempts? yes, i ask him why he quit, was trying to quit? and said yeah, he said he was concerned about his health. and then we have the claims on the other side that he quit -- tried to quit back in the 50s, yet we do not know whether he was really aware of the health risk of smoking. listen to counsel's argument very, very closely this morning, and it appears that the plaintiff is now abandoning the claim that mr. buchanan was unawar of the health risks of smoking and that it could be harmful to him in this case. he has now conceded, given the testimony that is come in from ms. fair, from the numerous, numerous quit attempts that are claimed by mrs. buchanan, and the application of just common sense, that nobody tries to quit unless there is a reason to do that. no alternative reason was given. so they have now conceded that mr. buchanan, from the first time that he began emitting back in the 50s. that is the testimony that is come in, he was aware of the harm of cigarette smoke. so there is no claim in the case anymore that the risks of harm from smoking cigarettes was concealed from mr. buchanan. phenomenal admission. substantial part of the case they brought to you in opening statement. they have now abandoned it. i'll talk a little bit about that some more when i get going. mr. tournay, the friend from work, testified that he was sure that mr. buchanan smoked three packs per day. certain of it. his wife told him about it, but he was personally certain that he smoked at least three packs a day. that kind of goes on the plaintiff's side on their stack. and then cross examination happens. cross examination reveals that he had the office next door, he was not in the same office as mr. buchanan, that mr. tournay did not know how many cigarettes were in a pack. hard to guesstimate the number of packs, if you do not knoi the number of cigarettes in a pack. he guesstimated three. so i did a little math. if there are 20 cigarettes in a pack, smoked three packs just during your workday, that is 60 cigarettes. if you take a 5-minute break, after 1985, to go down and smoke them, five minutes sounds pretty quick, but at least five minutes, that is 300 minutes. that is five hours of your workday, taking 60 trips down to the loading lock. that only leaves you three hours at work, in 60 increments. that turns out that you are working about three minutes every 60 increments, and you are downstairs for five. that is kind of an application of common sense to some of this testimony. mr. tournay was put on the stand because he was very, very familiar, allegedly, with mr. buchanan's smoking, trying to ratchet the amount up as high as possible, and then he said, you know, i think he was addicted. was he addict? i think he was addicted. why do you think he was addicted? because he never quit. he never quit? all the testimony is he quit in 1994, by april, it is more than a year that they worked together and mr. tournay, who is supposed to be very observant about mr. buchanan's smoking behavior, that is why they called him to testify, did not notice that he would stopped smoking. another application of common sense. the claim is that mr. buchanan smoked lots and lots of cigarettes, packs a day, and he bought them just one pack at a time. not sure how someone can do that, but i'm not even sure why someone would do that rather than buy them in the carton if they are smoking that many. testimony was that he never even had another pack laying around, but still smoked all these cigarettes. and so on and on through the testimony. as you review the testimony in the jury room, you are going to potentially pile some of it up on the plaintiff's side when you go through the direct examination, and take it back off when you go through the cross examination. or when you hear somebody else testify that makes you question what you previously put up. i suggest that is kind of how it works. when it is all done, on each of the elements that the plaintiff has the burden of proof on, and there are many as we work our way through the verdict form, you have to be persuaded and convinced that it is been proven. all right. the first one, "was mitchell ivan buchanan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" mr. norton told you you can call it habit, addiction or dependence, it does not matter. well, it does matter. it is addicted for this element of the case. and what does that mean? you can call it habit, addiction or dependence, they built the case around addiction. that is what they built their case around, that is what they claim they were going to prove, that is the element of class membership that they were seeking to prove. and what we learn is that there are a whole bunch of definitions. we know that cigarette smoking is a habit or an addiction, interchangeably, over time up to the 1950s, when the world health organization decided, you know, things are getting confusing, let us separate them out. there is habit and there is addiction. addiction is intoxicating, habit is not. that is our dividing line, that should be clear to everybody. '64, the surgeon general adopts that definition, says there is addiction, there is habit, addiction is intoxication, habit is not. cigarettes not intoxicating, it is a habit. 1964. in 1964, also, the world health organization says, you know, we made a mistake. nobody is keeping these two terms separate. it is just more confusing. what we are going to do is in 1964 we are going to change the definition completely. cigarette smoking is neither a habit nor an addiction, we are going to call it a dependence. and you will see the medical community adopted that and a lot of addictions, a lot of habits, are now called dependent behavior. but in 1988, the surgeon general decided to go back and call cigarette smoking an addiction by eliminating the intoxication component. and now, 1988, whereas up to then for the last 25 years, cigarette smoking had been in the category with caffeine and other habit-forming, physically-dependent producing chemicals, but nol intoxicating chemicals. and illegal drugs, heroin, cocaine, are all over there on the side of addiction, because they are intoxicating. and the surgeon general decides you know we are going to mix them altogether. and tobacco company screamed bloody murder, wait a minute, we are a legal product, do not lump us in there with illegal products. you saw in the clip from 1994 -- and that is why it is so important to keep these dates in mind from what is being said about these terms. remember mr. johnson, i think it was, the second fellow who talk, and he tried to explain to the congressman, you know, congressman cigarette smoking does not meet the classic form, classic definition of addiction. it is not intoxicating and he gets cut off. well, that is what he is talking about. and i think from the 90s, the evidence is going to be right now, mr. norton is right. right now it does not matter, habit, addiction, dependent behavior, they are all mixed up right now, but as you go back and try to assess the conduct and the decisions and the statements of the company for which they are claiming, you know, most horrible behavior, you have to understand it in light of the terms at that time. in the context of the times. what was known and understood. in this case, dr. cummings offered a variety of definitions and claimed that mr. buchanan was addicted in 1950 according to his definitions, and that he was addicted until his death. dr. burns had a common sense definition, he is the medical doctor. big distinction. dr. burns is a medical doctor. dr. cummings is not, he is the ph.d doctor, very important for this claim. he wrote a chapter on nicotine addiction in the textbook and did not define what he meant by that term. but he did note in that book that rates of smoking cessation, quitting smoking and rates of nicotine addiction have gone down. so quitting has gone up, addiction has gone down since the mid 1950s. and i want you to bear that in mind as you assess the criticisms that mr. norton and mr. gustafson are going to make about the design changes in cigarettes because cessation has gone up and addiction has gone down according to their very own witness. he also believes mr. buchanan was addicted in 1950 until his death. then there is mr. tournay's definition. if you keep going and you do not stop, you must have been addicted. then there is the answer to interrogatory. because we asked in this case what, mrs. buchanan do you mean by addiction? it is your claim, your husband is addicted. what do you mean by that claim? all these definitions are out there, what do you mean? and you will recall, just for context, that interrogatories are the written questions one side sends to the other and the other side is then allowed to think about it, reflect upon it, discuss with her lawyers what they intend to respond. here's what the plaintiff responded. addiction is a medical diagnosis. a medical diagnosis. i'm not qualified to say whether the smoker was addicted or not. i'm not sure what the smoker's medical records say about this. the smoker, of course, is her husband. doctors will have to say whether the smoker was addicted. since i cannot say whether the smoker was addicted or not, i cannot say how long the smoker was addicted. the plaintiff showed you all those criteria and then dr. cummings showed you the dsm-iv, this is the criteria for medical diagnosis of addiction and dependence for nicotine. dr. cummings came in and introduced it to you becaus the criteria is very complicated and requires clinically significant impairment or distress. he tried to explain it to you. dr. cummings is not the medical doctor. remember dr. cummings admitted that he is not qualified, licensed or certified to render a medical diagnosis. his medical diagnosis is void he is not a doctor his diagnosis as a non-medical witness has no persuasive force by his own admission. he testified that in 10,000 visitors to his clinic, he has never used this once on any of them, but he presented it to you during his direct examination. and then dr. burns arrived and dr. burns is the medical doctor. dr. burns could have met the standard the plaintiffs have set for themselves by testifying whether mr. buchanan m this criteria, the medical diagnosis criteria, and he did not. he did not mention this at all. the plaintiff set the standard by their sworn statement of all of the definitions out there that could be used because, and you were reading through the jury instructions when the judge was reading them today, you did not see any instruction that said addiction is defined as blank, fill in the blank. it was not in the instructions. has to be in the evidence, and the evidence is that the plaintiffs claim a medical diagnosis is required and they did not provide it to you. they set the bar at what is persuasive and then failed to deliver. now, they may argue, we will see, mr. norton goes first, i'm in the middle, mr. gustafson goes last, part of what i'm doing here is trying to anticipate what the next claim may be. they may say, you know, he had nicotine gum and a nicotine patch and, so, some doctor may have diagnosed him. well, maybe, we do not know, there is no evidence of that, there is no record, he may have gone to the doctor and asked for nicotine gum or a nicotine patch. who knows, maybe, but they had the opportunity to have dr. burns, their live witness, meet the criteria, and they did not and that is their failure of proof. when they fail to prove an element of the case, when they offer maybes as proof, maybe does not carry any persuasive force because on the other side, it is always well, maybe not. that is why you bring witnesses. they had those two witnesses, they had the opportunity and they did not deliver on the standard that they set in their sworn statement. that was the medical criteria, there is no dispute about that. there is no dispute that dr. cummings is not qualified to render a medical diagnosis and there is no dispute that dr. burns failed to do that. so by their own criteria -this is the reference to the iodine by mr. buchanan's testimony, excuse me. all right. by their own criteria that they established in their sworn response did they meet their burden of proof by establishing a medical diagnosis with a qualified witness? the answer is no. the response is no. counsel indicated -- mr. norton indicated that you are supposed to answer all these questions. well, you follow the verdict form you are going to see that after each question, there is instructions. and it will tell you that if you answer yes to a particular question, you do something, and if you answer no to a particular question, then you do something else. if you answer no to was he addicted, and i propose you should given the sworn answer and the failure of proof, you are going to stop. that is a hard stop. so you do not have to answer all the questions. follow the instructions that are in the verdict form, please. those are the instructions you should follow. all right. the next question on the verdict form is, "did mr. buchanan have lung cancer?" and this is the medical causation question. and like i said, i'm not going to criticize dr. mabry at all. what i'm going to respond to, though, just a little bit is kind of a personal attack on raising the issue at all. i think the situation is this: we had very little records, very few records, admittedly incomplete, and they were not particularly clear. and we deposed dr. mabry and got some response; that indicated he agreed that they were not very clear and he did not have a recollection sufficient to explain them at deposition. and then he came into court, because we had just chest x-ray done here today, shows density at the right lateral apex -- right lateral apex of uncertain significance. and at deposition, he said the density at the top of the right lung was of uncertain significance then and now, and he explained that answer to you here in court. i read that to him, i asked him to explain it, he did explain it. a week later, april 27th, he notes that the primary may be in the left lung. he also indicated that there is tumor -- there may well be areas of tumor from that ct scan in the abdomen. we have two potentials. maybe in the left lung, maybe in the abdomen. so we asked him in deposition -- mr. gustafson: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: you sure can. mr. gustafson: take that down, please; it is not evidence. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. kelly: may i proceed, your honor? the court: yes, you may. mr. kelly: i have my next slide up. what i was going to indicate about dr. mabry was that he explained all of the absences in the record from the witness stand. he explained whatever differences there were between his testimony at deposition and his testimony here in court from the witness stand. it is up to you, entirely, to assess that evidence. that is classically what you need juries to do where there appear to be inconsistencies, and you receive an explanation, you assess whether you accept it or not. so i put a question mark for this verdict form question. now, let us talk a little bit about the claim that -mr. gustafson: objection, your honor. may we approach, again? the court: you may. [#deleted sidebar#] [#deleted recess#] the court: everybody be seated. mr. kelly, whenever you are ready. mr. kelly: if it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. kelly: thank you, your honor. all right. good afternoon again. i was just describing the evidence that we had in the record of the folks who knew mr. buchanan best. of course, his wife nan. his son patrick. his second son, older son, mitchell or mick. his grandson sean, who is in his 30s now. and then his sister-in-law, mrs. buchanan's sister, sally fair. these are the folks that the plaintiffs called to testify. ms. neves, an ex-daughter-in-law. mr. maud, a neighbor. and mr. tournay, a former co-worker. and these are who the defendants called, ms. fair, ms. buchanan's sister, and mick buchanan his son and ms. fair testified to a couple of things that i think have become essential in the case given the current abandonment of the claim that mr. buchanan was unaware that smoke was harmful. and one of those is the visit to the cessation clinic, the goofy cessation class where after four or five sessions you are still smoking cigarettes and she recalls attending that class back in the 80s with both mrs. buchanan and mr. buchanan. and she does not remember mr. buchanan trying to quit, but when she did, of course, she talked to him about it and he told her he was quitting because he was concerned for his health. we already told you about the junior high story; i'm not going to go over that again. but ms. fair has no ax to grind, no motivation to tell anything but the absolute truth, no bias for either side. on the scale of the weight that you put her testimony, it is going to carry a lot of power. if it were scales of justice, it would be like putting a brick on one side. okay. let me turn to verdict form number 3, "was mitchell ivan buchanan's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" of course you only get to this question if you would answered the first two question. if you answer either of the first two no, you will not get to this question. and the question, i think, is best assessed from trying to figure out how did mr. buchanan quit in 1994, and then asking yourself what happened in 1994 that needed to happen sooner or could have happened sooner or could not have happened sooner or was something preventing him from quitting, when he was able to quit in 1994? so let us start off by reviewing what did he do in 1994 to quit. he read a booklet on quitting that described a program to follow and he followed it. what did it involve? it involved changing patterns of behavior. it involved substituting new patterns for old patterns. and most importantly, it involved, perhaps for the first time in any of his quit attempts, he actually stopped smoking. you will recall mrs. buchanan's testimony that she always had the sense that he was still smoking when he was away from her when he was trying to quit, but not this time. this time, she had the sense that he would really stopped. he stopped smoking in the car, which had been his routine. he started using cinnamon sticks as a replacement. he drank more water. he exercised more and he stuck with it. and he successfully quit. there is no mystery about what it took for mr. buchanan to quit. that is solid in the evidence. we know what that is. what is not established in the evidence is what happened to allow him to quit in 1994, that was not there before? did cigarettes change somehow? did nicotine change somehow? did it become less addicting in 1994 and allow him to quit than it was before? the testimony is nothing, nothing changed with the cigarettes between 1950 and 1994 that somehow made it easier for mr. buchanan to quit. if you believe the paid witnesses that the plaintiffs brought in, it was supposed to be harder to quit because of the design changes. i'll talk about that in a little bit. but for mr. buchanan, he quit in '94 when it was supposed to be harder, notwithstanding dr. burns' article saying there ws actually more quitting going on. so what is it that they have identified in the record with the witnesses that changed, that prevented him from quitting sooner? they would like to say it is the nicotine. that is it, that is the answer to everything. it is the nicotine. well, the nicotine is the same in 1994 as it was before. what he did was follow a process identified in a pamphlet like dr. horn. remember dr. horn? dr. horn was head of the national clearinghouse for smoking and health, the federal government agency responsible for communicating t the public the health risks of smoking, who said in 1968 you could shout from the rooftop that smoking is dangerous and no one will have heard that had not already known that. well, he also is a psychologist and he worked to try and develop psychological techniques to address quitting smoking and help people to quit smoking. and i wanted to highlight in this news article the term "motives," how important motives are for a psychologist to try and understand why it is people smoke. because it is been known forever, and i'll get to this evidence, that nicotine in cigarettes is what causes people to like to smoke, to desire to smoke, to feel withdrawal symptoms when they stop smoking. bu why is it that some people smoke and some do not? why is it that some people have a hard time quitting and others do not? why? what is the motive behind smoking? and that is what the psychologists try to figure out and try to break that chain. dr. horn started in '65. in 1969, the american heart association, how to stop smoking has a complete list of that process. to quit smoking by breaking the behavioral patterns that one develops because they enjoy -- initially enjoy smoking. those are behavioral patterns that are developed. i pulled this one out because they refer to pavlovian responses. you remember that dr. cummings, the well-paid expert, says its immoral to use animals for psychological testing. he is a psychologist -- not a psychologist, he is in the psychological department at his new university. he is not a psychologist. he should know that that is what psychologists do. they do tests. and here's the american heart association referring to one. and it is ridiculous, nothing short of ridiculous for him to make that comment. his smart move guide, this is dr. cummings' guide, the one that he wrote, "do you have what it takes to stop smoking? there is no magic cure to help you stop. take this short quiz to find out if you have what it takes. do you want to stop?" motivation. "are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine?" chang in your daily routine. "develop a plan and change some habits." breaking the link between the trigger and your smoking will help you stop. "keep mouth toys handy: lifesavers, gum, straws and carrot sticks." dr. cummings knows that even though he told you that these kinds of pamphlets are ineffective, this pamphlet, this type of pamphlet is what helped mr. buchanan stop in 1994. they have been around since the 60s. and they do not contain any information that was hidden from the public by the tobacco companies. none. it is been public since the 60s. tobacco companies -- there is not anything in here that the tobacco companies had that was not already out there. so what was it about this nicotine condition that the plaintiffs have established prevented mr. buchanan from quitting earlier but allowed him to quit in 1994? or was it the patterns of behavior that he developed that he had responsibility for, that he had control over, that he exercised that control over and was able to quit? was it his motivation changed? was that what it was, was it his motivation changed? motivation is certainly important, may be critical. it is the number one thing that dr. burns has on there, you have got to want to quit. well, mrs. buchanan never talked to mr. buchanan abou his quitting. she testified, did you ever ask him or talk to him about it? no, i did not. so i would submit to you that it is not the nicotine that changed, there is no evidence of that. it is not some new technique that was developed, there is no evidence of that. but there is motivation, and there is just no way given the evidence you have been presented that you can assess that. all you can say at this point is nicotine did not change. patterns of behavior that he changed did work, but what happened in '94? well, maybe your common sense will tell you it was probably his motivation changed. why, we will never know. but we do know from the witnesses that, by 1989, nearly half of all living adults who ever smoked had quit. that 60 million americans have quit every year. that 1.3 million smokers quit every year. that virtually all of the 60 million former smokers would fit dr. cummings' criteria for addiction, and quite a few, he would characterize, as heavily addicted, and they quit. the majority of those 60 million smokers quit cold turkey. you were told about brain receptors and i'm just going to touch upon that very briefly because dr. burns and dr. cummings disagree. yo put dr. cummings on one side and dr. burns on the other side and take them both off the table. research shows, and i showed dr. cummings the article, research shows after 21 days of smoking cessation, the number of receptors is not significantly different than in nonsmokers. dr. burns, when someone ceases smoking after about four to six weeks, the up-regulated nicotine receptors, the additional ones, down-regulate, disappear, to the status of a nonsmoker dr burns agrees with the present literature, dr. cummings does not. he admits he is not an expert in the area. one other point. this is very current stuff, this is scanning electron technology, radiology, with radio tracer infusions that are being tracked through the brain. nobody was doing that in the 1950s or 60s or 70s or 80s or 90s. the article i showed to dr. cummings, i think, was 2009, but that is the latest technology. and what are they learning? they are learning that the brain changes and puts out these receptors and dopamine and neurotransmitter responses to a whole bunch of activities and substances. alcohol downgrades receptors. caffeine upgrades receptors. chocolate, i'm not sure what it does to the receptors, except you enjoy it, so it must do something. gambling releases dopamine. sexual activity. eating does. watching the seminoles does. laughing does. it is good for you. we learned at all that recently. that does not mean that tobacco companies knew it all along when non of this technology ever existed. so try and keep things in the right time frame when you listen to the argument from counse because saying that tobacco companies had some secret knowledge about brain receptors in the 60s, 70s, 80s or 90s, at any time when mr. buchanan was smoking, is not within the evidence. i mean, it is just -all right. when i talk about the motivation as the key to mr. buchanan's quitting, because we do not have any other proof of something related to the cigarette design or the nicotine, i asked dr. cummings and dr. burns about the importance of responsibility. it is up to the smoker to make a quit attempt, dr. cummings says, a smoker cannot quit smoking without stopping smoking. that is fully and completely under the control of the smoker. dr. burns, a person who uses addictive substances, including cigarettes, remains responsible for their own behavior. to stop smoking, someone actually has to stop smoking. so, on this third question of the class element, "was mitchell ivan buchanan's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his lung cancer and death," it is very difficult under the evidence you have been given to identify how nicotine somehow prevent -- both prevented him and allowed him to stop smoking. had to be something else. that is a constant. okay. if you get past those questions, and i do not know how you are going to decide the case, so i need to cover all of it. thank you for bearing with me. "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan?" now, the law requires that the plaintiff prove that the use of defendants' product was more than just a contribution, that it was -- that it contributed substantially. and you will get the full instruction, it is a long instruction, but you will see whenever causation is discussed in any of the instructions, you will always see "contributed" linked up with "substantially." lots of things could contribute, it does not rise to the level of the legal cause for which consequences bear unless it is substantial. so that is what i'll be discussing now is whether or not there is evidence that the contribution of philip morris's products rises to the level that the plaintiffs must persuade you it was a substantial contribution to mr. buchanan's illness. what does that mean? what does "substantial" mean? you will see in the evidence -i'm sorry, in the instructions, "contributed substantially" appears often, but it is not defined, for it applies to a whole bunch of legal concepts, but here, it applies to cancer. so we know from the record that there is a dose response relationship between smoking and lung cancer, the more you smoke, the higher your risk. at what level of smoking does the cigarettes from a particular company not just contribute, but contribute substantially? here's the evidence: dr. burns, when mr. buchanan switched to philip morris brand cigarettes, each and every philip morris brand he smoked in his lifetime contributed to his addiction to nicotine in cigarettes. so each and every one contributed. the term "substantially" is not in there yet. each and philip morris brand of cigarettes contributed to mr. buchanan's development of lung cancer. still, "substantial" is not in there yet. counsel seemed to be arguing in his closing that i'm debating -- disputing that mr buchanan ever smoked a marlboro or philip morris brand product. i'm not saying that. there is testimony that he smoked some. plaintiff has the burden to establish that he smoked enough to meet the standard of proof that the law imposes on them. dr. burns testified -- well, so far he said every cigarette you smoke contributes. all right, but at what level does it reach substantial? at what level does it reach substantial, so that legal consequences follow if somebody becomes ill? here's what dr. burns said in response to a question from counsel, "if a brand of cigarettes is smoked in sufficient quantities and for long enough, it has the ability to cause cancer." that is it. that is the only evidence in the record to allow you to assess how much. not very clear, is it? "sufficient quantities," what does that mean? and "for long enough," what does that mean' and "it does have the ability to cause cancer." i want you to understand, i am not standing before you on behalf of him and saying cigarette smoking does not cause cancer. that is not my position, we do not deny that, we have admitted it for years, more than a decade now. what i'm saying is that before the law allows consequences to follow, that there is a level of proof that is necessary and the plaintiff has that burden of proof and for this case in the instructions you have, that level of proof is a substantial contribution. and the only person who can describe that for you, as to what that is, who was on the witness stand, was -- well, i guess dr. mabry may have, he was not asked, but dr. burns. dr. burns is a pulmonologist. he is the only one in the courtroom who is qualified to set the criteria to meet the standard of proof that the plaintiff has to meet and this is what he said: "if a brand of cigarettes is smoked in sufficient quantities" who knows that what means "and for long enough" who knows what that means "it has the ability to cause cancer." so, in this case, the plaintiff has to establish that smoking x amount of philip morris brand cigarettes for y amount of time caused mr. buchanan's cancer. there is no evidence to that. i do not know why they did not ask dr. burns to give his opinion on this, he is the only witness who was qualified to give an opinion on that, and he did not. so let us look at the evidence of what philip morris brands were used. mrs. buchanan's testified that she cannot remember every brand used and that he smoked mar different kinds of cigarettes over the years. she was given a brands sheet from the lawyers and filled out all of the major brands under philip morris and liggett & myers, and you will remember this testimony, i'm sure we went through those, then a minor brand, english ovals, we asked about each one. was marlboro regulars a brand that he smoked exclusively for some period of time. not to my knowledge, i know he tried them. not able to say how often he smoked them. in the trial testimony, marlboro was a regular brand for a period of time as a transition between chesterfield and marlboro lights. there is no indication of how much or how often or how long those marlboro red cigarettes were smoked. it was never an exclusive brand. she cannot say for how long or how many. even if there was a criteria that dr. burns had left behind, marlboro regulars, the testimony would not be sufficient. and i'm not going to spend a lot of times on these, but these all fall in the category of each and every one contributes, like every cigarette a person smokes contributes, but none of these could be said to be substantial because there is no specification, at all, that would allow you to match it up against the standard, if one had been left behind for you to use. ms. buchanan could not visualize the marlboro lights package. did not know if the other brands on the brand list were light or low-tar cigarettes. and marlboro lights was the only light cigarette specifically identified on the brand sheet. mrs. buchanan is pretty clear, her husband switched to a light or lower tar cigarette around the mid 1970s, and on the sheet she was given by her lawyers, under philip morris the only light was marlboro lights. that is what the packs looks like in evidence, or the picture is in evidence. that is what the cigarette looks like, it has a white filter. white filter is maybe a little bit relevant. remember we asked ms. buchanan to look through your pictures, see i you find any with packs of cigarettes in this time period, 70s, 80s, 90, she came up with just four she was able to find. we looked at each one and saw if we could kind of zero in on the cigarette pack and we see that it has some red on the binding on the top, and that marlboro lights is white and gold, does not have any red on it. the next picture is a picture of a cigarette pack with cigarettes sticking out the brown filter, at least a dark filter, it is not a color picture, but a dark filter. there we go right there (indicating). and, of course, marlboro light does not have a dark filter. got a very distinctive packaging. once again, the red tab at the top, that is not consistent with the packaging of marlboro lights. and, lastly, the package up there. there is a cigarette, there is the brown filter, there is the white filter. there is the pack versus this pack. so both the packaging and the cigarette are inconsistent with cigarettes and packaging from marlboro light. those are all the pictures that we have. that is it. so, when we get to -- if you get to question number 4, "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by the philip morris the legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan?" then yc go to the definition of legal cause and try to figure out what that means. in this case, it means contributed substantially. the only witness who was here, as i say, who offered that opinion testimony was dr. burns, and he just restated the question using terms like, well, it has to be sufficient, and a long enough period of time. okay. what are those? how long, how much? and the plaintiff failed to present that evidence to you. and unless somebody who was qualified said it is ten years, 15 years, x number of cigarettes over y number of time, you cannot take the evidence you have been given, you know, skimpy though it is, and measure it up against the standard. that is called a failure of proof. absence of evidence under the standard, i would suggest you have to, under this evidence and this legal criteria, that is set at a substantial level because the consequences, you have to answer this no. the next two questions, 6 and 8, deal with the claim of concealment. your honor, are we going to take a little break or keep pressing on? the court: let us go for now._ mr. kelly: i can keep pressing on. okay. give me a hi sign if you want to. "was philip morris's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan?" let me just pause here, maybe i'll go on to get 8 out of the way, because it has to do with agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature was the legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan. and what i'd like you to remember is these are the engle findings. and in the engle findings, material information is identified as not otherwise known or available. so it gives you a little more information, what you are looking for in the evidence to see if it had some impact on mr. buchanan. so we have the term of "materi fact," which is one that is of such importance that mr. buchanan would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. so it is pretty important fact, would it change the way he did things. in mr. buchanan's case, it is some fact that was concealed that would have allowed him to quit sooner. that is what you are looking for in the evidence. plaintiff has the burden of showing it to you. and when you do find it, it is got to be some fact not otherwise known or available. now, give you a moment to take a breath, me to take a breath, and i'm about to get into a little science. how do you like that at 3:00 in the afternoon? can we switch this to the elmo, please? counsel said that philip morris added stuff to their cigarettes and processing and it made cigarettes more inhalable and more addicting, and i could not let that pass without addressing the testimony of dr. cummings on that point. okay. what mr. norton told you was that they manipulated the tobacco processing and they increased the ph and that drives up the free nicotine and they add the chemicals to drive down the ph, which made it more inhalable and, wait a minute, you cannot do both. higher ph, it is a chemical characteristic, things are either basic or acidic. a higher ph means there is more free nicotine, but also means there is more irritability and less inhalabilitv remember he referred to burley tobacco, burley tobacco. burley tobacco has a higher ph. cigars have a higher ph. there is more nicotine in cigars. there is higher ph in the tobacco, but you cannot inhale them because the ph is too high. cigarettes have a lower ph. less irritability and more inhalability, but with the lower ph, you get less free nicotine. you cannot have it both ways. nature does not allow you to have it both ways. if you want to increase the ph, you are going to create a product nobody can inhale. decrease the ph, you are going to drive down the nicotine. so they counter balance each other. that is why most cigarettes are within this range. and i did that from memory, so i could be little off there from your notes, but it is a range. so the concept that processing is for the purposes of driving up nicotine is nonsense because it would be counterproductive to selling cigarettes because you could not inhale them. that is the important science. that is why cigarettes are different than cigars. okay. so why did not you make cigarettes without nicotine? we did make cigarettes without nicotine. denicotinized cigarettes, almost all the nicotine removed. what happened when philip morris did that? the public health community came down and said those are really dangerous. they do not have much nicotine in them. people are going to smoke a lot of them. the more they smoke, the more dangerous they are. get those cigarettes off the market. dr. burns -- dr. cummings, sorry dr. burns. dr. cummings said up until the year 2000, he was not an advocate of denicotinized cigarettes. he was not an advocate for lowering the nicotine in cigarettes until after 2000. so at any time while mr. buchanan was alive, if we would gone to dr. cummings and said should we lower the nicotine in our cigarettes, he would have said no. he comes in here and says yes in court. well, there is only a range in which it can be done. we tried to -- philip morris tried to lower it down to almost nothing and the public health community said those are more dangerous than the ones that are on the market now. get those off the market. all right. this is from mr. norton's closing argument. this is what he said. the company knew that the cigarettes contained nicotine and disputed the public health message that smoking caused cancer. hold on a second. those are two different things. the findings say it is addiction or the health risks. he is confused the two. disputed the public health message that smoking caused cancer, he has admitted that mr. buchanan knew about the harmful effects of smoking from the first time he quit in the 1950s. so what he is really -- i think what he is claiming is that the companies knew something about nicotine in cigarettes that was otherwise not known or available. this is what mr. norton said in closing argument. "no, let us be clear, ike buchanan would not have tried so hard to quit and struggled so much to quit if he did not think it was bad for him." i'm quoting mr. norton's closing argument. all right. so the claim is that the company knew something about nicotine that nobod else knew, was not otherwise available, and we go take a look, step back in time to 1900, the sears catalog, smoking cessation aids have been marketed since the early 1900s. tobacco to the dog. we cure you of a desire for tobacco. 1936, time magazine, popular media. the dorsey, dr. dorsey, "the dorsey cure is simple. the smoker must cease abruptly and completely. whenever he wants to smoke, he swallows a capsul containing one-eighth grain of lobeline. this is a drug which smells, tastes and affects the human system almost as exactly nicotine does." lobeline is the first nicotine replacement therapy on the market in the 1930s. the fact that nicotine is in tobacco has been known for hundreds of years. the fact that nicotine is the effective chemical in tobacco and smoke that affects a persons desire has been known, at least published in the popular media, we are going to talk about scientific articles, but in the popular media, so it is available, it is known, back to the 30s. this is a scientific article in 1933, where the doctor identifies that, "the real exciting, pleasure-giving effect, depends almost entirely on the absorption of the nicotine content." 1942, dr. johnson, "tobacco smoking and nicotine." cited in the 1964 surgeon general's report. so obviously available, known to the scientific community. "on the assumption that smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine iust as smoking opium is a means of administering morphine," and he goes on to describe this test where he uses nicotine in his subjects. 1963, the american journal of psychiatry. this is dr. knapp's article, and the reason i put this up there is because there is a claim that the council for tobacco research and the tobacco industry research committee did not fund science that was investigating anything that could potentially be harmful to the tobacco companies. dr. knapp's research was funded by the industry organizations along with, i think, it was the american cancer society. "heavy cigarette smoke thus appear to be true addicts, showing not only social habituation, but mild physiological withdrawal effects. i'm showing you some of these things because the claim is that the research that we were aware of and funded, we hid. the green monster section in here that we put into evidence on nicotine and its effect, that has all the known articles at the time, 1961, on the effect of nicotine and tobacco compiled by the tobacco industry given to the surgeon general. 1964, the surgeon general compiled all the information that was out there concerning tobacco, cigarettes and had this to say about nicotine: "nicotine-free tobacco or other plant materials," because they tried to make a cigarettes out of lettuce, "or other plant materials do not satisfy the needs of those who acquire the tobacco habit." if there is no nicotine, the person that has the tobacco habit is not satisfied. no mystery. no secret knowledge of the tobacco company that nicotine is the key and nobody else knows it. this is the surgeon general. "denicotinized tobacco has not found general public acceptance as a substitute." why, because of the importance of nicotine in someone that wants to smoke. then the surgeon general identifies the psychological component of cigarette smoking. after discussing the pharmacological importance of nicotine, goes on to talk about the psychological aspect, which was very important to mr. buchanan. "the drive to use tobacco being fundamentally psychogenic in origin has the same basis as other drug habits and in a large fraction of the american population, appears to satisfy the total need of the individual for a psychological crutch." those are kind of science phase. popular media. reader's digest, do not see the reader's digest too much anymore, but it at one time was the most popular national magazine in the country, in part because there were a lot of people who subscribed to it, also in part because it was virtually indestructible. you would see a reader's digest magazine that was dated ten or 15 years earlier sometimes, still in pretty good shape. so reader's digest had the largest circulation of readers of any popular magazine in the 30s, 40s and 50s. this is an article entitled "nicotine knockout or the slow count," by gene tunney. he was a heavyweight champ back at this time period, very popular celebrity, and he is writing about nicotine knockout. "the cause of most of the trouble is, of course, nicotine. it touches off the mechanism by which the adrenal glands release quick energy from the liver and muscles." all right. this is a collection of the reader's digest articles that are in evidence. take a look at them. they talk about how difficult it is to quit smoking. the effect of nicotine, how to stop smoking, smoke at your own risk, an article about cancer by the carton. it does not pull any punches about the health risks of smoking. and then we look back in time, the surgeon general, in 1988, this is the article -- this is the report that changed the definition of addiction, dropped out intoxication. so the whole book, the whole report is addressed to this issue of nicotine and addiction. here's what the surgeon general says: "there was no question at the time of the 1964 report that nicotine was the critical pharmacologic agent for tobacco use, but its role was then considered to be more similar to cocaine and amphetamines than to opiates and barbiturates." that is pretty clear. the surgeon general responsible for compiling all of the literature on the topic concludes that there was no question in 1964. dr. burns admitted on cross examination that the position of the public health committee -- i'm sorry, community, i misspelled that, from 1964 to 1988, 25-year period before they changed the definition, it was the position of public health community that the nicotine was a habit and not addictive and onlv after they changed the definition did they change the opinion. this is -- we have magazines, scientific articles, newspapers back there, put into evidence for you to take a look at, to get the historical perspective, to see if there is anything that the tobacco industry knew, that philip morris knew in 1974, that was somehow not known out there by the rest of the scientific community and researchers, and the public. one of the ways the public gets informed about information, but also one of the ways that you can tell how well is something known is that it pops up in a popular song. this is smoke smoke smoke that cigarette, written originally by merle travis, performed by tex williams. we have got this particular exhibit in evidence for you, has all the various singles over time who sang this song from 1947 to 1995. all set? (songs playing.) mr. kelly: all right, thank you. all right. so songs, there are more songs that we put into evidence that just reference what the common understanding of the day was about cigarettes and smoke how difficult it can be to quit smoking. talk a little bit about from -- i'm going to try to put into the right time context as i move through some of this information, some of the documents that counsel has been critical of from philip morris. i said in opening statement that i'm not going to be able to explain all of the statements of opinions in all of those articles. not all of them are from my client. i represent philip morris. i cannot represent what authors from r.j. reynolds or brown & williamson or american tobacco company said, but i am going to talk about smokers psychology research. i'm going to read it to you because it does say what it says and it means what it says, and every time a document was put up and a portion was read, it was very hard not to try and get the next part to be read so that you can see the full context. you will have a complete document back with you in the jury room, so there is something else that counsel wants to read beyond what i'm reading now, you will have a whole document so that you can see the whole on text. so this is 1969, smoker psychology research. this is one of the scientific researchers of philip morris making a presentation concerning what kind of psychological research program they are thinking about putting together and they have begun, 1969, and he says "recently our psychology program has added a new emphasis. we are now beginning to concentrate on the motivation of the smoker. we are asking the simple question why do people smoke." you will see that pattern of psychological inquiry in dr. horn's article, internally in the psychology department and outside in the research that was going on, trying to answer the questions of why some people smoke and some people do not smoke, a this is an executive in the research saying "i must admit to some embarrassment when i say i do not know the answer to the question. it is even more embarrassing to the psychologists on my staff, but i can tell you this: despite the voluminous research and pseudo sophisticate theories, no one seems to be able to give an explanation backed up by substantial solid fact." does it sounds like the company has a lot of information nobody else has or are they asking the same questions? "we have been largely concerned with the technology of the cigarette and the cigarette making," the science of tobacco. "in all this, we have until recently almost totally ignored the smoker and the why of smoking." contrary to claims in this case, this is 1969, philip morris is not doing anything with nicotine to try and figure out how it can improve the smoker's smoking psychologically. all right. that is a point in time, let us move forward. 1973, motives and incentives. let me run through the history of motives and incentives. first thing i'd like to point out is that talking about motives, the why of smoking, and this motives and incentives the book, it is in evidence. big book, big exhibit. and then there is the speech that dr. dunn gave and then there is the article. so here's the story of how that they all tie together. in 1972, there was a conference in the caribbean at st. martin attended by pharmacologists, toxicologists, psychologists, chemists, biologists, to address the question invited by the tobacco industry, ctr, including academics from outside the industry government researchers as well, and they addressed the question of why do people smoke. in a conference together, pulled the papers, present the papers on that topic, some of which are general comments on problems of motivation relevant to smoking, the neuropsychopharmacology of nicotine and tobacco smoking. this particular one, "further observations on nicotine as the reinforcing agent in smoking," by dr. jarvick, one of the inventors of the patch. "nicotine related neurochemical changes, some implications for motivational mechanisms and differences," and on it goes. all addressing the question of why do people smoke, what are their motives and incentives, and addressing it from a whole variety of perspectives. following that conference attended by dr. dunn, dr. dunn presented a paper at the conference. it is entitled "experimental methods and conceptual models as applied to the study of motivation in cigarette smoke." that was his paper. after the conference, he went to work to put together a book compiling all the articles presented at the conference. that is this book. in october of 72, there was another conference. in virginia, coresta, a collection of national ai international tobacco scientists, agriculturists, and attended by a whole bunch of folks, government, public health as well as industry, it is at that conference that he gave that speech that was so colorful, and you will see when you read the speech, he is presenting a summary of what happened at the conference. "the majority of conferees would go even further and accept the proposition that nicotine is the active constituent of cigarette smoke. without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking." that is the claim mr. norton is making we hid. the proposition that nicotine is the active constituent of cigarette smoke, and without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. that is dr. dunn of philip morris reporting to an assembly of attendees at a conference, a technical conference, what mr. norton claims philip morris is hiding. and then he publishes, in the scientific book that dr. cummings has on his shelf, the articles presented at the conference that he is summarizing here. he did not publish the speech; he gave the speech, he published the book. i cannot believe there is any confusion over that in counsel's mind, but he raised it, i thought i would clear it up. in addition to giving the speech, publishing the book, he interviewed for a newspaper and his picture ran in the newspaper with the article. now, in a claim for concealment that we are supposed to have concealed the information you give a speech on and you put the basis for that conclusion in a book, i think that would be the antonym in the dictionary. there is concealment antonyms giving public speeches, publishing a book on the very, very topic. that is what the evidence shows happened with this document, that the document has lots of colorful language in it, he is giving a speech at a dull conference, it looks really good unless you put it in perspective and understand that it is the farthest thing from concealment giving a speech. when the surgeon general concluded in 1988 that cigarette smoking was addicting by changing the definition relied upon, the book, motives and incentives that dr. dunn had edited that was the source of that speech that came from the conference. so public, public, public, and accepted by the surgeon general as reliance for his conclusion. then there was the -the court: may i interrupt for one moment? does anybody need a break? this is abou you all, so if you need a break, i'll give it to you now. if you want to keep going, we will keep going. anybody need a comfort break yet? no. okay. mr. kelly: thanks, your honor, i'm almost done with these documents, but i'll press on. thank you. so just kind of keeping our track of time, this is 1977. another article by dr. dunn, he is giving a review to somebody, perhaps his boss, smoker psychology program review. dr. dunn is a psychologist, his boss is a chemist. he is describing his work to his boss and, in doing so, he uses two psychological references, to pavlov and to skinner, and he uses -- he references rats that he is explaining what those are, and that is where counsel stopped reading and said what do you think about using rat studies for a psychological review and dr cummings said it is immoral if he read on a little bit, what dr. dunn continues to say in his document, "conceptually simple on the surface but the complexities" he described the two concepts. he says "conceptually simple on the surface, but the complexities lurk in numbers beneath the surface. first consider the operant behavior." that is the skinnerian. "it is not a simple lever press." well, up until now, the lawyers for mrs. buchanan have suggested to you that dr. dunn was saying it is just like a simple lever press. if he would read just the next paragraph, it is not a simple lever press. "now consider the many effects upon the person of the smoker." we were talking about the smoker, left the animals far behind. "our task would be much easier if the essential parts of the smoking act whether cleanly identified or if the essential rewards were identified." then he reads "is nicotine component x," we asked dr. cumming; did the company know that nicotine was component x, yes. let us read on. he asks a second question. "is component x some other compound than nicotine, carbon monoxide or some other alkaloid." number three, he asks, "what is the nature of the reinforcement, what is its locus, central nervous system, specific brain site, synapse, peripheral, autonomic." i got my slides out of order. i left out the punch line there for a second. 8, so the whole list of questions here. the first one is only one you have been shown so far. "are there other factors not related to component x that influence the frequency of the smoking act, the social utility of the act." then he says, here's the punch line, what does he conclude after all the questions? does he say nicotine is component x, forget about all these other questions? no. he says, "many of these questions we are not qualified to try and answer." and you can look throughout the whole article to see if he ever says nicotine is component x. there is no question that nicotine is an effective chemical in a decision of a smoker to smoke. no question about that, but what has been investigated since the 1960s is why do some people smoke and others not. why is that? if it is just nicotine, then everybody who smokes should be affected the same way, but they are not. and that is what the researching, inside and outside, and if there is some claim that philip morris discovered something and did not put it in the speech that dr. dunn gave in 1973, you have not been told it yet. let me go back to see what i missed. the animal studies dr. cummings said on cross examination that there is nothing at all with using rat studies, mice studies, in scientific experiments in the hopes of learning something that might help better understand humans. motives and incentives by all these other researchers outside of the industry make reference to rat studies all the time. that is what psychologists do. okay. other public awareness at the time, these are all in evidence, you can take a look at them, but i put them up here so you can see the references to coffin nails, cancer clues, piling up, beyond any doubt, cancer by the carton, nicotine knockout we have seen, cigarettes said a cancer cause back in 1957. then the 1963 submission to the surgeon general. you were shown the 1961 article by dr. wakeham listing the carcinogens. it is about a 12-page document that current technology is not sufficient to remove them, and you read on a little bit, and hope you would, it says, well, we are working toward reducing them. that is 1961. the other thing i want you to pay attention to, if you would, when you take a look at that document is that there are references to the source of the information he includes and all the references to the source of the information are outside publications, that dr. wakeham has reviewed outside publications and he is reporting to his boss what he found. then, in 1963, philip morris sent a list of the chemical compounds in cigarette smoke tha they have discovered, either in the research of outside literature and the homegrown research to the surgeon general. let me see if i got this right here. and counsel showed you the last sentence of the page before and the last sentence on the page before says whether or not they think they could remove the carcinogens, and that is where he stopped reading. this is the next page. "the considerable experience in smoke filtration gained from this continuing effort has convinced us that the tar and nicotine content of filtered smoke can be substantially controlled. it has also convinced us that, if and when it shall appear from reliable scientific research that particular substances in smoke are of pharmacological significance in the amounts in which they are present, we can develop methods either to remove them or to reduce their concentrations to insignificant levels." he completely left off the recommendation -- the reference by philip morris that we can either remove or reduce and, in fact, the technology to reduce harmful compounds in cigarette smoke is ongoing in 1963 and continued thereafter. so the suggestion that we did not tell the surgeon general that we could not remove everything we found is refuted if you just continue reading the document. read the rest of the document. all right. more awareness information, all in evidence, and i think the claim as it currently stands by mr. norton is that, although mr. buchanan knew about the health risks of smoking way back, he was fooled and switched whei he should not and that is the tobacco company's fault when he switched. so what i want to show you is what was said about low-tar cigarettes during the period of time when mr. buchanan was smoking to give you a flavor of what was known outside of the company, what things were said outside the company. there is no advertisement in evidence that philip morris ever said any marlboro light cigarette was healthier or safer. none in evidence. you are going to see who it is who was saying lower tar cigarettes are safer. this is the public health recommendation that dr. burns agreed to. from 1974 to 1994, the public health, surgeon general, american heart association, american cancer society, the whole collection of public health community said, number one, first priority, if you do not smoke, do not start, but if you do smoke, quit. then the third, if you cannot or will not quit, then switch to a lower tar cigarette. four, smoke less and do not smoke more intensely. because if you switched to a lower tar and nicotine cigarette and you are not getting the nicotine and tar that you thought you used to get, you might smoke more of them or smoke differently and they cautioned about that. this is the public health saying that, and they said it going back -- this is the scientific basis for us back to 1933. it is in evidence, you can take a look at it. dr. farrell, they tried to denicotinize cigarettes, but they were smoking three times as much. that is not a good thing. the tar is harmful, so you decrease the nicotine, you increase the amount, that is not working out. that is back in 1933. 1957, dr. wynder says forty percent filter effectiveness is a good thing provided the smoker does not decide to smoke twice as many cigarettes. and, then, in '66, the first warning went on. 1967, the first report of the expert committee put together by the surgeon general was published in the congressional record and what they were assigned to do was look at filters. here's what they conclude. "the ad hoc group of scientists which reviewed and discussed these data recently at the invitation of the surgeon general concluded that, one, the partnership of scientific evidence strongly suggests that the lower tar and nicotine content of cigarette smoke, the less harmful would be the effect." 1968, then, shortly after the public health community -- i'm sorry, public health scientists reached that conclusion, the u.s. department of health, education and welfare published this pamphlet if you must smoke. so this is a government agency responsible for the health, education and welfare of the nation publishing this information. these are recommendations in the book, it is in evidence. "choosing a cigarette with less tar and nicotine. one way to cut down your smoking is to switch to a cigarette with less tar and nicotine. learn the tar and nicotine content of your cigarette. 2, do not smoke your cigarettes all the way down. 3, take fewer draws on each cigarette. 4, reduce your inhaling. 5, smoke fewer cigarettes per day." consistent with the public health message i just put up there, and in 1970, the warning came on. 1972 -- the reason i'm going through this is that there is the claim is that the company knew that people smoked more cigarettes if they switched to a lower tar cigarette that was filtered and nobody else knew that. everybody that was involved in developing a less hazardous cigarette at the time knew. it was not a secret that philip morris had. an alternative point of view held by -this is the 1972 surgeon general's reports. "an alternative point of view held by some is that smoking behavior is a response to the need to reach a certain nicotine level and that lowering the amount of nicotine available from a cigarette may result in an increase in the number of cigarettes smoked, the depth of inhalation or the number of puffs in order to maintain an accustomed level," and that could be harmful. that is what they reported. not any secret. then there is a claim that there is one small study that was done at philip morris in 1975 that reported on this very thing, that the little research project involved nine smokers, five of them smoked marlboro regular, five of four of them smoked marlboro lights, and they had them switch and they measured the tar and nicotine that they were getting. nine people, that is it. not a large population for a research project, but that is what they were doing at philip morris, looking into the very same thing that the government had been reporting on since 1957. and they found much the same thing that the government had found, that when some smokers switched, they got more nicotine tar and nicotine if they switched from a high filter to a low filter cigarette, just like the public health community had been reporting. but there was another finding that this report shows that has not been talked about yet and that is around 1975, you were starting to get the first group, the first collection of smokers who did not switch. those smokers who always smoked a low-tar cigarette and were not switching from high tar to low tar. what they wanted to investigate was to see whether, if someone always smokes a low-tar cigarette, do they get less tar and nicotine than someone who whose smoking full flavor cigarette. look at what they found. tape 40 is the regular smokers and tape 34 is the marlboro light smokers. here's what they found. you are smoking marlboro regular as your regular cigarette, you are getting 21 milligrams of tar and you are getting 1.4 milligrams of nicotine. but if you are somebody who did not switch and always smoked lower tar cigarette, are you getting some reduction in the tar and nicotine? well, sure enough, you are. marlboro lights, the tar is down to 15 and the nicotine is down to 1.1. now, counsel is, i think, claiming that established some red flags somehow, that this showed something that the public health community did not know. well, what it shows is that those would smoke lower tar cigarettes as their cigarette of choice are getting less tar and nicotine. well, that is what was hoped for. it also shows that those who switch from a full flavor to a low tar are not going to get as less as those who have always smoke the low tar. that is what the public health community had been reporting on for 15 years. so that is what the document says and i'm asking you to agree with mr. norton and me, the document says what it says and it means what it says. that is what it says. 1979 surgeon general's report, which is the one that looks back over time, reports that the preponderance of the scientific evidence continues as in 1966, looking back 13 years, to suggest that cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine are less hazardous. 1981 surgeon general's report says the same thing, refers to the compensatory behavior that may negate the benefits. 1982 surgeon general's report identifies again the same thing that they have been talking about, which they are supposed to do, they are supposed to talk about what the potential risks that are out there. that is what the surgeon general does, and none of the risks that the plaintiff claims are hidden are hidden from the surgeon general, they are in his report, or her report. okay. so, as you identify some of the design features of the cigarette and try to relate it to this claim the plaintiffs are making that the filter somehow fooled mr. buchanan because o something that the company said, number one, there is nothing in the evidence about what the company said to mr. buchanan or to the public generally about these cigarettes. it is in 1974 at a time period when there were no ads on television or radio all of the print ads had the warning on it, all the cigarettes had the warning on it, and in a time when the public health community had been publicizing the hoped-for benefit of low-tar cigarettes since the mid 1960s. and as you assess the cigarette claims in this case, this is one of the laws that you have been provided and you are going to take back with you and that is that cigarettes are a legal product. as a result, you may not impose liability on the defendants for merely manufacturing, advertising and selling cigarettes even if defendants knew or believed them to be dangerous or to present health risks. that is essentially the claim the plaintiffs are making here, the plaintiff is making here. they are claiming that we sold and manufactured and advertised cigarettes, although there is no advertising from philip morris in the case with respect to marlboro lights, even though we knew that they were dangerous and presented health risks, and that nobody else knew that, that we are the only ones that knew that. well, since 1966, there was a warning label on, 1970, 1985. mr. buchanan knew it and there is no liability for that. that is the rule. that is the law. that is kind of an anchor for you to understand what the plaintiff's claim is in this case because that is essentially what they are arguing, and there is no liability for that. okay. now, sorry for that lengthy history lesson to put things in perspective. let me bring it back to the claim in the case, bring it back to mr. buchanan, because the claim is that something was concealed that was not otherwise available, that mr. buchanan, had he known, would have changed his behavior. all right. that is how the plaintiffs have to tie it back to mr. buchanan. so is there anything that was concealed that mr. buchanan, if he would known, would have changed his behavior. well, we know he changed his behavior in 1994 and we know there is no evidence that he received information from the tobacco companies i 1994 or about tobacco or about cigarettes that he did not have before. so how is it that the essential claim in the case that the plaintiffs are basing so much on is going to be connected to mr. buchanan? the plaintiffs have the burden to establish that he did not know something that, had he known it, he would have changed his behavior. they have not shown what that is. you cannot guess what it is. there is a failure of proof on this concealment claim because there is no way in the evidence that we have in front of us to determine what it was that mr. buchanan needed to know to change his behavior before 1994, and even if you could figure that out, then you would have to see whether or not it was otherwise available. is there anything about the nicotine information that was out there or the health risks of smoking that were out there that the company knew and public health community and science did not know? that has not been identified. it has not been identified. so there is no real clear findings of what is been concealed and there is no evidence that establishes that it would have been material to mr. buchanan and changed his behavior so we come back to what we know about mr. buchanan's quit attempt and we know that he made a change in his behavior for some internal reason that nobody knows what it is that motivated him. was it -- we just do not know, and because we do not know, the plaintiffs cannot prove their case on this claim and they cannot try to switch the burden to the defense and say, well, the defense did not prove what he did know. defense does not have a burden of proof. we do not know what mr. buchanan was thinking. that is the plaintiff's burden to establish. this gives you a flavor of the time 1964 and how the public media was responding to the surgeon general's report when it was issued. sorry, jen. (video plays.) this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. the attacks took a new turn 10 years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men and women smokers much the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee said there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee said if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more yoi inhale, the worse your chances are. above all, every american who smokes and every american youngster who is thinking of smoking must now consider whether to stop or not to start. it comes down to a subjective question. there is no question, but what smoking has meant a great deal to many people. an old smoker never forgets how he started and during the lifetime of a lot of us, cigarettes have be an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betrayed, and in a case like that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then, you give him a chance to reform. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his. the decision and the health may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night." (video ends.) mr. kelly: so this concealment, two concealment claims, both 6 and 8, have a number of components to them. there is this historical general information of what was known, what was available on these two issues, and then there is the question tying it back to mr. buchanan. is there any evidence that indicates the material, the information was material to him and would have changed how he acted. i propose that the evidence fails on several grounds, but primarily because mr. buchanan quit in 1994 and there is not any indication, if he learned something in 1994 that he did not know before that had been concealed, that just cannot be identified on the record you have been presented. all right, but if you do get this far in the verdict form, you come to the question of comparative responsibility. i'm going to move through this pretty quickly. mrs. buchanan admits that her husband bears some responsibility. you seen the quotes from dr. burns and dr. cummings, the witnesses they pay to come here and their views of personal responsibility and the smoker's role in personal responsibility. you will see the smoking cessation guides and pamphlets in place. they indicate the responsibility on the smoker. that fundamentally it is the smoker's responsibility to quit and the motivation to do so is something that is individual to the smoker. responsibility on philip morris for the having information on nicotine and health risks of smoking you would expect the company to have information like that. the question is does it match up with what was already out there, are they doing the same things that independent researchers are, and from time to time, do they share that information with the rest of the scientific community (indicating). 1964, after the surgeon general's report, congress said if you want to sell cigarettes in this country, you will have to put a warning label on your pack. that is the deal. philip morris put the warning label on the pack. 1970, different one on. okay, we did. you have got take your ads off the air, okay, that is what happened. then, looking back on development of low-tar cigarettes, please bear in mind what the public health community was saying at that time. let us not look back on hindsight. trying to find my quote here, but the 2010 surgeon general's report did look back in hindsight, and over the past many, many years, they said, "major design efforts to reduce machine measured tar and nicotine yields continued throughout the 1960s and 1970s with the introduction of light and low-tar cigarettes. efforts to further reduce machine measured tar and nicotine yields included the use of porous cigarette paper, reconstituted tobacco, filter tip ventilation, and the use of expanded tobacco." all design features that dr. cummings talked briefly about. "this research led to the seemingly reasonable conclusion that cigarettes with lower machine measured tar and nicotine might pose fewe hazards, assuming that smokers did not increase the number of cigarettes they smoked per day or otherwise change their smoking behaviors " and cites to all of the surgeon general reports that i've just showed you. 2010, when there was hindsight review by the surgeon general of the united states responsible for this historical record of smoking and health research, concludes that the development of lower tar cigarettes and that design features that permitted the lower tar levels on machine measures was seemingly reasonable to reach the conclusion that smokers -- that might pose fewer hazards. so, seemingly reasonable conclusions, looking back on it at the time, taking into consideration the information at the time, it is hard to assess the company's responsibility as being substantial for mr. buchanan's decisions concerning smoking, and there is the information the company has out there already and available, and nothing about his decision to quit, the psychological decision he made, was affected by anything the company did. that information has been out there since the 1960s. then there comes a point where there is -if you get this far, and i do not believe that you will get this far, there are a lots of hard stops along the way, to which there is no evidence to support the plaintiffs claim, but if you get this far, the process is still the same. there is instructions on what you can consider, what you should consider, and then you match it up against the law, against the evidence you have been presented on damages, and you assess it just like you assess any other damages and you ask yourself what evidence have i heard on damages, did i hear anything on damages from mrs buchanan's sister who was here. no, nothing. how about her son who was here? nothing. you heard evidence concerning her relationship with her husband from a former neighbor, a former co-worker, and a former daughter-in-law, but not from ms. fair, her sister, who has been down here living in the same vicinity for 37 years, and not her son mick. but i think -- and then you think about counsel suggested that i was -- i meant to indicate that when mrs. buchanan went on a cruise at the end of 1995, she was just fine. that is not what the testimony was and that is not what i implied. mrs. buchanan indicated that the cruise she took with her son and daughter-in-law helped her turn the corner, and that is not turn the corner down a rosy path, that is turn the corner down from a time that it was very, very traumatic for her, i'm sure. i'm sure that is how she meant it, that the grieving period, a really difficult period, very, very difficult period, was over and she was starting, starting the next phase in her life with the family and friends to support her. if you took it that i meant that everything was hunky-dory and fine after that period of time, that is not what i meant, because the evidence is that it was not. and she has thankfully developed friends and relationships, she has family close here in tallahassee and she is done things and traveled. that is wonderful. you should take all that into consideration in arriving at a verdict if you get that far. i would say that whatever numbers counsel provides and picks out of the air and throws out there is not evidence, has no persuasive effect. only the evidence has persuasive effect. last topic for you is this claim for punishment. the claim that -- because the claim is that philip morris had information that was not otherwise available that was material to mr. buchanan, stop right there, we do not know wha that information is, it has not been established for you, there is no proof of it, but that is the claim, that would have made a difference for mr. buchanan. no evidence of that. that there is all this other information out there that counsel uses to stir up emotions that are not connected to mr. buchanan. you can only consider the conduct that relates to mr. buchanan when you are considering this particular issue. mr. gustafson: objection, your honor, improper statement of law. mr. kelly: let me withdraw that, your honor, state it this way: you need to focus on the conduct that harmed mr. buchanan, once you hear what counsel says that is, and if you can find it in the evidence, that is the conduct that he can complain about. so, whatever that conduct might be in the concealment claim. kind of hard for me to address this claim because i have not been able to identify what that is, but let me give you some concepts. it is hard to conceal danger when it is written right on the pack it is hard to conceal danger when it is public information that is available. it is hard to conceal information that you talk about and publish on. there is no evidence in the case that -well, there is no evidence in the case that philip morris advertised its marlboro lights as healthier cigarettes, boom, done, but there is all these other pieces of information that are out there concerning the health risks of smoking from tobacco institute, or other tobacco companies over time. mr. norton took that issue off the table when he told you right at the outset mr. buchanan, let me be clear, mr. buchanan knew about the health risks of smoking when he started to quit back in the 50s. so all of that doubt issue and tobacco institute press releases that never get picked up, they have now conceded had no effect o mr. buchanan. with respect to the level of nicotine in cigarettes, remember that dr. cummings said that he did not recommend lowering the limit until after 2000 the entire time that mr. buchanan was living. all right. for this element of the case, the findings for the lower level, now there is a new standard that you have to apply. so, before, it was the persuasive force of the evidence, a whole new territory on this punishment claim. as befits this kind of a claim, the standard is clear and convincing evidence, a bar that is higher than what you have been dealing with before, it is evidence that is explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue. so, as you review the current version of the concealment claim that the plaintiffs are making -- the plaintiff is making, excuse me, ask yourself whether that evidence is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation because if it leaves you with questions, uncertainties, about what was concealed and what did he rely upon and where is the evidence, there is no basis upon which you can find any punitive liability. the level of proof is substantially higher. i'm going to close if i could, if there is no objection, by thanking you for your attention. you have been incredibly patient with me this afternoon as i covered an enormous amount of material over 65 years, and i very much appreciate it. mr. gustafson, i think, is going to get up and he is going to argue now and i'm sure he is going to be very eloquent and argumentative about -- as he should, as an advocate, and i will not be able to get up and read the rest of the page or pull out something else because plaintiff has the burden of proof. the hardest part of the case for me, i have to sit down and be quiet, but let me remind you that what is persuasive to you and influences you does not come from podium. it came from that chair and the evidence, and i'm convinced that you will do your duty and you will bring justice to this case according to the law as you are given it. thank you very much. thank you very much, your honor. ms. ruiz: good afternoon, everyone. you will be glad to hear, as you have seen during the trial, i'm going to try not to repeat what you have already heard. it is been a pleasure to be here before you and judge fulford's court. i thank for attention you have paid to this case since the beginning. now we are at the end of the trial and mr. kelly did an excellent job of covering why the plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proof against both defendants. but as you heard, it is plaintiff's burden here to prove her claims against both defendants. so i need to cover what the evidence shows with respect to my client, liggett. we all have sympathy for mrs. buchanan and her family. it is never easy for someone to lose a loved one, especially a spouse, but that does not mean that liggett is responsible because mr. buchanan chose to smoke and buy the cigarettes. when you consider the evidence in this case, please use your natural reason and common sense as judge fulford has instructed you. you did not check your common sense at the door when you got here. we ask that you rely on that as we evaluate the testimony of the various witnesses you have heard in this case. and with that in mind, what did the evidence show? this case is about two things. first, it is about mr. buchanan and the way he lived his life and, second, whether philip morris or liggett did anything or said anything that influenced mr. buchanan's decisions. everyone who came here who knew ike buchanan described him the same way: he was an intelligent man, principled family man. he had a unique passion for life. his wife described him as a sophisticated and accomplished jazz musician by all accounts and a self-taught electronic media producer and writer. throughout his career, he was well traveled and well aware what was going oi in the world around him. we know from the evidence that he was the kind of person who would have been able to and did, in fact, quit smoking when he decided to and chose to do so. nothing that liggett did influenced mr. buchanan's decisions and his behavior. mrs. buchanan told you that her husband was smoking chesterfield cigarettes when she met him in 1950 and that he continued to smoke chesterfield until 1974. that is all we know. she is the only one who remembers chesterfield. and as you saw, there is evidence that, at least on one occasion in 1972, you saw the pictures of mr. buchanan when the buchanans livec in miami, that is buch-15 in evidence, on at least that occasion, he was not smoking chesterfield. you saw the picture with the box of cigarettes on the table next to him. they were not the white pack of chesterfield cigarettes that mrs buchanan remembers. incidentally, in all the pictures that were shown to you, you did not see any chesterfield cigarettes. you also heard from mick buchanan that his dad was smoking something in a red box when he w in grade school. that would have been in 1968. and as you saw from the pictures that you were shown, chesterfields were not packaged in a red box. so all we have on the chesterfield smoking is mrs. buchanan's recollection. using your own experience and common sense and evaluating the evidence, plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proof that smoking chesterfield cigarettes was enough by itself to cause mr. buchanan's lung cancer, but even if you believe mrs. buchanan that he smoked chesterfields for all those years, we submit that plaintiff still failed to meet her burden of proof here. mr. kelly covered the addiction issue in detail and i do not have a whole lot to add to it, except to remind you that nicotine does occur naturally in tobacco. that is not a secret. it is not information that the tobacco companies or liggett in particular were keeping from the world. keep in mind we are not here to decide whether smoking is addictive. we know that it can be and we have been talking about that throughout this case. significantly, mr. buchanan was an intelligent man, he could have stopped smoking at any time he decided to. he was not a slave to his cigarettes, and because he could control his behavior, i suggest that you check off "no" on the first question of the verdict form. if you agree, you do not need to go any further, you will have decided this case in favor of the defendants. but as mr. kelly said, we do not know how you are going to decide this case, so i do need to discuss a couple of other issues that you are going to be asked to decide. as i mentioned, plaintiff has the burden of proving that smoking liggett cigarettes caused mr. buchanan's cancer. judge fulford has instructed you on legal cause. liggett cigarettes would be the legal cause of his cancer if they contributed substantially to producing the cancer, so that it can be reasonably be said that, but for smoking liggett cigarettes, mr. buchanan's cancer would not have happened. the evidence on this point comes from_ plaintiff's own expert, dr. burns. he told you people who quit after a period of time are less likely to develop lung cancer than people who continue to smoke. he did not tell you that, but for mr. buchanan smoking a liggett cigarette, he would not have developed lung cancer. had mr. buchanan quit smoking in 1974 instead of switching to another brand, we might not be here. and because of that, plaintiff cannot say that liggett cigarettes contributed substantially or were the but-for cause of mr. buchanan's lung cancer. for this reason, plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proof on causation. but beyond that, there is no evidence that liggett did or said or failed to do or say anything that affected mr. buchanan and his smoking decisions in any way. these are some major problems with plaintiff's case here. you heard a lot of arguments in this case about tobacco companies and what they did and wh they did not do. what is the evidence about what liggett did? the evidence showed that liggett was a responsible tobacco company and took a path independent from the rest of the industry during critical parts of the story. we saw evidence that, beginning in the late 1950s and culminating with the 1964 surgeon general report, there was emerging scientific evidence concerning the risks of smoking. one of the most widely publicized studies on this was the wynder-graham mouse painting stud in 1953. you heard various experts talk about that. there is no question that these early scientific studies were very important and we know that, by today's standards, they were correct. as you heard, no one today disputes that cigarettes are an important cause of lung cancer and other diseases, but in the 1950s, legitimate scientists on both sides of the issue did not agree as to what these studies meant. so what did liggett do in response to this information coming out of the 1950s and what did they do compared to what the others in the industry did? you will see that this is a critical distinction. as you heard, liggett did not attend the plaza hotel meeting in 1953. liggett did not have anything to do with the frank statement. it did not join the tirc. instead, it responded to the controversy by investing enormous resources in arthur d. little. you heard that arthur d. little was a reputable scientific research firm. it has a very important client, you heard about nasa, and the man in charge of this testing program was dr. charles kensler. he was a preeminent scientist with sloan kettering in new york. he had impeccable credentials. together, liggett and arthur d. little set out to do two things: they coordinated with dr. wynder himself to see if the wynder-graham mouse skin painting test could be replicated and, second, to see it they could identify what, if anything, the cigarette smoke could be identified as the problem. please go back and review the documents in this case. that is what happened. the documents will show you that liggett thought if the wynder-graham tests were replicated, it might be able to find out what it was in cigarette smoke that was responsible for the test results. the mouse skin painting test was a landmark experiment and you have heard testimony that when the results were released, that some of the top research labs in the country, such as the ones at yale, sloan kettering, roswell park, all began testing to try to replicate dr. wynder's results. other public health officials were invited to weigh in on these tests, and despite the arguments, you have heard that is what happened. that is in the document that you will be given in this case. this was an ongoing process. liggett shared its research with the public, ultimately turning over all of its research to the surgeon general's committee on smoking and health. liggett's 9 volume submission is in evidence. it is exhibit 231. you might remember mr. sales standing here, doing one of these with liggett's submission (indicating). dr. cummings told you that liggett did not tell the surgeon general that cigarettes were cancer producing. i invite you to look at the submission. there is a tremendous amount of information there. we can look a few examples what is in there. you will have the whole thing to look at when you deliberate, but i just want to point out a couple of these examples. this is from volume 1, page 3. you will see that liggett researchers concluded that a gross statistical association existed between smoking and death, if you can see that there, right here. and they go on to say, on pages 4 and 5, that smoker death rates are higher than nonsmoker death rates and they attribute that to lung cancer and a host of other diseases. if you look at volume 3 of the submission, the title of the volume is called chemical components of cigarette smoke and biological activity. in the table of contents to volume 3, you will see there is a section entitled materials which have been suggested as possible carcinogen for the human lung. you heard carcinogens means cancer causing, and they identify seven different components that were thought to be cancer causing. and then they go on to talk about carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic compounds. i will not read the others to you because i cannot pronounce them. lastly, if you look in the appendix to volume 3, on page 17, the submission talks about associated tolerance, habituation and addiction. these are all things that dr. cummings would have you believe liggett kept to itself. the important carcinogens in cigarettes that they believed were contributing to biological activity. the document is a compendium, there is a lot of stuff in there, but some of this information was published before 1963. and liggett made a lot of that science available by publishing its results to the new york academy of science in 1960 and, of course, voluntarily providing it to the surgeon general's advisory committee in the 1960s. shortly after that submission, you might recall that the surgeon general praised liggett for its work. this is liggett exhibit 219. it is in evidence. you will see the assistant surgeon general wrote to dr. kensler, that is the scientist at arthur d. little. "we feel that simple acknowledgement of the receipt of the nine volume which you submitted to us is not sufficient. please accept, on behalf of liggett & myers and arthur d. little, our special gratitude for the tremendous time, effort and expense in the production of this material for our use." they went on to say they were especially grateful for the oral presentation that dr. kensler made to the committee. dr. cummings tried to turn liggett's positive efforts with dr. wynder and cooperation with the surgeon general advisory committee right on its head. instead of recognizing liggett for doing the right thing and doing what no other company did dr cummings criticized liggett because it tried to do the right thing. dr. cummings was not there. it is easy for him to come here, 60 years later, and apply present day scientific standards to know what we did know about disease causation to liggett in 1950s. it is not a fair assessment. scientists working for liggett did exactly what legitimate scientists do; they shared their data and identified for public health authorities the specific carcinogens that they had already identified. now, dr. cummings showed you a document called l&m, a perspective review. this is pt2138 and he told you that this sentence, "there are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco that are cancer causing," was not shared with anyone. each of those conclusions was shared by liggett and arthur d. little in the submission that they made to the public health officials. they identified the carcinogens in cigarette smoke and showed that they were cancer causing. they even identified that cigarette smoke was habituating, which is exactly the term that the surgeon general used in 1964. all of this was in the submission which cites to articles that were dating back to the 1950s. so, with respect to liggett and its biological testing program, there were no secrets. dr. cummings also showed you another document. i'll show you the front so you can recognize it. it is pt66037. and as you will see, this document does not have anything to do with secret information not at all. this is a document that is reporting on research. and if you will look at page 4, it cites to articles outside of liggett, one of which is dating back to 1929. there is nothing secret there. and as you heard from dr. cummings, none of that research that liggett was doing about ph and altering the ph balance of cigarettes, none of that made it into any commercially available cigarette. you also saw another document with dr. cummings showing that liggett took an independen path. you will remember the trip report that we talked about. this is also in evidence. it is plaintiff's exhibit pt3289, and this document reports that "liggett felt that the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large scale investment by the company directly in experimental research." it goes on to say that "liggett had already invested considerably more in that work than the combined donations of the rest of the industry to the tirc." it goes on to say that "liggett was avoiding public comment until their own research had provided something concrete to offer." now, dr. cummings wants you to believe that liggett should be lumped in with all the other companies and that its conduct is the same. you should not accept that. plaintiff wants you to believe that because liggett was a member of the certain industry groups, it is now responsible for what every other tobacco company did or said for 50 to 60-year period of time. it is simply not correct. the evidence showed that liggett was a minor player at best with minor contributions to two groups over the years. what plaintiff wants you to believe is that every letter, every comment, every statement by the tobacco institute and others regarding smoking and health issues is somehow attributable to liggett. ask yourself if you saw any documents from liggett directing anybody else to make any comme directing any tobacco institute press release. you did not see a single one. during the trial, plaintiff presented testimony from two people that plaintiff claims to be for liggett, mr. shipe and mr. lebow. these witnesses came in the scene in the 1980s; they were not with liggett in the 1950s. they had nothing to do with anything that happened so long ago. mr. shipe, for example, was asked a bunch of argumentative questions by a lawyer about events that took place in the 1950s. please remember that lawyer statements are not evidence, only testimony is evidence. obviously, mr. shipe did not know what was going on in 1950s. the only thing he could do is look at the documents that the lawyer put in front of him and answer whether or not the documents had been read correctly. and, in fact, the evidence has been presented here contradicts some of things that the lawyers questions were trying to suggest. for example, we know that liggett did not just ignore the controversy. we know that, instead, liggett sponsored significant research spending more than the rest of the industry combined. so when you go back to the jury room and evaluate liggett's conduct along with the conduct of all these other companies, please ask yourself if there is any real evidence of liggett's involvement in this information. i submit to you that the answer is no. of course, there is a shortcut for all of this. the crucial test for evaluating the claims in this case did any of the statements by the tobacco institute or any other tobacco company or any of these companies, including liggett, play a role in mr. buchanan's decisions to start smoking or continue smoking, and the short answer is there is not any evidence that any of this made any difference to mr. buchanan. we know that when mr. buchanan was warned about the risks of the smoking by his own children, he ignored them. we know that, from 1966 on, there were warning labels on the packs and on advertisements, and they made no difference. mr. buchanan continued to smoke until he decided that he wanted to quit. mrs. buchanan never identified anything her husband saw from the tobacco companies, more importantly from liggett, that mr. buchanan saw that would have made a difference that he could have relied on that would have changed his mind. despite all of this, dr. cummings and dr. burns came in here to talk to you about the pervasiveness, and i think they called it the drumbeat of the counter information. it is up to you to decide whether these witnesses had their own agenda. mr. kelly touched on this a little bit. it was clear that dr. cummings and dr. burns were not big fans of the tobacco companies. dr. cummings admitted that he was an anti-tobacc advocate. it is his choice, but something that you get to consider when you are evaluating their testimony. we saw that dr. cummings showed a large number of ads going back 70 years. some of them are liggett ads; a lot of them were not. none of the ads that were shown to you during plaintiff's case had anything to do with ike buchanan or the facts of this case. over the years, dr. cummings has been paid handsomely to tell juries that advertising drives sales and market share. so think about that when you are weigh credibility. obviously, the goal of advertising is to sell a product. all companies advertise to sell their products; it is not something unique to tobacco companies. cigarettes are legal and liggett was permitted to advertise its cigarettes. dr. cummings never once said, look here, this is an ad that ike buchanan saw. he never said this is an ad that ike buchanan relied upon or that impacted his decisions. there is no evidence that he started smoking because of an advertisement. you were shown all this information supposedly showing that liggett hid the ball regarding smoking and health. what was liggett supposed to have hidden? by the time the surgeon general's report came out in 1964, by the way, that report was considered one of the major news stories in the 20th century; you heard about that. in 1964, buchanan was 34-year-old professional who was well read, stayed up with current events, he watched the tv news every night and, beyond that, produced the tv news for some time. warnings went on the packs in 1966. mr. buchanan continued to buy cigarettes with the warnings on them for decades. at the very least, he knew enough about the dangers of smoking to not smoke around his grandson. he clearly knew smoking carried risks. now we know that ike buchanan started smoking at some point before he and mrs. buchanai met, so we do not know why he started smoking or when he began smoking, but we do know that he started smoking at least eight years before the tobacco institute even came into existence in 1958. the bottom line: mr. buchanan knew that smoking came with health risks and he continued smoking anyway until he decided that he wanted to quit and he actually stopped smoking. the last thing i need to talk to you about is punitive damages. judge fulford has instructed you punitive damages are a category of damages that are separate and apart from compensatory damages. compensatory damages are intended to compensate. punitive damages are intended to punish a defendant for wrongful conduct. punitive damages must be based on liggett's conduct, not anybody else's. and the burden here is on plaintiff to prove, by clear and convincing evidence, that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. there is no basis for punitive damages here. we do not think you should even get to that point, but if you do, and as mr. kelly pointed out, clear and convincing. the clear convincing standard is a much higher standard than the one that you would use to decide the rest of these claims. in considering the punitive damages issue, you need to decide whether there is any evidence that any alleged wrongful conduct by liggett caused damage to mr. buchanan and whethe it is necessary to send a message to liggett or to punish liggett for the way it is currently doing business. based on everything i've just discussed regarding what the evidence has been in this case, i submit to you that punitive damages against liggett are not warranted. as i've mentioned to you in detail, back in 50s, liggett acted in a way a responsible company should, conducted independent research to corroborate dr. wynder's tests, and it turned over almost a decade's worth of research to the surgeon general. even after warnings were already on the packs, it continued to do research in development to try to makes his products safer for smokers. today, liggett is the smallest of the major tobacco companies, has about 2 percent of the market. in 1996, it was first tobacco company to public admit that smoking causes cancer and that it is addictive. liggett went beyond the required warnings on the pack to say smoking is addictive in 1997. and in 1998, liggett started listing all of its ingredients on the cigarette carton and today is doing business as a responsible cigarette manufacturer. so i ask you to please use your intelligence and your common sense in looking at the evidence in this case, and when you do that, you will find that there is no support for plaintiff's claim for money damages or for punishment against liggett. thank you again for paying attention to me and to my closing remarks and for your attention throughout the trial. we really appreciate it. thank you.