mr. gustafson: thank you, ma'am. may i please the court. good afternoon. i'm not going to go through all of this, i promise you, but i do need to take a minute to thank you for your patience today. this is -- it is a long process and we understand that, and this is hard for lawyers not to talk. it is hard for us to sit. mr. kelly talked about sitting down, did not want to sit down. it is hard to stop. you just wonder, did we get them everything they needed to do justice, did we get them everything they needed to make the decision, to answer these questions. and when you sit down, you do not get to get back up again. so i'm going to do my best, i know you have been listening to two hours and 45 minutes and another 30 minutes, and i'm going to do my best to respond to what they had to say and i'm going to try to guide you where the plaintiff believes the evidence shows what the verdict should be. and i need to start by saying that only amongst a bunch of these lawyers would we have sal in the same courtroom, listened to the exact same evidence, went through everybody's documents with a fine tooth comb, two and a half weeks, and then get up in closing argument and have such different takes on what you all just saw. only a bunch of lawyers would do that. that is why we have juries, that is why lawyers do not decide cases, that is why juries decide cases. and i want to start just by responding to something that ms. ruiz said. she said that liggett took an independent path and she said that you did not see or hear any testimony from dr. cummings or dr. burns or anybody else that ike buchanan ever saw or relied on anything that liggett ever said, any advertisement liggett ever had, any statement by the tobacco institute or council for tobacco research or the tobacco industry research committee, and mr. kelly made similar argument. ike buchanan died in 1995. ike buchanan cannot speak here. we all know how advertising works and how newspaper articles get read and how news shows get watched on tv, but it does not mean that people walk around talking about it. everybody in this room, everyone in this courtroom has got smart phones and cell phones and computer; and e-mail, and ten years ago, there was no such thing as an iphone. think about all the folks that have iphones and wonder how is it -- were they forced to buy iphones by advertising, no. no, they were not, but advertising makes us aware of things, makes things seem desirable, and that is the way advertising works and that is the way advertising drives sales, and to argue otherwise is to argue against common sense. you are supposed to use your common sense. there was never, ever an epidemic of disease and death in this country that even approached what cigarettes caused until mass marketing of cigarettes and mass production of cigarettes and mass consumption of cigarettes that was driven by advertising, plain and simple, and there is no other way to explain it. it was driven by advertising and it was driven by nicotine, period. that is it. now i want to make something very clear to you all. i said only in a room full of lawyers, only in a room full of lawyers, all hearing the same evidence, the same law given to us by the judge, going through the same documents with the fine tooth comb, looking at the same photographs, only a room full of lawyers would disagree. this case has never been about ike buchanan not knowi that cigarettes were harmful to human health. it is never been about that. think back to opening statement. i never said, i never said that the concealment in this case was about lung cancer causation. ike buchanan was well read man. ike buchanan read the paper, he read books, he was a voracious reader. he was an intelligent, high functioning, successful decent man, and it would be stupid for me to get up and try to tell you all that, ike buchanan did not know that cigarettes would harm you. nobody from the plaintiff's side has ever made that suggestion. the only ones who wanted us to make such a suggestion were the folks on the other side of the room. because it is not believable and it is not credible. that is not the claim in this case. the lung cancer, the lung cancer denial by the cigarette companies was a 50 year sideshow. it was a 50 year sideshow to keep people's eye off the real ball. of course, it caused disease, but they kept saying there is no proof? it is a very similar -- a very similar message that you heard today about the evidence that you saw, there is no proof he had lung cancer. there is no proof he was addicted. there is no proof that his nicotine addiction caused his lung cancer and death. sounds like the documents that are in evidence. you see, what this case -- what the concealment claim has always been about is the companies, and you see here plain as day in the cigarette consumption graph, it is plain as day in the cigarette consumption graph how this all works. people did not used to use cigarettes, then mass marketing, mass production, and all that, cigarette consumption takes off. and then you see when folks find out when the studies come out, sales dip. so what is the response to that? oh, it is not proven cigarettes cause lung cancer. but the truth is why would sales go back up? why do the sales go back up? it was such big news and everybody believed it, why did the sales go back up? well, the reason sales went back up is people tried to put them down and they could not put them down. just like what the forwarding men said, all the cigarette executives back at that time said, boy, good thing cigarettes are a habit people cannot break. and they call it habit, but they knew it was an addiction. i'm going to get to that in a minute. but the point of this, there is a couple things i want to illustrate to you with this graph. the recent sales graph is this stuff is bad for you, people tried to give it up and they could not give it up and went back to smoking. and then they also added filters, and told people we will take it out, told the surgeon general they would take it out, and then after the filter fad went along for a while, they had to come up with a knew idea. the new idea was we are going to give you a low-tar cigarette and lights, healthy cigarettes. and that is how -- that is the doubt that bestowed about whether you can smoke safely. and the other thing that this shows, the other thing that shows, this graph, and you see the delay between consumption and lung cancer, se how the lung cancer goes up and they are just pretty much the same delay that whole time and then the lines cross. you have got the same delay on this side. as consumption goes down, the lung cancer rate goes down. well, the one thing that this shows you is there is a delay between the time that cigarettes start causing problems, you have got use them for a long time before they start causing problems, and then what happens. well, the public health authorities start figuring it out and they start trying to catch up, but you will notice in the documents and that graph is a perfect example of it, the public health authorities, the doctors, epidemiologists, cancer research specialists, their knowledge is also delayed 15 to 20 years. and, so, you see the public health people, they do not know about the lung cancer epidemic until it starts. well, it starts 20 years later, and then as they start learning more about it, they start to understand, oh, well, maybe what the companies are saying about filters being safe, filters taking things out, well, in the 1960s, they were telling people you ought to smoke filters. even if the 50s, they were saying that. they did not find out until the 70s that filters did not work, 20-year delay. now these are companies that are supposed to cooperate. these are companies who pledged, i 1954 in the frank statement, we are going to cooperate with the public health authorities. we are going to cooperate with those whose duty it is to safeguard the public health because we find that our customers' health is the most paramount concern than any other concern in our business, and that was a lie. flat out lie. so they could make money. these are human beings. an argument being made that plaintiff has not proven that what these companies did was reprehensible. what these companies did was run a lie by the american people, pose the public health folks whose duty it was to protect, pose people who were working to find out the truth and people come in here in court and they attack them. dr. burns testified he would never, ever -- that committee, the surgeon general, came out in 1981 and recommended to people if you must smoke, smoke low-tar cigarettes, they would never -- he testified right there, they would never have made that recommendation had they kno what philip morris knew. philip morris did a study on people. mr. kelly said it is only nine people, do not listen to the study, then when he got to the part where the study that he like, he said you can listen to the study. both sides of the mouth. they knew in 1975 that folks that switched from full tar or high tar or regular cigarettes, whatever you want to call them, when they switched to low-tar cigarettes, they smoked more, they smoked more deeply, it was more dangerous for people like ike buchanan to switch to low-tar cigarettes. philip morris knew it and they kept it to themselves. the public health authorities, just like that line on that graph, did not know the truth about that for another 20 to 30 years, and it is set forth right here in the 2010 surgeon general's report. and it is necessary to show this to you because, for two hours and 45 minutes, you were told that the public health authorities knew all there was to be known and nobody relied on anything we did not say. because, you see, this case is not about trying to impose liability on these cigarette companies for merely manufacturing, advertising and selling cigarettes; this case has nothing to do with that. this case is about what they did not say to people. this case is about the information they had that affected human beings, fellow americans, and they kept it to themselves and they congratulated themselves by making all the money that they made by not letting that information out because, like i said, cancer causation and the fact that this was not proven and the fact that nobody could agree, oh, you cannot identify for us what it is that is in cigarette smoke, so we take it out with our filters that we know do not work, that is a sideshow. the real issue for the cigarette companies is do not let anybody find out that they are addictive. do not let anybody -- it is okay, it is just a habit, it is habits. habit is your fault. habit is your fault. addiction is different. addiction is sinister. addiction is a drug. addiction is something that grabs you and you cannot let it go because your brain is addicted. it happened in this country to a couple generations. i'll get to this in a minute, but it happened to people that we love. that is why -that is the reason for the jury instruction about harm to others can be considered in deciding whether to impose punitive damages on these companies. harm to others should be considered under the law. they did not just do it to ike buchanan. they did not just do it to ike buchanan they were clapping each other on the back, congratulating one another about what they did, all the money they made. mr. kelly told you everybody knew. public health authorities knew about the dangers of smoking low-tar cigarettes and knew about compensation, all these words you never heard before he came in here with regard to cigarette smoking. here's what the surgeon general said in 2010. "at the time the adverse effects of smoking were being recognized, the tobacco industry developed cigarettes with low machine measured yields of tar and nicotine and public health authorities encouraged consumers to select them. unfortunately, it took public health researchers and federal authorities many years to discover what the tobacco industry knew much earlier: the health benefits of reductions of tar and nicotine intakes were negligible at best for persons using these products. thus, by the 21st century, it was apparent that five decades of evolving cigarette design had not reduced overall disease risk among smokers and new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts." and they get up and tell you it is all ike buchanan's fault and they put one hundred percent to ike buchanan. they withheld information from public health authorities who, as you know, just like on this lung cancer delay graph, the public health authorities figure it out because the companies are not cooperating with them, because the companies do not share information, public health authorities are having -- you heard dr. cummings talk about it, they have to reverse engineer cigarettes. you think the cigarette company's going to give them proprietary blends, give them all the stuff they learned? of course not. just like in 1963 when philip morris sent a letter to the surgeon general with that big green book, does not have their internal company knowledge and internal company conclusions about what they knew to be true about their products, they sent that book in, withheld information that they knew that would affect other human beings, and they knew people would die and they did not care. because they like money. if that ain't reprehensible, then it does not exist. so philip morris withholds that information. they not only do that, but you saw the letter that mr. kelly showed you, he went into that whole thing about the second page of that letter that philip morris sent to the surgeon general. first page of the letter said we can remove the stuff from -- we can remove the particles with filters when you know that, a year and a half earlier in their own document, said we cannot do that. on the second page of the document, they use the same old message, if you just tell us what is in there that is bad, we can develop methods to take it out. and they already knew, they already knew that they could not do that. yet they market the filters to people as something that healthier and the public health authorities were thinking it must be healthier, so let us recommend it to people because the testing that we have done, with our limited knowledge and the things that the cigarette companies choose to give us, the public health authorities do not know, they do not know what is being withheld from it. folks, this is a story that has only one side and you did not hear another side to this story because one does not exist. they lied about what they knew, not only about the fact that their cigarettes caused disease, lung cancer and stuff, they lied about how addictive, how addictive cigarettes are. but addiction just was not good enough. the fact that you could engineer cigarettes to be addictive the way they do, taking the nicotine out, spraying it back on going down the belt, just the right amount to maintain addiction, but that is not even good enough. they used ammonium hydroxide, they used to experiment with calcium hydroxide to increase the free nicotine in their cigarettes. philip morris today, you saw the website page, what is in marlboro lights. diammonium phosphate. ammonium -- i think ammonium hydroxide, all of that, and dr. cummings explained -- i'm going to put a slide up just to show you what he said. it is been -- maybe folks will not not remember what he said, to get up and do closing argument, but i've got what he said. i'm going to put it up here so you can see for yourself. addiction just was not good enough for these companies. they wanted to sink that hook deep and really wanted to hook you, and that is exactly what they did. and then they want to corns her and ask you for a pass. if you notice, if you notice, in all of these documents we start back in 50s and we go all the way through the 60s, into the 70s, into the 80s, and it is not until 1988 that you start seeing public stuff about nicotine addiction. surgeon general of the united states, whose job it is to safeguard the public health, whose job it is to research all the stuff that they researched, they know surgeon general's office public health service knows a heck of a lot more about cigarettes than your average american, and that is just common sense. they do not know near as much, as you heard from dr. burns and dr. cummings, as these companies know. and that puts them at a disadvantage when you are dealing with companies who tell the public, who tell the public that we are cooperating with the public health officials and, secretly, they are not. secretly, they are keeping all that information to themselves. addiction was the holy grail to these companies. addiction was what they really needec to conceal. all those decades, it was all about cancer causation and whether it is true, it is a sideshow. they needed to keep people's eye off the addiction ball because what happened when surgeon general came out in 1988 and said that cigarettes are addictive just like heroin and cocaine, and the companies went crazy. you saw the press release, you saw -- we have got newspapers articles in evidence, you saw press conferences, and what did they -- they pushed back real hard in 1988. and what happens? what happens on this timeline to cigarette consumption when people start to know the truth? what happens to the timeline? it starts going down because the truth makes a difference to people. if you know that, the reason -- if you are ike buchanan, you have been struggling to give up cigarettes. you know you are smoking a pack and a half a day, two packs in another ten years, three packs in another ten years, and you know this is not good for you and what to put them down and you try to put them do\ and you wonder why it is i cannot just walk away. i served my country, i was able to do everything they asked of me, i could be good to my wife, i can hold a job, i can be responsible, i can raise my children, but i cannot stop doing what i know is going to kill me some day. you just cannot put them down. and what do they say? it is your fault. it is your fault. you choose to do it. folks, talk about choice, two and a half hours. they do everything they can today to take choice away. they do everything. addiction just -- the nicotine in tobacco was not good enough. the court: i cannot hear you, mr. gustafson. mr. gustafson: i'm sorry. i might to get a little water. they have put additives and flavoring in it and increase the addiction. the 2010 surgeon general report talks about that, too. "the speed and amount of nicotine delivered to the brain depends on the amount of nicotine in the product, the alkalinity of the product and the route of administration. nicotine pyrene is a volatile alkaloid in the tobacco plant and its absorption in renal secretions is highly dependent on ph. tobacco products can contain constituents such as ammonia," the very ammonia you heard about phil morris uses in their marlboros and marlboro lights, "such as ammonia to increase the conversion of nicotine to the nonionized or free base state." he wrote down in red ink that little science lesson he did right around 3:00, does not say what the surgeon general's report is saying. this is 2010. it took the surgeon general all these years. "physical design features such as filter tip ventilation also increased the free base fraction of nicotine." filter tip ventilation is put there by the manufacturer. they do not do it by accident. they did not just willy-nilly stick those holes in there. they do it for a reason. they do it because they studied it. they do not share this information with the public health authorities and then they want to bring in some article from the 1970s, that so that -- lost my place there. "nicotine is the key chemical compound that causes and sustains the powerful addicting effect of commercial tobacco products. the powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products are mediated by diverse actions of nicotine at multiple types of nicotinic receptors in the brain." it took the public health authorities a long time to learn that. philip morris has had a smoker psychology program from their own documents since the 1960s their business model in 1977, i have the documern here, their business model in 1977 was predicated on treating their customers and likening their customers to hungry rats in a cage. you have seen this three times now. you are all familiar with pavlov's dog and then operant condition, hungry rats in a cage, put a lever in the cage, and in time, he will be rapidly pushing the lever for food. then what do they tell you. consider the smoker, the smoking is a lever press. effect of smoking is the reward. that effect reinforces the smoking act and he pushes the lever 10 to 60 times per day. "our task is to understand the reinforcing mechanism or process whereby the habit is established and maintained. such is our model." then he tried to explain it all away, but the truth is that, without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, pm would collapse and we would all lose our jobs. nicotine was the golden goose, the goose that laid the golden eggs, the big white elephant in the corner they did not want anybody to know about. that is why the concealment of -- not just the disease aspect of it, like i said, that was the sideshow. nicotine addiction was what they really needed to protect, and as long as folks were focused on proving what it was in cigarette smoke to cause cancer and proving how it is that cigarettes cause cancer, the whole entire chain, these companies were never going to be satisfied and that is what the sideshow was all about, occupying with some other area because people are still smoking and they are still smoking because they are addicted and cannot let that secret get out. and it is not about the definition of addiction, dictionaries talking about habit and addiction. they studied this for decades and they still talk about the definition changing. there has never been a time in this country where you could know the truth and it would be acceptable to lie when your fellow man depended on you to tell the truth. there is never been a time where that has been acceptable. they are trying to suggest to you today that it is. i want to talk about the verdict form real quick since this is what you are going to be doing in just a couple minutes. first thing, was mitchell ivan buchanan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. well, you saw testimony from dr. cummings who, by the way, if dr. cummings was not qualified to give the opinion that cigarettes -- that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, he would not have been able to say it to you in court. the argument that he is not qualified to testify about nicotine addiction is laughable. they brought you nothing on question 1. nothing. dr. burns said he was addicted. dr. cummings said he was addicted. nan buchanan saic he was addicted. eric tournay, who worked with him for 15 or 20 years, said he was addicted. bill maud talked about how he smokes so much he had yellow stains on his fingers. the idea that iodine caused the yellow stains on his fingers for over 20 years, as if he walked around with iodine stains on them, i do not even know -- i cannot waste your time talking about something like that. dr. burns testified that smoking one to three packs a day for over 40 years, did mr. buchanan smoke long enough and in sufficient quantities to develop small cell lung cancer. based on your knowledge, he was smoking a pack to a pack and a half of chesterfields a day. that is correct. there was an argument made he did not smoke enough chesterfields to cause lung cancer, and that he did not smoke justify marlboro lights to cause lung cancer, and that we did not bring you any testimony on whether he smoked enough of thos cigarettes to cause his lung cancer. well, folks, he smoked those cigarettes for 24 years until the earlier to mid 70s around 1974. answer: correct. then he switched to what brand? marlboro. did he smoke marlboro or marlboro lights? answer: marlboro lights. and then he smoked marlboro lights until he quit smoking in 1994. correct. and then if he was smoking one to three packs a day, tell the jury what a pack year is. he described what the pack years are and he had more than 60-year pack-year history. and i asked him so if mr. buchanan was smoking at least 44 years at one to three packs a day, it is certainly more than 60 pack years relative to causation of lung cancer. and then i asked him tell the jury what the relative risk is, and he explained relative risk to you, dose response and relative risk. the more you smoke, the higher your risk goes. he smoked plenty. and what did dr. burns say? i asked him if a patient is a one to three pack-a-day cigarette user for 44 years, is that enough, that he smoked long enough and in sufficient quantities for that smoking to cause small cell lung cancer. they told you in closing argument that we did not have that evidence for you. what did dr. burns say? he was not guessing, was not equivocating, he said, "absolutely. that is a very substantial, high risk level of smoking accumulated over time.' folks, it does not matter if he had smoked 20 different brands and it was two years per brand. we would have all those manufacturers in here saying, well, he only smoked our cigarettes for two years, it was not enough to cause lung cancer. here, you add them all up, it is enough. the fallacy in the argument that they make is that he only smoked ours for 20 years or only smoked ours for 24 years. you smoke the cigarettes for 44 years, we identified what brands they were, and if you do not believe nan buchanan when she set up here and took an oath to tell you the truth that she remembers her husband smoking chesterfield cigarettes from the time she met him until about 1974, and then marlboro light cigarettes from '74 until he quit smoking in 1994, if that is not good enough for a woman who is married to the man an lived with him all that time, bought his cigarettes, watched him smoke those cigarettes, heard him ask for those cigarettes at restaurants and received those cigarettes at restaurants, then i'll just pack up and go home. she has told you what he smoked. and they bring you four photographs over 41 years and they try to tell you that she is not believable. four photographs in 41 years. it was suggested to you that dr. burns did not testify about whether he was addicted to nicotine, whether it caused his death. well, did he permanent changes to his brain; dr. burns described that, and he did. do you have an opinion whether he was addicted did philip morris and liggett cigarettes. yes, he was addicted to them manufactured by both. and i asked him, did each and every one of those cigarettes that he smoked from liggett and philip morris contribute to his addiction, and he said, yes, initiating the addiction when he started or maintaining it as he continued to smoke. then i asked him, and when he switched to philip morris, did each and every philip morris brand contribute to his addiction. yes, it did. and did each and every liggett brand contribute to his development of lung cancer. yes. same thing with philip morris. folks, there is not even a decision for you to make on question number 1. they have brought you nothing. we had all kinds of people coming in here saying he was addicted. the idea that he could just go to the doctor and ask for a drug and get it, get a prescription for it, one that you have to have a prescription for, doctors just do not prescribe medication for people they do not need. when he was chewing nicotine gum, nicorette gum, the very gum that philip morris tried to keep off the market. those documents are in evidence. they threatened their business partner to keep them from making it and marketing it. when it finally got on the market, who is using it? the guy they say who did not want to quit. the guy they say who did not want to quit is getting a prescription for nicorette gum from a doctor and they said he is not addicted. no doctor, we do not have the records. well, you know there is only 11 pages of medical records left. the fact that he chewed nicorette gum when it required a prescription, the fact that he had a nicotine patch that required a prescription shows you inference you can draw fron the evidence that he had been diagnosed with nicotine addiction by a physician or else he would not have had the nicotine addiction cessation therapy aids. did he have lung cancer. well, i do not know how much time i need to spend on this, but dr. mabry testified he was certain of the primary site of the cancer, and if he was uncertain of where it originated, how would you have signed the death certificate. i would have signed it cancer of uncertain primary site, which occasionally it is necessary to do. and then did mr. buchanan die from oat cell cancer that started in his lungs. yes, sir. what was the cause? i believe the cause was like likely the cigarette smoking or tobacco exposure and then the part they say we did not produce any evidence on, all right, and let me ask you this, in 40 years of practice, seeing thousands of cancer patients, have you ever encountered even one patient that oat cell lung cancer who was not a smoker. no. they brought you nothing. they crossed him for three hours. yes, he had lung cancer. and then was his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his lung cancer. we have got a couple things for you here. dr. burns said, i asked him, based on education, training and experience in the field of medicine, pulmonology and smoking and health, do you have opinion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, what the cause of his death was. yes, and what is it, nobody put the words in his mouth, his cause of death was small cell lung cancer caused by his addiction to cigarette smoke based on repetitive exposure to cancer-causing substances over his smoking history. i asked him, dr. cummings, the one they said was not qualified to say it, he was permitted to testify because he is treated so many people and he teaches folks about diagnosing and treating nicotine addiction, do you have an opinion as to whether or not, included among those chemicals to which he exposed, there were chemicals that can cause lung cancer. yeah, there are 60 known or subject carcinogens that are in every puff of a cigarette. some of them are highly potent, and he was exposed to those repeatedly with his nicotine addiction that led to his cancer. they brought you nothing on the question number 3. it is unrebutted, unrebutted, uncontroverted testimony in evidence in this case. we get to question number 4, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan. i just went through that with you with dr. burns' testimony. it is taken right from this trial. absolutely, smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris was a legal cause of his death. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by liggett a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan. of course it was. it is unrebutted, unrebutted, uncontroverted testimony in this case that it was. and then was philip morris's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan, and we have the same question on number 7. and this is back to what i talked to you about before, about the argument that you heard today, was somehow we made some bi concession that mr. buchanan knew that cigarette smoking was bad for him. that is never been our position in this case and it is never been stated by anybody he did not know. he may not have known in 1950, but, eventually, he knew because he is trying to quit in the late 50s, trying to quit through the 60s. he wanted to quit. who spends five -- he tried to quit in five decades, 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s. he tried. remember the methods he tried? he went to goofy group meetings where they dumping ashes on their head. he used nicorette gum. he used the nicotine patch. he went to hypnosis. he went to american cancer society group therapy. he tried cold turkey. he switched to lights. that is a quit method in itself. mrs. buchanan talked about how he would buy cigarettes a pack at a time. that is what smokers do when they are trying to quit. you are trying to quit, you do not buy it by the carton, you buy it by the pack. that is just common sense ike buchanan wanted to quit and tried to quit and knew it was bad for him and tried every method that was available at the time it was available. if he was alive today, there would be methods he would be trying now if he had not already quit because there is methods out now that were not available to ike buchanan back in those days. and as you heard from the stand, it is harder for some folks than it is for others to quit. everybody's brain is a little different. everybody reacts to things a little bit differently. one person can give it up easy, others find it extremely difficult, and folks are all along the axis in between. ike buchanan tried over and over and over and over again to quit smoking. he used every method available at the time it was available. the idea that he chose -- the idea that he chose to keep doing this in the face of trying to quit as many times as he did flies in the face of reason and common sense and the evidence in thi case. because what these defendants did every step of the way, plotting and scheming and researching and testing and writing about how it is that you take choice away. additives, ammonia, calcium hydroxide, all that stuff. so was philip morris's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan. the argument was made to you on what was it that happened in 1994 that was different. what was it that we did not tell him that he relied on that, you know, what have they identified for you. i told you when i started ike buchanan passed away a long time and he cannot speak for himself here. so kind of posing those kind of questions to you, you know, you judge the fairness of that. you judge the fairness of that in a court of law, but i'll say this: the cigarette companies were not just fooling folks like ike buchanan. they were fooling public health officials whose job it was to keep up with this stuff. if they were fooling the public health officials, you know, they were fooling ike buchanan. the idea -- the idea that you can just keep information to yourself, after you have pledged to cooperate with the people whose job it is to safeguard the public health, is simply unacceptable. their concealment or omission of material information about the health effects, that is not our case, or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, was a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan. yes, it was and yes, it was for liggett because they were all in it together, which takes you to question number 8. was philip morris and liggett and other's agreements to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature. see, this case is not just about concealing the health effects of cigarettes. that is easy for them to talk about because the surgeon general was big news. and mr. norton mentioned this in the first part. i have to raise it again because of the arguments that were made by the defense. but it was big news in 1964. you heard dr. cummings say when he was asked a question b; the jury in this case, when was it that the surgeon general came out and actually said that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. well, it was 1957. it was 1957 when the surgeon general, ] think it was leroy burney was his name, i think. i get them mixed up, but it was 1957 when the surgeon general said that. now, ike buchanan started trying to quit in 1959 or so, according to nan, that is her recollection, and 1957 is when the surgeon general said it. if everybody knew because the surgeon general already said it, why was it such big news seven years later in 1964? why was it big news? because as mr. norton mentioned, you know, you do not read articles about, oh, we just discovered that gravity makes objects fall to the ground or the world is not flat, everybody pay attention. you know, we know all those things to be true, so they do not make the newspaper, only news gets in the newspaper. why was the 1964 surgeon general report, why was it such big news when the surgeon general already said it seven years before? cigarettes were in the fabric of our society. we got shirt pockets for putting cigarettes in them, even now in 2012. we made ashtrays for our smoking fathers when we were in seventh grade wood shop. we brought ashtrays hom< to our fathers that we loved so they could smoke and put their butts out in ashtrays. this case is not, when it comes to punitive damages, it is not just about ike buchanan. the law tells you you are to consider everything all the people this affected. it ain't just ike -mr. kelly: counsel, i'm having a hard time hearing you. the court: you can stay within the parameters where the court had said, but you have got to speak up. mr. gustafson: i'm staying on the green. mr. kelly: thank you, your honor. mr. gustafson: folks, these companies, these companies did the very thing that meant the most to them, the nicotine addiction. that is what the concealment is. it ain't about lung cancer, but still they made it a controversy, a controversy that did not exist except to keep everybody's eye off the ball and it was not until 1988 the surgeon general said, 1988. which you see, you see materials from these companies about addiction. mr. kelly told you they did not know it was addictive. august 26. 1959. philip morris was not just doing psychological research in the 70s, they were doing it clear back to the 50s. and what did they say? why do people smoke, and what is the reason they give in their very own document that they say did not know about back then? addiction. that is why people smoke, according to philip morris. they were not -- they did not have a psychological program, as mr. kelly suggested to you in his closing argument. their smoker psychology program was not to make smoking a bett experience for smokers. their smokers psychology program was to keep them smoking. it was their business model to keep them doing the -- to keep them like those rats in the cage hitting that lever. that is what their smoker psychology program was about. i implore you please, to please read those documents. mr. kelly said we did not tell you the whole story. please, they are in evidence, look at them. look at them. because you will answer yes on the punitive damages questions when you read those. and in terms of not knowing whether it is addictive or not, and taking the position that this case is not about concealing nicotine addiction, this is council for tobacco research. they changed the tirc name in 1964 after the surgeon general's report, in the ctr, they are talking about work that is being done by a ctr scientist. donald ford, a new staff member, makes the following quotes. "opiates in nicotine may be similar in action. we accept the fact that nicotine is habituating. there is a relationship between nicotine and the opiates." now, when the surgeon general c. everett koop had that beard, when he came out in 1988 sai it was addictive just like heroin and cocaine, 1988, this is 1977, that is 11 years later. philip morris knows. it is ctr, that is the whole group, all the companies are paying for the ctr. that is their prime. that is their front. 1977, what do they say? "it is my strong feeling that, with the progress that has been claimed, we are in the process of digging our own grave." because, you see, all that stuff about lung cancer, that sideshow i talked about, the sideshow did not keep people from buying cigarettes. knowledge is powerful, truth is powerful, and when you see here that they are in the process of digging their own grave because they are doing studies that talk about how opiates in nicotine may be similar in action, when you tell someone it is just your choice to smoke, it is just your behavior that is causing you to keep smoking, it is just your fault. well, when you change it, when you tell someone after they have been smoking for 30 years the reason you have not been able to put them down is because you are addicted to highly addictive drug, that knowledge can change people. changed ike buchanan, the evidence shows, because the way he approached smoking after that information came out is he was a little more methodical about it. there is no dispute the evidence about this. he tried the nicotine gum, tried the nicotine patch, and then he went to that booklet. ike is a cerebral guy. ike is a smart guy. mr. buchanan gave it a lot of thought and he went about it in a way that worked for him, but it did not have anything to do removing triggers from his life because you saw in the medical record from dr. mabry he was drinking several beers a day. if drinking beer was a trigger for him smoking, and it is his fault that he continued to drink like mr. kelly suggested to you in closing argument, well, he is still drinking beer when he is diagnosed with lung cancer. it was not a trigger for him, anymore than having a cup of coffee in the morning was a trigger for him. he did not give up coffee, either. he had a nicotine addiction. it was not a trigger addiction, he had a nicotine addiction. last thing that the ctr document from 1977 said, and i think it ties the knot in the idea that -the court: what happens is the equipmen turns off after a period of time because it overheats. mr. gustafson: i'll read it to them, it is quicker. this document is in evidence. it is pt153, it is the first page of the document. so the ctr is concerned about the work being done by this research scientist, suggesting nicotine is just like opiates, heroin, cocaine, that kind of stuff. and then he says, "i strongly urge that the whole relationship of our company to ctr be carefully reviewed. i am very much afraid that the direction of the work being taken bv ctr is totally detrimental to our position and undermines the public posture we have taken to outsiders." that is philip morris. that is the defendant who tells you everybody knew and noth we withheld made a difference. something i want to go through with you when we get to number 8, was philip morris's and liggett's and others agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of the death of mitchell ivan buchanan. well, the letter i just read is philip morris to the ctr, which is their -- that is the organization they all agreed and paid into, including liggett. they are all in it together. they are all in doing this together to conceal this information from fellow human beings and it was their agreement to conceal or omit that material information about nicotine addiction that they were worried that the public was going to find out about. the only acceptable question under the evidence, the only acceptable way to answer question 8, is to check yes because when you think about it, the whole idea of their agreement to conceal this information and what they said about how successful they had been, and they were so successful, the surgeon general did figure it out until 1988 did they not do a report on it. all of these questions, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 and the addiction questions in the very beginning, they all have the same instruction in the law about how addiction does not have to be the only cause. it can act in combination with the act of another. the concealment -- or a defect in the product need not be the only cause. the defect may be a legal cause of cancer and death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause if the defect in the product contributes substantially to producing such cancer and death. the same as the addiction instruction. they all connect together. the law recognizes that life is complex and the world is a complex place and there is usually not just one cause for something to happen. usually it is a bunch of things that kind of come together and make events happen when you have a situation like this. yes, ike's failure to try harder to quit, to be more persistent in trying to quit, that he owns that._ ike buchanan owns that, and nan buchanan has told you from the get-go, from the time this lawsuit started, that was part of it, but it was not the only thing. it is not a hundred percent like mr. kelly said. and the law that you are going to get illustrates how all these things fit together because every one of these instructions instructs you, 8, instruction 13, 15, 17 and 20. every single one of them say whether it is an addiction or a defect or negligence or fraudulent concealment or a conspiracy to conceal, it is all the same. they all can act -- they may be a legal cause of his cancer and death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause. all these things, the law recognizes, fit together like a puzzle. and it is not special for this case. this is just basic black letter law the juries get in cases all the time. all these things fit together. so that is why we ask you, it is not just one thing or another that caused this, all these things worked together. so we would ask you, when you get that law, follow the judge's instructions to you because it will guide you, it will lead you to justice. it is going to lead you to these answers, given the evidence in the case, apply the law to that evidence, you are going to get these answers. then, we get to question number 9. and mr. norton mentioned to you that we recommend twenty percent on mr. buchanan. i'm going to say this: this decision is yours and yours alone. it is a recommendation. given what mr. buchanan failed to do, what he failed to do was quit smoking sooner. maybe he did not try hard enough. maybe he did not try long enough. maybe he did not go about it the right way. he owns that. mrs. buchanan owns that fault, but what he did and whai these companies did is a bit different, and percentages ought to recognize that. that is my suggestion to you. this is going to be your case, and i bet if mr. buchanan was here, he would tell his lawyer to sit down, quit talking and give the jury the case because, you know, it is hard for us to sit down. it is hard. so i want to just cover a couple more things with you. mr. norton went through the amount of damages sustained by mrs. buchanan. he made a recommendation to you do not go past the 10 million, whatever. i do not know what you are going to do. the amount should be respectful of her loss. the amount that you put in question number 10 should be respectful of mrs. buchanan's loss, but whatever you do, do not award more than $10 million. we ask you that. we get to number 11 and number 12. and, you know, i showed you the philip morris documen about the rats in the cage and showed you the philip morris letter to the council for tobacco research talking about how we are digging our own grave if you publicize this research about nicotine being like opiates, but liggett says they are different, that they took a different path. liggett's path was not any different from the other companies except that they hired the a.d. little company to do their scientific research instead of throwing in with the rest of them at the plaza hotel in 1953. liggett went their own path. but what was the result of them taking a different path? well, they did a bunch of mouse painting, came up with the same results, and they had that memo, but they did not share that memo with the 1961 where the stuff in cigarettes is cancer causing and poisonous. they gave the surgeon general a list of carcinogens. they did not give the surgeon general their conclusions. look at all that stuff that is put into evidence. they did not tell the surgeon general our cigarettes cause cancer. there is a reason, there is a reason that liggett joined the ctr right after the surgeon general's report came out in 1964. when the surgeon general said in 1964, again, that it caused lung cancer, liggett joined the ctr and that is what is the evidence in this case. that is when they joined the ctr. why did they do that? because they were worried at that point. now, they had not told the surgeon general about their conclusions about cigarettes causing lung cancer when they submitted that stuff, just like philip morris did not. they might have taken a different path and done it on their own research, but they withheld the conclusions. they withheld what they knew. and the only other way that liggett was any different was, you know, they 'fessed up in 1996 and philip morris and the rest of them 'fessed up in '99 or 2000 that say all of our_ cigarettes cause disease and our cigarettes are addictive. they finally did it then. liggett beat them by three our four years. that is the difference. and i have to say this: if everybody knew if the concealment of these companies and their agreement to conceal this information did not work, why is it that, when i read the testimony of bennett lebow, who bought liggett in the 1990s, why was it a surprise to him when he bought the company to find out that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive? why was that if the concealment did not work, how is the guy who bought the company, i imagine mr. lebow is a very intelligent man, he did not know. he did not know when he bought the company, but they tell you that mr. buchanan knew. everybody knew but the little old tobacco companies. mr. shipe, when you are considering whether liggett is any different, consider the deposition of steven shipe taken december 22, 2011, raleigh, north carolina. "does liggett agree today, today, that liggett has a responsibility to always tell the truth about the products it manufactures? answer: i think liggett has a responsibility to be a responsible company. question: does that include telling the truth about its products? liggett will take the course of action, that is correct." okay. well, let us tie a knot in that. "does liggett agree it would be inappropriate for it to conceal information regarding the health risks of using its products? liggett does not have a position on that." the opening statement for liggett said not only did liggett act responsibly then, it is responsible today. that is liggett. we have a responsibility to be responsible, we will take the course of action that is correct, but we do not have a position on whether it would be inappropriate for us to conceal information regarding the health risks of using our products. think about that when you are faced with question 12 regarding liggett. the answers here should be yes. and i'll say one more thing about answering question number 10. and as i said, you know, the jury instruction in this case tells us that there is no exact standard for measuring a loss like this. there is not. we do not value the loss of our loved ones like gas from filling station. you all are going to need to put your minds together and think about what it means to have a loss like nan buchanan has had. because it is been suggested to you here that she did not really help ike, that she did not consider it her business when he was trying to quit, and she told you, you heard her, she put her arms around him and told him that she loved him every time he failed, and that is what folks who love each other do. she suffered a great loss, and i would only ask that if you see in your hearts that the law that you are going to be given guides you to a verdict for nan buchanan in this case, that what you put in line number 10 is respectful of her loss. follow the instructions, do what is right, we need you to do that. thank you. mr. norton: able counsel for the defendants, grandpa says good morning, jury. i did not call -- i did not say good morning to each one of you individually because -- and i called you the jury, good morning, jury, and i did that for a reason, because today and whenever you do this, you will speak with one voice, a unanimous voice upon your verdict. on behalf of nan buchanan, and really on behalf of the process, we thank you for your time, your effort, your patience. we have watched you work hard and it is what good juries do, and everyone thanks you for that. we started, i'm reminded, four weeks ago, it may seem like four months ago to you, but you are not here by accident, jury. it has been said that many are called but few are chosen, and you saw that process. you are here because both parties, all parties, all three parties, expect you to do justice. and now is the time, today's the day for justice. it is not just a word that we throw around a courtroom, it means something, and it means that it is the cornerstone of this country's democracy. i talked to you about that, and you all told us in voir dire how you felt about the system. justice will be done here at the end of this case if you utilize the evidence, what you know from the witness stand and the documents. justice will be done if you recognize nan buchanan's loss, and you have seen and heard how real that loss is. justice will be done if you also right a wrong. you have been given the power. and it is to you, and you alone, the power has been given to right the wrong. and we will ask you to do that, to send a message to_ corporations who do or might do what was done in this case. the evidence is, and you now know the evidence, that the conduct is beyond all bounds of human decency. and we will ask you, in doing justice, to send that message, that that kind of conduct that you have seen, it is not going to be tolerated in this country, it is not going to be tolerated in this city, and that the powerful and the rich cannot run the roughshod over the people. so we will ask you to check the box on your verdict form that indicates that it is appropriate to consider punitive damages against philip morris and against liggett. and i will tell you why in the evidence. we hope the evidence has been interesting to you and hope you learned some things about addiction and nicotine; why and how millions got addicted. when you came into the courtroom, did you know about nicotine in the cigarettes, that it actually caused teenage brains, that is -- the evidence is that is when most folks started smoking. certainly back when mr. buchanan start smoking. that -- did you know that the brain actually changed, it grew nico receptors, it actually changes the physiologic characteristic of a person's brain? did you know that when you cami in here? did you get an education on the dirty little secrets of the tobacco industry, their confidential documents, what they knew, and how and why they did the truth for 50 years, that agreement to conceal? we know what they did and we -- you know, the information that we shared with you -- was a ton more. think about this. there was a ton more information that we -- and we scratched the surface, okay? we had the documents, they had the documents. there were 16 million documents turned over. and as a matter of fact, our expert, dr. cummings, was hired to go through them. knows more about those documents than any man alive. well, there was a ton more information we can share with you that ike buchanan knew in 1947 when he was 17 years old. that is 19 years of smoking before the very first warning. he was already heavily addicted to nicotine. 19 years. well, the documents tell you what this case is all about. it is about nicotine and it is about -- you can call it -- i do not care what you call it. you can call it addiction, you can call it a habit, you can call it dependence, but it is something that drives the smoker, it is nicotine to smoke the cigarettes. when you smoke the cigarettes, you are going to get cancer, the majority, vast majority, or other diseases, copd, heart disease, what have you. never forget -- you know, the defense in this case is, oh, everyone knew, everybody, ike knew, ike knew. we will tell you and i want to make it very clear to you what we believe ike knew. never forget, it was 1997 before liggett first came clean. and they admitted -- think about this, 1997 is the first time that liggett admits what they are telling you now everybody knew. if everybody knew all this stuff, why did it take until 1997 to come clean? philip morris did not come clean until 2000 on their website. think about that. if everybody knew, why did it take that long for them to come clean? all right. let me please see 01771. this is 1994. you remember this clip? this is the tobacco executives and they are in front of congress, '94. (video plays.) "let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i've heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. johnston? congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxications -we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we would just like to have this for the record. i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. i believe nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive." (video stops.)_ 1994. this is a startling bunch of testimony in front of congress. it is not startling for the unmitigated gall to come in there and lie to congress about what they do, but what is startling is that they do it in 1994. they can still try to tell congress and the world it is not addictive. well, if people -- everybody knew. in 1994, that is the year ike buchanan quit smoking. they are still in front of congress saying it is not addictive. and one of them tried to hide behind the definition of addiction, that is why i said you can call it whatever you want. we know what their documents say, they said they were selling, what, they were selling nicotine. they know what they were doing. philip morris and liggett would have you believe that ike buchanan knew in 1947, 1957, 1967, 1977, as much as you all knew when you walked into this courtroom. it does not make sense. there is a lot more information about the health risks of smoking out there now. think about the time frame. does the average person walking around there today know what you all have learned in this case? i suggest to you no. does the average addicted smoker today know what he is up against? that his brain has been changed, his or her brains have been changed? do they really know that? no all right. let us be clear, ike buchanan would not have tried so hard to quit and struggled so much to quit if he did not think it was bad for him. we are not saying that to you, do not be misled by that. obviously, he was trying to quit. if he is trying to quit, he knows that something is not right there, but what he did not know was what he was up against. what millions of folks did not know and what they spent millions of dollars to hide, was nicotine, and you will see in their documents. it is just they were selling a -- they said it and it is there. if you want clear and convincing evidence on why we need a punitive damage award in this case, there is nothing more clear and convincing than their own documents. they cannot run and they cannot hide from it. they came out. we have got them. all right. if everybody knew, follow the logic here, that is the defense, oh, he knew everything -mr. kelly: objection, your honor. can we approach? the court: you may. (the following proceedings were held sidebar:) mr. kelly: that is the second time counsel said it. i did not object the first time, but the second time he is saying that the defense in the case is that mr. buchanan knew and was aware of the risks of smoking. that is not a defense in the case. that is our response to the plaintiff's proof on their burden of proof. i request an instruction, your honor, and we can figure out how to formulate it, but we need to tell the jury that the defendants have no burden to prove what mr. buchanan was or was no aware of. that is the plaintiffs burden of proof. mr. norton: i am allowed, in closing argument, to discuss what the defense has been in this case. i did not say it is their burden of proof. that would be far different and it would not be correct. this is closing argument and it is well within the bounds. the court: okay. i'm going to overrule the objection. (the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. norton: follow the logic. if everybody knew, why did they work so hard at hiding the truth? why did they gloat over how great their plan worked? by the way, is that reprehensible conduct? you betcha it is. are you going to stand for it? we do not believe that you should. and when we started, we outlined the issues for you and the issues are what we think the evidence will be in the case. we have the burden of proof in this case and we believe we have met it, but we will talk about that. and there were some issues discussed with you. we believe the issues -- and you are going to see this from the verdict form, and the verdict form is in the form of questions. you all are going to take a look at it, but i'm going to -- i think i'm going to do this. the issues are going to come to you by way of verdict form and you are going to have to answer these questions, okay? the first is was mitchell ivan buchanan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and then you get instructions. you have to answer the question did he have lung cancer, we will talk about that. and then was his addiction -- i'm missing 3 -- i'm sorry. was his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. obviously, when you become addicted to nicotine, you smoke more and you keep smoking and you get lung cancer, death. and then you go on and answer some questions. if you find the answers to the first three questions, then you will be bound by the engle findings, and we talked about that in jury selection. the engle findings are going to help you answer some of the questions on the verdict form. and if i could briefly have 014, baron? i'm throwing baron some curve balls here. i'm going out of order. these are the engle findings. if you find class membership, you just saw that the judge gavi you these instructions, and we are going to come back to them, but they are what they are. that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, and so on and so forth. we will come back to the engle findings in a minute. when i discuss the evidence with you and the reprehensibility of some of the conduct that occurred in this case, and the defenses that were outlined, this is -- i mean no disrespect to anyone, this is about what the companies did. the defenses that were outlined, what you were told the case was about are as follows: you were told in opening that mr. buchanan was not addicted, it was just these triggers that kept him smoking and he should get rid of his triggers and everything would be fine because he had a free choice. well, he did not have a free choice. never a word about what nicotine has to do with it. what do their documents say about nicotine? they knew, they knew what nicotine did but we did not hear anything much about nicotine in opening. let me go to 2385, if i could, please. and this is what you were told in opening, philip morris's opening. with respect to cigarette smoking, it meant cigarette smoking, tobacco use, generally, can be very hard to quit and be very hard to quit for some people. it is a characteristic of the tobacco it is not a characteristic of tobacco that we are dealing with, it is nicotine and nicotine addiction. that is what this case is about. and to suggest to you, and you heard dr. cummings say, we cannot get -- oh, nicotine is just natural, it is in the product. yeah, well, they -there is a document, and you have seen it, where they looked at if they denicotinize, take the nicotine out of cigarettes, what happens? surprise, nobody smokes them. obviously, it does not sell. they are selling nicotine and they are selling addiction and they are selling something else, the byproduct of that. so there was also a subtle suggestion, and i do not know if it is subtle or not, they are trying to tell you that mrs. buchanan, who lived with ike buchanan for 42 years, does not know what brands he smoked. now, liggett did not put on any evidence that mr. buchanan did not smoked chesterfield. we know he smoked chesterfields. when mrs. buchar met him, he was smoking chesterfields. that is what he had in his pocket, that was his pack. and she put cartons of chesterfields in the weekly budget until what time? until 1974 when the switch was made. liggett did not contest that in this case, so obviously we know he smoked chesterfields for about 20 years. and we know why he switched. interestingly, he switched for exactly -- we will talk about this in a minute, but for exactly the reasons the companies wanted him to switch. what was it? filters. we will look at what those filter documents in a minute because filters were baloney. they were not true, and they knew it. all right. in an effort to convince you that mrs. buchanan does not recollect or she does not have it right about marlboro regulars and marlboro lights, they told you that she did not have a specific recollection. let me have 2400, please, baron. all right. this is what you were told in opening statement. it was supposed to be a defense in the case, an issue. then she was asked by philip morris lawyers about the marlboro brand, not the marlboro lights, but the marlboro brand. she testified that that is a brand that he may have smoked. she had no specific recollection. do you remember her testimony about it? do you remember -- i think we have that. let us go to r20. this was in response to a question by me, a series of questions. "you told us there was a switch from chesterfields to marlboro lights. yes. at that time, did your husband tell you why? yeah, he said it had a good filter and he felt it was healthier cigarette for him to smoke." we will talk about that in the context of this filter stuff, but -"all right, ma'am, thank you. in the time frame between smoking chesterfields and going to marlboro lights, did he smoke some marlboro regular cigarettes? he did. he did. not an awful lot, but it was kind of a transition, sort of from the chesterfields to the lights. and then from '74, when he made the switch, until '94, what was his primary brand? marlboro lights." and she was cross examined -- r21 -- about this. this was by counsel for philip morris. "all right. these are questions of the philip morris brands that you identified among all of the brands that you have listed. for marlboro regulars, do you remember that he tried them, but he never smoked them exclusively; do you recall that? i recall that, when he made the switch from chesterfields to marlboro lights. he smokec marlboros for a brief period of time, kind of a transition from the chesterfields to the marlboro lights." you were told in opening that she did not have any specific recollection of that. those are -- that was 400, 500 pages of deposition testimony of ms. buchanan, you know, the boxes that you have seen here. everybody knows what witnesses say. it is not a secret. and, so, she did testify to marlboros, but you were told she was not because they are trying to make you think she is somehow confused after all this time. so she testified to it. her son mick testified to it. it was red box and it was a marlboro. he remembered seeing some marlboros ike switched to marlboro lights because he thought, so he thought, it had a good filter and it was a healthier cigarette it was not a healthier cigarette and we know why, but we will talk about that. all right. he smoked marlboro lights for 20 years. mrs. buchanan, on occasion, bought the packs of marlboro lights. she remembered, and told you, that i remember the waiter went out and -- out at julie's out there in i-10, julie's restaurant, she was there and the waiter brought him a pack of marlboro lights. it is what he smoked. bill maud, the neighbor, he described the pack, it was white and gold. marlboro lights. and that is the case on -- they are trying to convince you that somehow she is confused about marlboros and marlboro lights as his primary brand, with the man that she lived with for 42 years. all right. this suggestion to you, just like the other suggested defenses of he is not addicted, he did not smoke them. this is the brand issue. they also -- and i'll touch on this with you in a minute -- they questioned whether the documents were really the words of their company, and we will talk about that. and then they told you he did not have lung cancer, do you remember that? because if you -- you have to check on the verdict form, did he have lung cancer. if you say he did not, we lose this case. and we know he had lung cancer. we will talk about that. these are the suggested defenses in opening statement. they are gone. they are all -- not one of those defenses is valid. as a matter of fact, there is contrary, overwhelming and unrebutted testimony about these defenses. so assert yourself in the jury room, say why are we told that was the issue, i.e. defense, and now it is gone? i told you they suggested or called into question whether or not the secret documents with all that reprehensible details of their conduct are really statements or opinions of the company. may i have 2406? this is what you were told in opening statement by counsel for philip morris. "i want to note that the evidence that you are going to see from the documents are sometimes from other companies." yeah, they are from the tirc, the tobacco institute, the ctr, the companies they all put together to keep their little dirty secret quiet, dirty secrets quiet._ all right. "sometimes from philip morris they contain, as reflected in the evidence and the documents you will see, statements of opinions, assumptions," et cetera, et cetera. "and whether those opinions are held by the companies is a separate subject for the evidence." the suggestion to you is there is some stuff in there that is really not ours. well, let us look at some of that. you know they are theirs because we know what they said; their documents are out. let me go to 3681, please. this is wakeham, a senior scientist to the entire research. okay. now, what is important here is this is 1961, and wakeham is identifying to the research -- the r&d folks what a carcinoge is and -- that is 1961, do not forget that. was there another page on that? there you go. all right. he is got a list of compounds in cigarette smoke and they are identified as carcinogens. there is a whole bunch of them. '61, they are reporting, internally, here's what is in our smoke and this is a lot -- there is a lot of carcinogens in our smoke. all right. let us go to 1963. now, this is only one and a half years later -- oh, i'm sorry. the carcinogens, they -- this is what he reports, wakeham, the senior scientist. carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. it is everywhere. and guess what, here comes the filter. here comes the start of the filter issues. actually, it started before this. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. that is a fancy way of saying we know already we cannot take out the carcinogens, the particulates. we know that. we cannot filter it. keep that in mind. '61, wakeham's reporting internally, we got carcinogens out the ying-yang in our smoke and we cannot get it out with filters. that is one and a half years between the '61 to this next document. this is philip morris and this is to surgeon general, right before the '64 surgeon general's report. all right. what are they saying now? they are talking about what they hav< found. and none of the chemical substances listed in their chemical constituents in tobacco and smoke, none of them, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in the amounts reported in smoke. one and a half years after they report internally that we got all this stuff, all these carcinogens in our cigarettes, we are going to tell the surgeon general something different, are not we? then what are we going to say? we have told ourselves, internally in '61, we cannot filter it out, cannot do it. oh, what do we tell the surgeon general? it is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by use o filters. that is not true. it was not true then and it is not true now. and you are going to find out it is the folks like ike buchanan who switched to filters trying to -- cannot get off of these things. i tried cold turkey in the 50s, i cannot get off of them, i'm going to switch to a healthier cigarette. it was the big lie. the big lie to keep people -- give them a rationale to keep smoking. all right. 2407. this is what you were told in opening about what i just showed you. and you are going to see -- he says -- philip morris's counsel says you will see more than just the excerpts you were shown as an example. you were shown a document i '63 that the philip morris sent to the surgeon general's committee as part of their investigation. they sent it to the surgeon general, the information concerning chemicals in cigarette smoke that it was aware of. surgeon general, in their report, thanked philip morris for that information as a reference to filters in that correspondence from philip morris. you were asked in opening statement to give them a pat on the back for how honest they were with the surgeon general, but we know they were not. we know they were not honest with the surgeon general. they spent billions of dollars. they would even call press conferences the day before the surgeon general's report came out to pooh pooh it, say it was baloney, and they knew it was not. it was a very well orchestrated campaign, and we will look at it a little bit later, but -and then the last defense you were told about -- and i do not know whether this is still a defense, it is up to them -- but the last issue, and you were told this, and i want to be crystal clear about this, you were told or you -- it is been suggested to you, just like these other defenses, oh, he was not addicted, it was just a free choice and all those triggers caused him to smoke, nothing to do with the nicotine, and, you know, these documents may not speak for us, and, you know, we are not sure if he smoked marlboro lights and marlboros. well, last issue, and this has never been an issue in this case, and they knew it, and that was -- and let us go to 2413. this is opening statement. you are being told, okay, here's our defense, folks. last topic i'm going to discuss with you is the -- this is philip morris's opening statement -- is the medical issue in this case and the question of whether mr. buchanan's cancer began in his lungs. there is that word "whether" again. they are suggesting to you in opening it really did not, and i'm going to review it with you in the context of where you -- because you have got to answer that question on the verdict form. and i want to say one word to you right now, one witness, who is it? dr. mabry. think about dr. mabry. we will talk about dr. mabry. where is their witness to tell you that it is not lung cancer? we will talk about that. all right. the question 1 is was mitchell ivan buchanan addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine. you have -- that is the first question on the verdict form. let us go to demonstrative 12, please. and dr. cummings talked to you about this. this is -- hopefully you all learned something and maybe you enjoyed some of the case, maybe not, bu at any rate, this shows what happens. and it was only when cigarette smoke -- you remember the history lesson we got about cigarette smoke? that old burley smoke, you could not inhale it. and it is only the inhalation that allows the transfer of the nicotine, boom, hits that brain. what does the brain do? it goes thank you, i like that, i'm going to -- i need more of that. let me get some more buckets up here to fill it up with nicotine, nico receptors. 19 years before the first warning, ike buchanan is approximately 17 because he knows -we know he was a regular smoker at the time nan met him when he was 20, he would been smoking for a while. so, 19 years before the first warning, he smoked and he is smoking regnlarlv all of the time in this case, what the evidence is, that they were hiding the truth from the public about their drug nicotine, what were they doing? what were they doing? why do not you hear about nicotine and addiction? nicotine addiction. well, what were they doing? you know what they were doing; they were putting additives in the cigarettes. and what did they put -- dr. cummings came in -- and this is marlboro lights, by the way, folks. they put ammonia hydrochloride in their cigarettes and they put calcium hydroxide in their cigarettes. and why did they do that? because what did it do, it made the cigarette smoke easier to take deep into your lungs where that transfer chain takes place, blood barrier into your brain to fill up those nico receptors, to keep you smoking and to keep an addicted smoker smoking. and he will be exposed to those carcinogens, there is no question about it, and we know what happens. it is not just ike buchanan, millions of folks. all right. the purpose of that is to get more free nicotine in it. when you alter the ph of the smoke, it is called ph manipulation, and liggett was aware of it and pm was aware of it, it makes it easier to inhale, but it also does another neat thing, it gives you more free nicotine. all right. let me go to 66037. and this is the liggett scientist talking about it. ca(oh)2 is calcium hydroxide, okay? and look what we can -- cigarettes will be made in a factory to give an equivalent 5, 10, thirty percent free nicotine in the smoke by the adjustment of the ph. and guess what free nicotine is? it is different than nicotine that you measure, that you have to report. so it allowed -- let me go to the -- there is another part of this i think we want to see. yeah, there it is. if the ph could be adjusted upwards slightly, the ratio of nicotine free base to acid salt could be increased, giving a better absorption of the nicotine and, therefore, a more satisfying smoke -- let us reword that in our minds to a more addictive smoke -- with a lower nicotine dose. the beneficial effects of this goal are obvious. what are they? to addict people to nicotine because this free nicotine, you can give a lower nicotine dose, you can report i'm only putting .9 milligrams of nicotine in this particular cigarette, but i've altered it with additives, i've put some ammonia in there, i put some calcium hydroxide. and even though it was only .9, which looks like a low dose of nicotine to the world, free nicotine goes up thirty percent. the effects of this goal are obvious. yeah, it is obvious, all right. it is we are going to be able to addict people to nicotine better with these cigarettes while reporting low nicotine. what a neat thing to do, to get your scientists to work on. think about it. are you going to tolerate that in this country? would the public like to have known that? would ike buchanan, intelligent man, like to have known that? did the public have a right to know this, that they are altering the ph to get their obvious goal to addict more americans? i think the answer to that is yes, and you can tell them that in your verdict. i forgot, i'm sorry, this is from 66003. dr. cummings testified about his and he told you about what i just said. this is from philip morris's website and there is your diammonium phosphate and ammonium hydroxide. philip morris knew, they all knew it they were doing it. and they are doing it for that obvious goal, we can report less nicotine while blasting the brain with more free nicotine. that is why it is so hard to quit. they did not tell smokers that. you are up against a drug, smokers, we are manipulating, we are adding ammonia to your cigarettes, smokers, and we are doing it to keep you smoking, smokers. would it have made a difference? you bet it would. is that concealment, you are going to be looking at the issue, you bet it is concealment. all right. let me go to demonstrative 019, please, baron. was ike buchanan addicted to nicotine cigarettes? you have got to answer that question, here's the evidence on that. he smoked heavily, we know that. he smoked first thing in the morning after waking up. he smoked with coffee. he took breaks to go outside to smoke when smokin; was banned. he smoked before going to bed at night. he found it hard to refrain from smoking, go to funerals, that sort of thing, and i want to talk about that for a second. he had tobacco stains on his fingers and he tried to quit many times, obviously, and then he finally did. think about the time that he was able to quit in the context of how the information was coming out. kind of fits together, does not it? even in '94, those folks are standing up in front of congress saying it is not addictive. but his quit attempts, when he starts using patch in the 80s, nicotine gum, and then he is finally able to break it with a booklet, what a wonderful thing, but, anyways, look at this. every witness in here -- a lot of them, not every witness, i said that wrong. they came in here, did he have tobacco stains on his fingers. yes, sure, he sure did. when he smoked like that, you smoke enough to put tobacco stains all over the wall of your den, you are smoking a lot of cigarettes. we know that. that is the addiction question. but what did you hear? you heard a cross examination about his fingers getting bloody whe he played his bass and he had to put iodine on his fingers. why was that brought out in this case? it was to try to suggest to you that that was not tobacco stains on his fingers, that was iodine, playing the bass. not true. not true. it is different, really. so ask yourselves about that. were his fingers stained. he had all the markers of addiction and we know that. all right. let me see 017, i think. yes. what happened to him. we know what happened to him. he had withdrawal symptoms, not surprising. another marker of addiction and, you know, by the way, mrs. buchanan was cross examine about the '94 quit attempt, whether or not he had those problems for a couple of weeks or did he have it for a month. you saw the cross examination. right in her depo, she said, yeah, after the two weeks, he had, then finally it subsided. it was a month's worth of withdrawal systems. it did not go quickly, like you were told in opening statement, that is not correct. let me go to 025. this is the exposures -- i'm sorry, there is his attempts. this did not work for him, and then we had quit attempts in the 70s, hypnosis. he went to the american cancer society over by the silver slipper, went to some classes there, and there was this crazy group therapy. mrs. buchanan went in the first class where the spouses were and the last class, and ike buchanan went to those classes in between. she was not there. she came in, and they said bring your spouses to the last class, the weird class where you are supposed to put ashes on you, and ike said i'm out of here. it did not work for him. he is trying. then he moves to getting outside help. he is getting more help, nicotine replacement patch, and then he finally quits. he struggled to quit and he finally did, and that is fine. and, you know, we have told you we accept some responsibility in this case and i'll tell you about that, because, you know, he struggled to quit. we will talk about why we say, you know, we are partly at fault here because we could not quit earlier. we tried, but he did not. we tried in the context of switching, doing what the cigarette companies were telling us, but we did not know what was really driving the whole process. so let me go to 025, please. that is the exposure. he was getting between 3.2 -- depending on how many packs per day, low end of 3.2 million lifetime exposures to 9 million lifetime exposures of nicotine, and this is a social smoker and this is the ike buchanan smoker. this more fits the profile of the americans that were smoking and dying, all the while not being told what was keeping them smokinj to die. so let me go to exhibit 02. what is the evidence, you know, the greater weight of the evidence on addiction, because you have got to answer that question, all right. here's who we have. you know, we brought you two experts. dr. cummings has worked 30 year in nicotine addiction and disease prevention, award winning researcher, national cancer institute, cdc, national institutes of health, 60 million in grants, started the new york quit line, you know. i think they have handled 10,000 addicted smokers. if anybody knows who an addicted smoker is, it is dr. cummings. and he came in here and testified to you why he thought mr. buchanan was addicted. look at david burns. do you remember dr. burns? this guy, this guy was editor senior reviewer of every surgeon general's report since 1975. he is a preeminent addiction specialist like dr. cummings. he just knows more about this, he and dr. cummings combined, than anybody else in the country. but guess what, you did not get -did you get an expert from the defendants to come up here and say ike was not addicted, i'll tell you why? no, you did not. the overwhelming evidence is that he was addicted and, you know, these folks, dr. burns and dr. cummings, they spent their entire lives teaching smokers about nicotine and addiction, to teach them what the real problem is, and try to help them quit smoking. they are on the public health sides. they were under attack. there was a war on truth by the tobacco industry and it went right at these guys, and they should be in here telling you about what this stuff is about. they have been trying to take care of public health their whole careers. that is what they have done for their lives. and do they know what they are talking about? yes, i suggest they do. not one expert, not one witness, refutes dr. burns or dr. cummings. no evidence from liggett, no evidence from pm on that. what is the greater weight of the evidence on addiction? let me go to 102. overwhelming evidence. dr. cummings, was he addicted, yes. dr. burns, yes. eric tournay, a friend, yes. joy neves, former daughter-in-law, yes. nan buchanan, the wife, yes. mitchell buchanan, yes. and what is the evidence they bring to you to refute that? overwhelming evidence by scientists, doctors, addiction specialists and regular folks. interrogatory answer by mrs. buchanan where she said yes, i think he was addicted, you just heard it, yes, i think he was addicted, but i think it has to be a doctor, i do not know. well, she does not know whether it takes a doctor. guess what? it does not take a doctor to give you competent evidence. the court's job here is the gatekeeper of the evidence. every one of these folks testified about addiction and they told you why. the same things that the experts say. when you are addicted, you have those problems when you try to quit, you smoke before you go to bed, you smoke -- you load up on your nicotine before you get on the bandstand, and when you come off, you feel it. when you go to funerals, you cannot stay there because the craving is there. dr. cummings explained all that._ so the evidence is overwhelming and we suggest to you that, on question 1, was he addicted, there is just no question. this evidence is overwhelming and it is uncontradicted. they did not bring any experts in here to talk to you about it. the best they could do, if you will remember, was pose a question, did ike buchanan ever tell you he was addicted, and then you found out, when we did redirect, that the folks that said ike buchanan never told me he was addicted did not talk to him about it. they did not remember. joy neves? would you have any basis on which to answer that question, ms. neves, and she said no, i would not, i did not talk to him about that. if somebody asks a question to you like did he ever tell you he was addicted and they never talked about it, there is no basis for it. so just consider that. the evidence is overwhelming and we ask you to on that verdict form to tell them, yes, i'll show this to you later. how did you do that? mr. philipson: magic. mr. norton: i suggest to you it is uncontradicted. i want to go to the next issue you have got to decide, the issue of whether or not he had lung cancer. now we will go back to -- let me go to 0110 and this puts together two questions, really, on the verdict form. was ike buchanan's addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death, i'll break it down for you like it is. the question on the verdict form is the second question here, after you answer the question of whether he was addicted, is did mitchell ivan buchanan have lung cancer. i'm going to go ahead and check that yes. we think the evidence is overwhelming and unrebutted. an why do i say that? well, okay, let us think about it. what is the greater weight of the evidence. first of all, did he have lung cancer? let me go to 48-2. dr. james mabry. who is dr. james mabry. he is a local guy and he did not come in here as a paid witness. showed up, he is retired, he is working at social security, showed up and he told you the truth, and they tried to cross examine him to try to suggest it really was not lung cancer because they know if von sav no to that we lose we go home, and you pin the blue ribbon on them for their conduct. did he have lung cancer? of course he did. well, how do we know? we know dr. mabry testified to it. he was the guy that was hands-on, he was there. dr. burns testified to it, but who was mabry? what training? i mean, he went to vanderbilt, he was second in his class in biology. then he went to vanderbilt medical school, first in his class. he did a residency at yale university, had to apply for it. he went to the national cancer institute, had to get in there, competitive position. went to duke university. triple boarded. was he telling you the truth about oat cell lung cancer? and you were told in opening it was an issue in the case. it is never been an issue in this case, not according to the guy that was there. and what did he say? he said, well, i found a density in the lung. he said it started in the lung as the primary site. 95 percent of all oat cell cancers start in the lung, and they will suggest to you that there were some abdominal findings. remember dr. mabry talking about that? they went away. the surgeon evaluated there was no surgery necessary. and guess what, they are going to say to you he did not pinpoint the cause of the lung cancer in his deposition. do you remember the cross examination of mabry on that? what did dr. mabry say when they cross examined him on that? will recall it for you. he said you did not ask me in the deposition. well, we asked him and what did he say to you? here's what he said to you. he said final diagnosis, lung cancer oat cell type disseminated. it was a bad cancer. let me see 031. the death certificate. the death certificate was signed by dr. mabry and he said, well, you know, that is the official cause of death. it is lung cancer, it is oat cell type. what would he have put if he was unsure, what was his testimony. he said if i was unsure, i would have written on the death certificate oat cell cancer of uncertain site. i had done that in the past and i would have done that here, and i did not do that. so they did not bring you one witness to rebut dr. mabry. and dr. burns, the pulmonologist, he testified, yeah, it is clear here. so did he have lung cancer? overwhelming, unrebutted evidence is that he did. and he was asked a question at the end, and that was the question of did you pinpoint the cause and he said, look, by the time this transpires in july, i'm well past the date of may where i made my final diagnosis. same diagnosis, i would have had a ton more information, but i do not sign these things lightly. when i say that, you can bank on it. so, to suggest to you in opening statement whether lung cancer was a cause of his death is just not -- it is not an issue in the case. it is not a defense. no better a defense than was he addicted or those are not really our documents, does ms. buchanan really recall marlboro lights and marlboros. that is what is being brought to you, and talk it over with each other, see what it means to you. so what did dr. mabry say? i've never seen an oat cell lung cancer that was not a smoker because smoking caused the lung cancer, obviously. the addiction causes the smoking causes the lung cancer. it is a pretty easy steps to take. well, he is smoking because he is addicted. you know, he is struggling to quit, and the defense it is just a trigger. the triggers -- by the way, they tried to say he drank with coffee, he was drinking, he smoked when he had coffee, smoked when he had a beer. he smoked all the time. eric tournay said, yeah, he smoked when he had a water, he smoked when he had juice, he smoked all day long is what tournay told you, anc it is the way that ike smoked, that is how you smoke when you are addicted. he smoked. it is not like, oh, i'm walking by my dog sitting on the back porch, i'd better have a cigarette. it is not triggers, it is addiction. it is not triggers, it is nicotine. let me see demonstrative mc101. was it just something ike did for pleasure? was it just a pleasurable thing he did? well, the pleasure in smoking comes from this, what nicotine does in your brain. it gives you dopamine, this is why the brain grows more places to get your nicotine. if you released dopamine and serotonin, that knocks down your appetite, it is a mood modulation. all of these things that are going on here, that is pleasure to the body. well you are not smoking because it is pleasurable. your brain is saying i need more of the nicotine pleasure. that is what we are dealing with here. did ike buchanan know this, did all of those millions of smokers that got addicted know this? more importantly -- of course, they did. more importantly, did they hide it? yeah, they did. they got together in their little agreement and they hid it and you are going to see that. those engle findings, when you say check -- when you check 1, 2 and 3 on this verdict form as we think the evidence clearly is, engle applies and engle binds us all. the court, counsel, everybody, it binds you, jury, and we talked about that and asked you about that many moons ago. all right. ike did not know what he was up against. the smokers did not know what they were up against but the defendants were making sure that they did not know, and why they did they do it? (indicating) money. money. they sat there, knowing what they were doing, they did it for money and they knew what was happening. all the failed quit attempts, failures, struggles, he was trying to stop doing something he did not know he had. they say ike, everybody knew about those health risks, no peep about the nicotine, was there, and the addiction. oh, he knew about this. yeah, he was trying to quit, but i said that. so, if everybody knew about the health risks and everybody knew about nicotine addiction, why did they spend so much money over 50 years t< try to cover it up, cover up what everybody knew? does that make any sense to you? it does not. i submit to you, it does not. you all decide what makes sense to you. that is your duty. i'm trying to argue to you what the evidence is. if everybody knew, why was it such big news? think about this. this is interesting. if you saw a news story, well, if you saw a news story that said gravity makes things fall to the earth, would it be headline news, would it be all over the internet? no, because you know. you get that, we all know that. then why did the 1988 surgeon general's report on addiction, you know, they were trying to buffalo the surgeon general for, you know, 30, 40 years, too, and they got away with it. dr. burns told you, he was there. they were sending us false information, we know that they sent us documents. we knew, surgeon general, we do not have any cancer causing stuff. oh, by the way, we can filter out if we had it, so -- it was baloney, it was a lie. but why did the surgeon general's report on addiction make such a splash? because people did not know. it was big news. 1988, they did not know. why did not they know? i'll tell you why they did not. let me show you 2050. and this is panzer, the guy at the ti, the tobacco institute, the corporations that they set up and spent billions of bucks on to hide the truth. panzer says, all right, now what year is this, 1972, i believe. 1972, all right. for nearly 20 years, take off 20 years off of '72, where are you at, '52. one year before they all got together in the plaza hotel, all right. 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend ourselves on three fronts, while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years and helped us win important battles, do you know what the battles are they were winning? they were beating back th public health message to addict smokers and we know what happened to those folks. they ended up like ike buchanan. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, fair to say it is not intended -- this has been a holding strategy. we are trying to hold back the public health message, trying to hold back the truth, the war on truth, this is what this relates to. all right. what are we doing, here's our strategy, we create doubt about the health charges without actually denying it. neat little smart little plan. you do not want to come out too strong, like we are not going to deny it, keep saying it has not been proven. 1994 in front of congress, oh, nicotine is not addictive. all right. this is what is going on in 1972. that is what they are doing and they know what they are doing. let us go to 2143. and we are going to see this a little bit later. this is myron johnson, a research scientist, to w.l. dunn, he was a supervisor scientist, and they copy wakeham, who we have hear from, and seligman, the head of r&d. there is a big distribution going on here and this is back to 1966. all right. what do we see here? what are they saying in '66? a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation and would therefore almost certainly fail. well, substitute addicted smoker for habituated, substitute addicted smoker. well, we cannot do that, we have got to deliver our nicotine or we are going to fail and we are going to lose money. we are going to lose money. this is what was going on inside the industry in '66. ike buchanan had not made his switch. he would been smoking 19 years. that is when the first warning came out. so this is going on in 1966 and ike was smoking 17, 19 years. all right. let me go to 3605. all right. motives and incentives in cigarette smoking. you heard about this in opening statement also from philip morris. and this was the speech a research scientist at philip morris, he gave a speech to something called coresta, and let me go to 2409, then we will come back to this. can we do that? this is what you were told about this speech. their scientist was down somewhere givin this speech about tobacco smoking, nicotine, what have you. philip morris told you that, at that conference, this is the conference where the speech was given, he gave a speech about what they discussed. he then -- i do not have a copy with me, but i will have it a little bit later. he then published it, the speech, in a book that is available at the florida state. that is what you were told. go back to 3605, please. and what dunn said. let us go to page -yes, that page. all right. what he said was no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. that is what you do not hear about. you hear about this issue of health risks, but you do not hear about nicotine from the defendants. the cigarette should be conceived not as a product but a package. the product is nicotine. the cigarette is but one of many layers, strip it off and the smoker strips off all these nice layers and he gets to that which he seeks. he gets to the nicotine. that is what they are saying. they are not saying that publicly, this is in a speech, okay. think of a puff of smoke as a vehicle of nicotine, and they go through this whole thing. you get 35 cc's, a mouthful, right amount of nicotine. and then it says smoke is beyond question the most optimized vehicle of nicotine and the cigarette the most optimized dispenser of smoke. that is a great recognition of what their product is and what their product does. the book that you were told about, dr. cummings got on the stand and he said that dunn only wrote one chapter in that book and they put it in evidence as pmu1840. you were told that speech is in that book. it is not. it is not in there. that was not correct. take a look at if you want to. pmu1840. they put the book in. it is not in there. the reason you were told that, as if we put all this stuff out, we were not hiding anything. they were hiding a lot of things. all right. they were fighting -- what they were doing in fighting the public health message so hard, why they did it is because they knew if the curtain was lifted, if they admitted there was a link between smoking and lung cancer, if they admit that, that was not really what -- you know, this is hide the ball. they did not really -- that is bad, but they want to hold that, they want to keep that away from the public because they knew. if that came out where they knew it, they knew there was a link between smoking and lung cancer, they knew it, but they knew that if it came out, it was a matter of time before what came out? you start lifting that curtain and guess what you find out? you find ou about the real dirty secret, nicotine. you find out about addiction. so they are hiding this health risk to hide the real secret, the nicotine. it is the nicotine. it is the addiction and they knew it and they wrote about it internally. so they are selling their words. do not be -- you were told in opening maybe these are not our words, they are their words. clearly, they are their words. they were hiding they were selling a product and the product was not cigarettes, the product was nicotine. and when you sell nicotine in a cigarette, you are going to sell something else, you are selling death and you are selling pain, destruction, and hurt of families, all over this country, and they knew it. and they did it for one reason, the almighty dollar. go to pt1129 1980 osdene, he is a scientist to r&d directors. 1980, philip morris document, nicotine program. my reason for the high priority of this -- he goes through what we should be doing in r&d. my rea for this high priority is that i believe the thing we sell most is nicotine, another expression. 1980, we are selling nicotine. nothing else, they are selling nicotine, and they are hiding the link between smoking and cancer so that the real culprit does not come out. that is why smokers are addicted. they do not know this stuff. is that reprehensible conduct? that is what you have to look at on the punitive damages issue. we say you betcha it is. you bet you it is. and you think about the millions they spent hiding the truth. you think it was money that was not well spent? they did. yeah. they felt they were spending their money wisely, and you know what, it worked. they put the public health message in a holding pattern while they are doing that. what is happening? the deaths are piling up and they knew that. was ike buchanan's addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer? overwhelming. that is the did he have lung cancer, and was it caused, next question, was his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his lung cancer, did it in a natural and continuous sequence follow. of course, it does. of course, it does. and the answer there needs to be, we submit, yes. it is overwhelming evidence and it is unrebutted. did you see somebody come in here and tell you that his smoking did not cause lung cancer, an expert to rebut dr. mabry? dr. burns? you did not see any expert. another thing they were telling you in opening was an issue/defense, it was not a defense. it is never been a defense and do not let it be a defense now. you know why? it would not be justice. justice is based on evidence and think about the evidence that was brought to you on these issues. once you answer those three questions, engle becomes binding on you and on everybody. the engle findings, they are in your instructions, you are going to be asked -- let me go to r18. this is off the verdict form. the question you need to answer -- you have got to answer all of them, actually, okay. was philip morris's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking of cigarette or both a legal cause. now, you have got concealment about health effects or concealment about the addictive nature, or both, either one or both, and we submit to you the answer is clearly yes to that. was liggett's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause, yes. and this is an engle finding, number 5, that will help you answer 6 and 7. this is binding on everyone in the courtroom. if you find 1, 2 and 3, which was addiction, and i want to say it right, addiction, lung cancer and that his addiction is a legal cause of his lung cancer. so then this becomes binding on you. take a look at engle when you go through the verdict form. engle will help you answer the questions on this, on these issues. this is on the concealment issue. let me go to r19. this is also on the verdict form. was philip morris and liggett's and others agreement to conceal or omit material regarding either health effects or the addictive nature a legal cause of the death. clearly it was. we say that you should check yes on that. what else were they doing with that campaign? what else was it designed to do? wha did they tell you? they told you it was a brilliantly conceived and designed program, patting themselves on the back, were not they? yeah. answer that question with their document. did it work? they think it worked. they sure did. smug, smug little secret document in the back room. hey, guys, we are really doing a great job keeping these folks addicted. we are selling a lot of cigarettes. we are selling a lot of death. number 6 on engle will help you answer this question on the verdict form. take a look at the engle findings that they become binding on yo if you answer 1, 2 and 3. we suggest to you that you will find yes is an appropriate answer there. let us move on quickly to the war on truth. you know, there is only one side to this story. we have given you the documents and there is really been no evidence presented to rebut what these documents say because there cannot be. they say what they say, and they mean what they say, and no amount of telling you in opening statement, we are not sure whether these are really the words of our companies are not -- well, that is not -- there is no other side to this issue. they were agreeing to lie, they were concealing what they knew, and they carried out a scheme to lie to the american people for 50 years. it worked for 50 years and made a lot of money. and you know what? that was all it was about. money. did not matter who died, did not matter how many died. that is the evidence. that is not us, that is their documents. because you are going to see from the very first time this issue started, first thought in their head was money. i'll show that document to you. okay. this message was carefully methodically crafted to help addicted smokers keep smoking. remember what they said, we are going to give ther a psychological crutch to keep them smoking, they gave them filters. filters came about at a time, you are going to see the guy, to the harry reasoner video, he tells you filters were only 3 percent of the market, they went to sixty percent of the market. that is not an accident, tons of advertising. i'm not going to go through the advertising with you, but they were selling filters. why? the more that the public health information from guys like cummings and burns was trying to get that message out, the more that message came out, they shifted their strategy a little bit. brilliant. what a wonderful thing. let us ammoniate our cigarettes, make that nicotine more addictive. let us use filters, how about that. it worked on ike, worked perfectly. he switched because he thought they were healthier. i'm going to go through that filter business. it is baloney, and i say something, it is not correct, it is not true. you reflect that in your verdict. that is not true. all right. give them a psychological crutch and get them to doubt the public health messages. got to give them some doubt. remember what the document said, create doubt, did a great job. there is a reason for that, obviously. after 50 years of a successful campaign to lie and deceive people, they come in here and tell you that mr. buchanan is unreasonable to rely on the message. discuss that with you. we know he got part of the message because he switched to light cigarettes. it is just a free choice and it was all because of those triggers. no, it is not, it is because of addiction. it is nicotine. and the truth is, you know, do you remember the shipe video, the liggett fellow that was -- when they asked him a question, i think the question -- if i get this wrong, you rely on your memory because i'm trying to remember it? he was asked a question whether or not liggett knew more than the average consumer about health risks and maybe nicotine. it was a question of information, who knows more, and that guy crawfished so hard, he went sideways on that question. he would go -- his answer was i do not know what the consumer knows. well, does your corporation know more about health risks than the average consumer of your product? well, it would depend on the consumer. you know, that is late in the game, folks. that is liggett still crawfishing on that issue. i mean, you have got to ask yourself why in the world, do you really think that the average consumer through all of those years, the 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s even in the 80s, do you that think the average consumer knew as much as they knew about what wa going on with their cigarettes and their addictive nature? he did not even answer the question and he does not come straight out and say yeah. there is only one question to that, shipe, you all think about that. so the majority of the folks that were born when ike was born were smokers. i do not remember the statistics, i want to say they were in the 60s, they went up to the 70s as they got older, but they knew about nicotine addiction. they knew about it because they engineered their cigarettes to give more free nicotine. if that is not knowledge, i do not know what is, and this is the stuff they kept from their smokers. they brought you no testimony that they did not do that back in the 50s and 60s and 70s, none. they did not bring anybody in here to tell you that that engineering with ammonia did not occur. it did occur, so they give more free nicotine to people. addict them harder. in the entire time that ike buchanan smoked when he first started until he took his last breath, and they denied it nnblicly and they knowingly lied and you saw them deny that from 1994, but behind closed doors, they were celebrating their successes fooling the public. so, as the truth got out, what happened to cigarette consumption? it went down. truth is a powerful thing, is not it? pushed it back hard, 50 years. so we got to the point where the cover-up began. and let me go to 26 briefly. and that is the rise of cigarette smoking. remember, there was, back in this time frame, everybody was doing snuff and chewing tobacco a that is doing different kinds of tobacco, and right in here, we started -- we got the mass -- the cigarette machine that could roll millions of cigarettes, and look what happens. there goes the rise of cigarettes. okay. cigarettes rose and the other forms of tobacco did not rise with cigarettes in the same way. why? because it did not have the ability to addict you from the deep inhalation. that is what happened. and, so, is this 024, baron? mr. philipson: no, sir. mr. norton: here we go. look at here. here's the rise. this is blue line is the per capita consumption 18 or older, and there goes the cigarettes, okay. that is the depression, by the way, little blip down consumption goes down, that is the depression. money. here we go, boom. look at there, '53, '54. how about that? why? wynder, his mouse painting studies came out first time somebody suggested a link between smoking and cancer and consumption goes down, boop, and it goes back up. and there is the '64 surgeon general's report, it goes back down. look what happens to lung cancer rates; they follow it. this right here, that blip, is cash and it is a lot of cash. it is a lot of money. two things happen: mouse painting came out and demand dropped for the first time. they were losing money. and what did these good corporate citizens do? did they get together and do we have to study this, there is a possible link between smoking and cancer and the nicotine is driving them and we have got addicted smokers and we would better tell everybody about these problems. is that what they did? when they lost sales, what did they do? they went to the plaza hotel. somebody got the bright idea to go to the plaza hotel and this is shortly before christmas, pre-christmas meeting, and they brought their customers a present for the next 50 years. it was unprecedented campaign of deceit, deception, denial and death. that is what they brought them when they got together and they said we have got to do something about this link that is coming out starting this mouse painting and we lost sales. so what did they do? they hired a pr firm. they made a conscious decision. 20061-02. that is the forwarding memo, we know that. this is what i was telling you over here. this is hill & knowlton, their pr firm, and they are talking about the guys they are going to deal with, meaning the tobacco execs, the company men. these guys are -- they are interesting, we have to understand them. one of them says it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. and you can that habit, you can call it addiction, you can call it dependence, but they knew it right there, 1953. what does the other guy say from the very first moment that they get their pr guy going, not a guy, a big company. would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to promote a produce a cancer free cigarette, what we could do to the competition. suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less, that would be 40 billion less cigarettes a year. what he is saying is, wow, we do not want that to happen. we have had a drop in sales and we have got our pr firm and let us get going. they made the tirc, and, by the way, liggett was not there. liggett will stand up and tell you proudly they were not there. well, they came into the ctr, special projects, liggett did, and the ctr was a split off, tirc went into ctr and special projects and, you know, the special projects were baloney, they did not really do any special projects about the problem, and ctr and ti. the war on truth began. it was very successful because, the 2010 surgeon general's report tells you this, from 1953 until 1995 -- i'm sorry, this is -- i should have gone to this next page. this was -- they identified the problem with their -- the public relations folks said here's our problem. we have got to give the smokers confidence, how to establish public assurance, how do we create it. they are making it up, making it up. most importantly, how do we free millions of americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths regardless of any pooh poohing logic. every time they light a cigarette, we have got to give them a rationale to keep smoking. because if you know -- if you are trying to quit, as ike did, he knew it was not good for him, and that is what -- he fits their mold. he is just like that other millions and millions of folks. let us create doubt, let us give them a rationale, then we come along, get the idea of filters, that will keep everybody happy. it is a wonderful plan with a terrible, terrible ending that they knew was coming. and the ending was that, from 1953 to 1995, they killed 443,000 americans a year for 42 years. you know, these are not statistics, 15 million fathers and mothers, husbands and wives, and sisters and brothers. they were killing people. they were were not killing statistics, and they knew it and they did it for one reason, and you know what the reason was. and that is why i told you we are going to ask you to check that box and say we need to send a message to others not to do this kind of thing and to punish folks that did, and the folks that did are right here with you, the companies. let me go to the filter business. i told you about that. we will go back to 3681 and 2817 briefly, and you all have seen this. they knew carcinogens were found. they knew that present technology did not allow them to filter it out, and then they sent the letter to the surgeon general saying we have not found anything, but if we do, we can filter it. it was a lie. it was absolutely to mislead the surgeon general and to mislead the public because that is where we started the filter business, '61, '63. the false message worked because ike switched because he thought it was healthier cigarette. it was not a healthier cigarette. here's what happened. let me go to -baron, let me go to 168 -- i'm sorry, 1685a. this is what i was talking about. this is the rise of the filters. you remember this fellow, howard cullman, i think he would been a pm executive, but he is a tobacco industry_ spokesperson at the time this was done. (video playing.) "this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. in our studio this afternoon following the surgeon general's news conference, cbs news correspondent richard c. hottelet put some questions to one of the leading spokesmen for the industry, howard cullman, president of the tobacco merchants association and a long-time director of the philip morris company. mr. cullman, prominen in the new york theater and civic affairs, is a third generation member of a tobacco family. mr. cullman, the conclusions are pretty stark and pretty solid. they say, quite flatly, they express the judgment that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate. then they have the rate at ten times as high for smokers in the case of lung cancer and are higher in other cases. well, that is awful hard to define the word 'substantial.' i do not believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. we are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. we eat more carefully. we have cholesterol habits. we have drinking habits of lighter whiskey. we have smoking habits, which incidentally are today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters. now, i was surprised at the beginning of conference when dr. terry was proud to have said that they have very little evidence, if any, on the effect, if any, of filtered cigarettes. so when we have today sixty percent of the business in the filtered field --" mr. norton: stop right there. (video stops.) mr. norton: he just said he was surprised. this is put out right after the surgeon general's report. this is another one of those messages to try to pooh-pooh attack the surgeon general/public health message. so they send this guy on tv on a really a big time show, and he goes on tv. he says i was surprised that the surgeon general, luther terry, he is the guy that dr. cummings got the award for, said it was the finest professional achievement in his career, he got the luther terry award, dr. cummings. an< this guy says i was surprised that luther terry said that he is not so sure filters work he is surprised, and he is going to tell you that the filters have become -- went from 3 percent in 1954 to sixty percent in '64. ten years, they went 3 percent to sixty percent of the market. that is what ike fell for, filters. go ahead. (video playing.) "compared to 3 percent 10 years ago, i think we need a little more research. i'm convinced that eventually they will find some elements through a filter or through leaf growing or a special type of seed growing that will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking for. we want to be the detective just as much the surgeon general and the ama. we will cooperate i every way. well, are you saying, then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco in which are removable by filter? well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them, and if they are found, they will be removed, but, at this point, we do not know. does any of the research that the tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any part of the findings here or the conclusions as a whole? well, without reading the report, i could not answer that to begin with. i do not think the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the conclusions." (video ends.) mr. norton: that was not 1964. remember, remember, the documents i showed you, the internal documents that philip morris had in the '61, '63 time frame right before this that identified all those carcinogens and said filters do not work. he is lying. i do not know how to say it any better than that; it is a lie. that is a lie. it is done to attack the surgeon general, luther terry. it is done to keep the message from getting out. let us go to pt65984. 1973. this is a philip morris scientist to the directors of r&d, barbro goodman. she is talking about marlboro lights. here's the story on filters or part of the story on filters. the smoker profile data indicates that marlboro lights cigarettes were not smoked like regular marlboros. that is exactly right and they knew this. there were differences in the size and frequency of the puffs. what they found out and what they knew was if you give somebody a light cigarette with those holes in the filters, it is ventilated, you do larger puffs, more puffs to get the nicotine, more puffs, more cigarettes, equal more money. lights did not work. as a matter of fact, you get just as much because the smoker compensates. the smoker compensates, the smoke does not go i'm going to take larger puffs, i'm going to take more puffs, i've got this light cigarette i've got to do that, it is driven from here (indicating). it is your brain telling you i need more nicotine. your brain knows it is going to fill up those nico receptors and, so, that was the part of the bogus information that they knew about filters. filters did not work. they did not -- they were not any better. the healthier cigarette ike was smoking, it was not healthier, it was marlboro light. and then 2143, briefly. mr. philipson: did you want the second page? mr. norton: go ahead, i'm sorry. in effect, marlboro 85, that is the regular marlboros, in this study did not achieve any reduction in smoke intake by smoking marlboro lights normally considered lower in delivery. th delivery did not change for the reasons i said, you still got all the -- just as much and they actually could sell more cigarettes. so this is a recognition of what was going on. they knew lights did not work and they knew why. they knew exactly; they had done the research on it. let us go to 2143. and this is just a document to show you that this is what they thought about, and that is 1966. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of the filtration. what they are saying is our marketing about filtration is bogus, it is an illusion, it is not real, but it is important because people believe it. and people did believe it. that is why it went from 3 percent of the market to sixty percent of the market, and they knew it and they knew people were going to have to smoke harder, longer, deeper on the lights and had just as much of the bad stuff they knew it and they did it for the only reason you know about. why do you think ike buchanan, intelligent guy, got the idea when he switched over from chesterfields to marlboro lights it was a good filter and a healthier cigarette? he did not make that up. where did it come from? it came from them. did their ads work? they did. sure, they did, and it worked on millions of folks, not just ike buchanan. and you remember -- i'm not going to play it for you, you remember the guy on the capitol steps, comes running down, you need to get more information. it is 1970 that guy said that, and here, call in for the white paper to the tobacco institute in washington. call in for what, the white paper was nothing more than a propaganda piece from these companies set up by that whole effort to cover up and they lied and people died. i want to show you what liggett was doing, what was liggett doing on some of these subjects. go to 00677. 1954. this is what liggett said was important. liggett & myers' major concern is to produce a cigarette that the public will use, buy, and then make those cigarettes the best possible from a health standpoint. a little bit backwards, is not it? go to the next one, which is 2138. 1961. and liggett joined -- do not forget they were paying for the ctr special project, and if they tell you we did not pay much, it is because it is based on sales. just happened they did not have sales so that they only paid whatever, one-tenth of a percent. it is not that they were good guys and did not, you know, really did not support the effort; they supported the effort like everybody else in the same proportion based on their product. do not be misled by that. so they hired arthur little in 1961. arthur little told liggett there are biologically active materials present in cigarette smoke, cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating pleasurable, flavorful. that is what arthur little told liggett. in 1961, ike buchanan had been smoking chesterfields for 14 years, and they knew this and they hid it. and let me try to recall with you, do you remember dr. cummings on the stand and my big red-headed partner david standing here, did all the companies in 1963 get a chance to do a submission, send out all their information about what they knew. the surgeon general still buying their baloney, saying you guys are doing research, send it to us. they did not send it, they hid it, but, everybody, give us your submissions, we have got the 1964 surgeon general report coming up. and dr. cummings was on the stand, he said how big was their submission, and he said move your hands and he goes right about there, that is how much material liggett sent to the surgeon general (indicating). do you think that was in it, their 1961 internal research? you think it was in it? no, it was not in it. they hid it just like everybody else. they are no different. they were smaller, but no different. i want to talk to you about two last subjects. one of them is damages. and, you know, i'm not going to stand here and take nan back through what we did, you know, what kind of guy ike was. they were married 42 years, they met over music. he was a handsome cool guy. 626, please. and that is early picture of ike and he was a handsome, cool guy and she ended up getting married. she called him bushy and that is a corny little nickname, but, you know, every marriage has something corny in it. and go to 617. and that is the way people start out, you know. and, you know, they went to base housing. i do not have that picture, but it was like all base housing, a crummy little spot, but it was a beautiful thing. they are young newlyweds. they are happy as two peas in a pod. that is actually how they were described. and ike was, you know, that is his family. he is raising a family in jacksonville. and there is nan in the background. and, you know, he was described as standup guy and she was a standup girl, and they stood up for each other. and you heard a suggestion that when ike had his quit attempts, that it was just his business and nan would leave him alone, struggled and fail and leave him alone in his disappointment. that is not true. that is not who nan buchanan is. she put her arms around him, sh did not pile on. they had -- you know, that is not the way. she would hug him and say i love you. and she was there for him and you know he was there for her. she told you she struggled with weight and he did not pile on. and when she lost weight, he told her, you know, you are doing great. and over the years, they raised a family, and that is the family. and it is like every marriage, you start out as a sweet young thing and everybody's pretty and slim and good and young and good looking, an then father time comes to visit and you have kids and your waistline spreads, you get double chins and you get gray hair. that is the facts of life. and you know what, he was a standup husband, he was there for her, and he was always there for her. and he told her, you know, he said, hey, honey, might even patted her somewhere, and said, hey, you still got that great bod and, my goodness, was a wonderful thing, to be a standup husband and stay with your woman. that was not even a question. they were there, by goodness, for each other and they were there for -- he was there for her and his family, and he was ever present with his dog that now makes love bill maud so much that he tries to bite him every time he saw him. he was romantic guy. i slowed you a picture of nan. that is happier times. do you know what she said about him? i do not want to go through all of it, but he made everybody he talked to feel like the most important person in the room. do you know what kind of person that is? that is a good listener. where have all the good listeners gone. that is why people liked him and he loved people and people loved him and there is good reason for it. he was a standup guy. hit me with 658. happy ike out there playing music. and what is nan's life without ike? you know, she is got a great family, that is a wonderful thing, and a good thing they get together. and i think the defendants said, hey, you got to go to europe after your husband died. well, that is wonderful, that takes care of everything, does not it? that was paid for with dannette, gave her a trip. you know, they were great family and nan has been robbed of those retirement years and, you know, it was a cherished time in life for her to look forward to and, you know, music. as ike died, she sang that song, tonight you belong to me. and she was telling him something, what she was telling him was i'll always be with you and you will always be with me, and ike buchanan is in her heart every day. and she said something at the end. she said i still consider myself to be married, my husband and i did not sever our marriage, and it is a great attribute to a wonderful marriage and a wonderful guy. and, so, today her case belongs to you. we give it to you, and we ask you to recognize in your verdict her loss, and i want to go to what happened in this family. go to 672. that is the way it started. that became the tradition. boys are younger. there is ike. go to 679. and now we got grandkids in there. ike is older, of course. and, last, look at 677. wow, what an tribute because look at the day. it is a terrible day. look at that, it is a foggy, nasty day and there is no ike. ike is gone. that is the hole. we ask you to recognize the hole in nan's life. and can you just picture nan and ike in that winnebago, driving around the country, looking for old cars to restore and nan doing crossword puzzles and ike helping her out and her trying to write travel pieces, having a great time, great time together in those golden years, when ike would call her at work and do crosswords with her. is not that a beautiful thing? you know they would be in that winnebago with a bass in the back and you know what would happen, they would stop somewhere on the way at ; holiday inn somewhere in the back roads of america, they would probably end up playing a set in a town. that was their hopes and dreams, and that is all gone. and we ask you to consider -- the judge will give you an instruction, but we ask you to consider returning a verdict that says that that was a very real life and very real marriage. they were lucky, they found each other, and we ask you do not return a verdict in compensatory damages more than $10 million. that would not be fair. it is your decision, but we ask you not to return the verdict for her loss. and you know how many years she is been without ike. if you return a fair verdict whatever you think is reasonable but a verdict -- justice says just return a verdict that recognizes her loss and it respects her loss and it honors her loss, and that will be fine, and we ask you to do that. the last thing i want to talk to you about is punitive damages and talk to you a little bit about it. you have seen -- i'm sorry, i do want to talk to you about liability in this case. we have taken -- you know, we have said, look, i do not know how you feel about this and it is up to you, but we are going to suggest to you that you should put twenty percent negligence on ike buchanan. maybe he did not quit hard enough -- try hard enough. he did try hard, and if you think it should be less, you make it less, and put the rest on these companies. you compare conduct. what did ike do. never once in his lifetime did the defendants tell the truth about what they knew about addiction. not once. so put twenty percent on mr. buchanan if you think that is appropriate. not more than 20 percent, when you compare his conduct to theirs, but we accept, we have accepted some responsibility. and we think that you ought to put responsibility on them. and they smoked about the same period of time, so i'm going to suggest to you that you ought to put forty percent negligence on each of the two companies, that equals -- has to equal a hundred on your verdict form, and we think that the evidence is fair. it is fair to put negligence on ike, although you know he was addicted 19 year before that first warning even came out. i've tried to show you what we did not know, do not -- we understood and that is why we say there were health risks, he understood that, but he did not know what he was up against and neither did millions of americans that ended up dying. so compare the conduct. no evidence of ike buchanan lied, cheated or deceived people; he was not that kind of man. so check that on your verdict form. and it says, under the circumstances of this case, there is one for philip morris and one for liggett. under the circumstances of this case, state whether punitive damages are warranted. and i'm going to let my partner talk to you about maybe the punitive damage instruction, but you can look at and you should look at their conduct and you can consider, in determining whether punitive damages are appropriate, not the amount, but whether they are appropriate, we suggest to you that what you have seen, and we have given you a snapshot, if you find by clear and convincing evidence that the conduct causing injury to mr. buchanan was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life and safety of persons, you bet. does it fit that conduct, you bet it does. does it show an entire lack of care, yeah. so they must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences. they were not consciously indifferent to it, they did it for money; that is worse. and it is in the documents, it is there. so what is clear and convincing evidence? it is their own words. nothing could be more clear than that. and you can consider the harm suffered by others in determining whether punitives are appropriate. not the amount, okay. so we ask you to check that as being particularly applicable. it is overwhelming and unrebutted that their conduct is punitive, it is reprehensible, and it ought not to exist in a civilized society. it ought not exist in tallahassee, florida. and the last thing i want to say to you is i want to show you 2184. this is -- it is a tobacco institute document. i think it is from vp to the tobacco institute to a president of the tobacco institute. you have seen those names before. what do they say? this is 1980. "i do not think the questions that i now raise are academic. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." is not that what they are trying to do here? do you know what they are trying to do? tell you that it is all a free choice. be very careful not this mention that word addiction. do not let them do that. for justice sake, do not let them do that. return a verdict for the plaintiff. thank you.