24 mr. uustal: thank you, your honor. good afternoon. we have tried, tried, not to waste a single moment of your time. so let us go directly to the questions that you are going to have to answer on the verdict form in this case. the issue, as you heard in opening statement, is did matthew buonomo have an illness before november of 1996 that was caused by an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. so if the answer to that question is yes, then the answer to both of these questions are yes. did matthew buonomo have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease before february 21st, 1996, and secondly, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine which caused that illness. if you answer no to either question, your verdict is for rjr. if you answer yes and yes, you are finding that mr. bounomo is part of a certain group of people and you will move on to phase two of this trial. in order to answer those questions, the judge is going to instruct you on the law. and, by the way, that verdict form, you will have it in writing to fill out. the judge is also going to give you the law that you need to follow in answering those questions, and that will be in writing. but there are a couple things about the law i want to discuss with you because you need to know what they are when you are deciding how to answer these questions. the first thing is a concept we touched on a couple times in this trial already, right at the top, something called the greater weight of the 8 evidence. the greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. it is important on every issue that you are deciding that you apply the correct standard and follow the law for this kind of case. in other cases, there are some cases where -- criminal cases where the defendant starts out -- i hope this would work because we just put this together. but the defendant starts out presumed innocent, and the prosecution has the burden of presenting so much evidence that the scales not only tip in the other direction but there is no longer any doubt, any reasonable doubt about the guilt of the defendant. in cases like this, the scales start out even. if they end even, we lose. we have the burden of proving our case. so if they start even and end even, we lose. but if they tip, the greater weight tips slightly in our direction on any issue, then that issue must be decided in our favor. i think, and i'm going to discuss with you now why i think we have proven this case far beyond that. but every issue that you come across, the first question you need to ask yourself and remind yourselves about is when we say decide something, what is the standard, who is more likely right than wrong. are we more likely right than wrong. you have heard, and mr. mcpharlin, right in opening statement, said there is basically two possible answers to the questions. either he had emphysema and copd -- and we are going to get -- we will talk a little bit to make sure it is absolutely clear that emphysema is a disease that is copd. there are other diseases that are also copd. but emphysema is copd. and he had it caused by an addiction to cigarettes which is what all his treating doctors said. all those doctors and all those medical records, there was not one that disagreed with that. and that requires yes, yes. the other possibility which rjr argues is true is that he was not addicted, never addicted, not a day in his life, and he never had copd, and he never had emphysema. i almost had the guts to just put in the medical records and rest our case because the very fact -- and i did not so you are here longer. but the very fact that he was treated for 13 years by 21 doctors who diagnosed and treated copd, emphysema, is way more than a slight tip. it is very, very strong evidence in and of itself. if they are going to overcome that, they are going to need to present 10 some very, very compelling evidence to explain to you how, right here in our community, 21 doctors treated a man for 13 years for the wrong disease. so what evidence do they have? they brought you four witnesses who are medical doctors. when you look at each of the things they testified to, there is another jury instruction including consider the believability of the witness. there are factors for you to consider. when you look at their testimony, it is appropriate to consider that unlike the treating doctors who made these diagnoses without any lawsuit in mind, they were hired by one of the parties in this case. in addition, they were paid an incredible amount of money to come to those conclusions. some of them said they hope to have more cases. they all have apparently the same 15 or 20 cases already. they are making a lot in each case, and they have an incentive to continue making that much money. so anything they say has a little less credibility, and maybe a lot less than somebody who wrote it in a medical record without any view of a lawsuit and who testified to it through days and days -- i mean those videos seemed long to sit through, but they were a tiny, tiny portion of what those doctors had to sit through, questioning and questioning and questioning, multiple occasions, multiple days. and that was not even all the doctors who had to go through that. they said those things as doctors who do not testify in lawsuits. several of them said i have never before. and some of the witnesses here said well, this is my first time in a courtroom, but they have testified many times at depositions. these doctors were strangers to this courtroom, this process. it struck me. dr. cummings said something on cross examination. they were asking him about how he had said something to some of the other people who are concerned about the diseases caused by smoking in our society, that you have to think before you talk to the press. if you are a doctor, used to dealing with regular people in regular situations, it might not come across the way you expect in a 30-second sound bite on television. those people like dr. cummings, concerned with public health, for years and years and years were getting drowned out by professionals who knew how to talk on television. and the danger is when you consider the weight to give any witness, any witness' testimony in this case, the danger is that somebody who is good at talking does not mean they are good at 12 medicine -- who has been picked because they are good at testifying. we did not pick any of those treating doctors. they were all the doctors who came in and treated him. not our experts. they are his doctors. but the ones that have been picked because of how they appear, just like the doctors and the pr people who for years and years said, like one doctor today, we do not know what causes lung cancer, and they said it well enough that it drowned out the truth. so you can consider that when you give the weight, when you decide the weight to give any testimony. that is why it seems to me we are not even close to who is slightly right. but on each of the questions, you have to look at this is not a close call. let me take you through the individual issues that are involved in this question. whether you look at it as one decision, did he have a disease caused by an addiction to cigarettes, or you look at it as two like the verdict form does, there are several parts. the first one was, was he addicted. you heard from his treating doctors that he was. it is obvious. it is an addictive drug. he tried to quit and he could not. they can come in here and say that he was not, and they can hire someone to say that he was not addicted, but you can use your common sense. in fact, you have to use your common sense. and you know essentially what addiction means. by any definition, any possible way to define it, like one of his daughter's defined it, when we were running low on cigarette, i saw him take the butts almost spent out of the ashtray and try to straighten them out and smoke them. that is a definition of addiction. that is him. he was addicted. or if he used the fagerstrom test or the heaviness of smoking or even the dsm their guy used, there is no doubt. it is not even close. dr. cummings is one of the world leading experts on tobacco addiction. todd asked him someone who smokes three packs per day -- he did not need to get to all of this information if you remember. but let us look at mr. bounomo. the amount of cigarettes he smoked, when he smoked in the morning, when he smoked at night, whether he had daily use, symptoms he had when he tried to quit, the fact he did try and quit and failed, the age he started, the length of time he smoked, is that person addicted he was asked? yes, there is no 14 doubt. and he trains the people who determine for the state of new york on the quit line if someone is addicted. if somebody said this person was not addicted, what would happen to them? it is ridiculous. if you want to use a technical definition, and remember dr. marks said i do not know, dr. marks was the psychiatrist they brought in to say this individual was not addicted. he said i do not know if you can use these other definitions of addiction, the fagerstrom test, heaviness of smoking index which was just two questions, ones used all the time by doctors. he said i do not know if it has been validated. i asked him what he meant by that. he said you have to do a study to follow people and see if the people that show that they are addicted under this test really are. but you already heard from dr. cummings that is exactly what they did. whether dr. marks knows it or not, it was a long study over many years, all types of people from very limited non-daily use to very heavy smokers, and this was the highest predictor as he called it, the highest correlation to whether somebody would have difficulty quitting because they were addicted. if you remember, when we scored it with dr. marks, their expert, under this test, he said at the very least it is high dependence, and it is quite possibly very high dependence which is how it was when i scored it with his wife. with his wife it was at least eight and possibly ten. with dr. marks it was at least seven and possibly ten. but any score over seven, your level of dependence is high, you are not in control of your smoking. by the way, we are not saying -- this really is not an issue for this phase because you are going to decide how much fault matthew buonomo had in the next phase. but i want to make it clear because this has been raised a lot. we are not saying if you are addicted you do not have free choice. but there is a physical addiction that results in what is called diminished free choice, a powerful physical resistance to acting on your free choice. does not mean you cannot quit. we never said that. but with smoking this high, your levels of dependence this high, you are not in control of your smoking. one other thing that dr. marks said and i expect it will come up in closing when the rjr lawyers talk. on this test, even a zero shows dependence. even a zero is addiction. i said do 16 you know why, doctor? do you know why a zero shows very low. very low obviously but, why it still shows some dependence. no. he asked me why. but i was not allowed to answer a witness. but i'll tell you. this is a test for daily smokers as dr. cummings told you. daily smokers by definition, in fact the definition that dr. marks admitted to, that rjr's expert admitted to, daily smokers have some level of addiction because as dr. marks said in the courtroom, do you agree that cigarette smoking is an addictive and chronic relapsing disorder. yes. he had to answer yes to that because that is the definition. it is an addictive and chronic relapsing disorder, cigarette smoking. if you are a daily smoker, that correlates to some level of addiction. if you smoke every day. it can be very low. as you saw, zero is very low dependence. but once you have a daily smoker by definition, by the definition dr. marks admitted to, you have some level of addiction. by their own expert's admission, he scores on that test addicted, and very, very highly addicted. i'll briefly remind you when they say he did not really want to quit and made no serious attempts to quit, he first tried cutting down. when that did not work he tried to quit cold turkey by eliminating cigarettes. this was in the mid-'70s. he tried different things with different quit attempts. sometimes chewing gum. he thought that would work. to us a lot of things about this case sound strange. but you have to remember not only was it a different time, but the things we know to be true like the air we breath, they really did not know. in fact, i was shocked to find out when i was questioning connie, i asked her did you know that it was proven in the '70s that smoking was harmful, and she said no, it was not. she did not say no, i did not know. she said no, it was not proven then. we will get to in a minute why people thought that. but the steps they took to try to quit were based on what they knew. they did not know all the things we know right now before we ever came into this courtroom, and certainly after what we heard. and connie even said that, i wish we had, i did not understand why matt was acting like that until i watched dr. henningfield on that video. to the point where when they were discussing quitting, he actually pounded on the table his fists and he said you do not know what i'm going through. and she did not. 18 this is not possible, rjr's answers. tried chewing gum. substituting smoking with candy and peanuts. i remember my grandparents doing it. water filter was a smoking aid, a cease smoking aid for the time. it seemed technologically advanced back then. you put a filter on it and you were supposed to get less nicotine and you can wean yourself off. he tried that. did not work. throwing away the cigarettes. we heard from his granddaughter all things the family would try to do, word games, to take his mind off it. they actually played this word search game. she would come over especially to keep his mind off smoking when he was trying to quit. why was matthew buonomo more addicted than other smokers? for example, dr. marks who told you he picked up a cigarette at 12 or 13, coughed, hated it and never smoked again. why was he different? well, we do not know entirely why. we just know he was more addicted. but we do know some of the factors. there are certain factors that will result in a lower level of addiction. one of the most important is the age you start smoking a lot. when your brain is still developing, remember nicotine actually physically changes your brain. if those changes occur when you are 13, 14, 15 years old it is much harder to quit. shorter duration, some people when they wake up, and we do not know why yet, reach for the cigarette. there is a biological, physical urge for the cigarette when they wake up. some people, they do not. they do not have that physical urge that makes them think of a cigarette. some person may be all the way on the left side, very low. but if you are like matt, starting younger, heavier smoker, longer duration, smoking very early in the morning, those are the factors that result in his powerful addiction. i'm going to stop talking about addiction. if he is not addicted, nobody is. let us talk about did he have copd. you have the entire medical record. that still exists. there were some things -- both parties have subpoena power to go out and get records, and we did from every hospital and doctor. but some doctors said we do not have them anymore or they said this is what we have. like you heard broward general did not have that sleep study. but everything we have is here. the defense and the plaintiffs have also marked certain things separately so it will make it easier for you to look at some of the things that were shown during 20 trial. but you are free to look through everything in here. i just wanted to give you a flavor of what those records looked like because if you read them, you know he had copd. doctor after doctor -- i have been using the 21 doctors. but that is just doctors who diagnosed or treated him for copd. there are other doctors involved with ruling out the congestive heart failure as a serious problem. and by the way, he did have congestive heart failure. there is no doubt he was diagnosed with it. we will talk about whether that was a cause of his death in a minute. you will notice whether it was a cause of his death is not one of the questions on the verdict form. that is for phase two. the only issue is whether he even had copd, not what killed him in 2008, but whether in 1995 when he went to the hospital he had copd. i did a very bad job of explaining something to you with the witnesses although they said it, but i kept trying to cut our part of those videos down, down, down, down. then we started talking about terms immediately, and some of the other doctors came in, and i think it was clear. but dr. klotz admitted this. the treating doctors all testified to this. copd which means chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, it means you have got something in your lungs, continually, chronically, obstructing in your lungs, the normal function, so it makes it difficult to breathe. that could happen in different ways. you can have copd from different physical causes. one of those is emphysema. if you have emphysema you have copd. if you have chronic bronchitis you have copd. if you have both you have copd. that is why dr. klotz, their expert, said copd is an umbrella disease that includes emphysema, chronic bronchitis, or both. some patients have both. some have emphysema. a lot of the doctors, the treating doctors, use it interchangeably with copd. dr. kelly adams who we did not hear from, every one of these doctors was available for the defense to talk to. and many of them who you did not hear from, they were talked to. they were deposed. you did not hear anything from any treater that disagrees with any of these. if you go through any of the medical records you will see again and again from doctor after doctor the diagnosis of copd, probable copd, exacerbation of copd, emphysema. in fact, look on may 13th, 1995. dr. bolton, a pulmonologist, a specialist in lung function, copd, chronic 22 obstructive lung disease. he called it lung instead of pulmonary, chronic obstructive lung disease with emphysematous copd and probable chronic bronchitis. but he is not necessarily diagnosing that. severe lung disease is written in the records and you heard it from the treaters. severe. show us 72 for a minute. a different summary. it shows how the different treatments they were doing were affecting his oxygen saturation. again, doctor after doctor, how the treatments are affecting and how they are going to change the treatments. ks73. they go on and on like that. s4. just a list of some of the doctors. this is not even complete in the different specialties who treated and diagnosed the copd. he was seen by seven cardiologists, seven cardiologists. pulmonologists. internists. radiologists. hospitalists. and you did not and will not ever hear one of them say that he never had copd, never had emphysema, he was not addicted, that he died of congestive heart failure, none. doctors that flew in from other parts of the country to say that. in fact, let us be clear about one thing. of all the experts who came in here for the defense, only one of them said he did not have copd. all the others if you notice did not say that. i have no opinion on whether he had copd. only one, dr. klotz, said he did not have copd, he had emphysema. well, he had bullae emphysema. we went through that three times. and i still do not know. hopefully you do. because i still do not know what he was saying. he said he did not have emphysema. so i said okay, he did not have emphysema. then i said once i wrote it, he does not have emphysema, he did not like it written down like that. he said i did not say that. i went and crossed out the not. he said it was small bullae emphysema. and he said in his opinion it was october 1995 according to the chart. because the x-ray that says bullae, that finds the bullae changes in the lungs which is emphysema -- emphysematous destruction in the lungs and they see it on the x-ray -- was october 1995. so there is no doubt about the date either. even the radiologist said emphysematous changes, which he finally admitted means of or related to emphysema, in every ct scan he ever saw but he would not give a date when he first got emphysema. dr. klotz did. this is their expert because obviously all the treaters agree. and there is only one doctor you heard from who said you cannot diagnose copd without a pulmonary 24 function test. that was dr. klotz. but remember, after i wrote this all out, his opinions in the case, it turns out he said the exact opposite a short time ago. the exact opposite. you do not need a pulmonary function test. i mean you can see the emphysema on the x-ray. people were getting emphysema before there were any pulmonary function tests. people were getting copd before there were any pulmonary function tests. one of you asked him what would you do if somebody came with these symptoms which clinically all those doctors could see, i know what this is, it is copd. what would you do? i give him a pulmonary function test. why? because he has copd. he said then i would diagnose it. it is the same thing they said year after year. we need more proof, not enough tests. we do not know if smoking is bad for you. we do not know if it is addictive. it is not proven. now they are saying they need one more test. i have a bunch of medical records. but let me play you -- can we have the video clip bolton 243? "question: is there any questions in your mind matthew buonomo had emphysema? "answer: no question in my mind. "question: any question in your mind matthew buonomo's death was caused by emphysema? "answer: there is no question that the patient died from emphysema. feinstein 108: "question: did matthew bounomo die from emphysema? "answer: yes. silver, 224: "question: do you remember mr. bounomo? "answer: i do. "question: how would you describe his emphysema? "answer: he was severe. issa 36: "question: how was emphysema diagnosed in mr. bounomo's case? "answer: his copd was diagnosed through x-rays. "question: do you believe that x-rays are a sufficient or adequate way to diagnose emphysema or copd? "answer: better than the pulmonary function test. yes. i believe so. was copd caused by his addiction? really that is kind of the other part of this. i want to 1834 show you one of the jury instructions on that. when we are talking about whether the addiction caused copd, there is a legal definition of what that means, cause. remember you are going to have these back there. but remember there are two important parts of this deposition. first of all, an addiction is a legal cause of an injury if it directly and in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine the injury would not have occurred. but for the addiction, no injury. if he was not addicted, he would not have gotten the disease. that is what cause means. if he was addicted, he gets the disease. if he is not addicted, he does not. it is important to remember the second paragraph because it is a cause. you see, there can be a lot of causes that if you take one out it does not happen. car accident. somebody runs a red light and hits somebody. that other person did not do anything wrong. but if they had not gotten in their car that morning there would not have been an accident. that is also a bolton cause. there can be several things if you take them away you do not have the outcome. in this case you got addiction. you take it away there is no copd. and we are going to get briefly into how addiction drives disease. they are going to say failure to quit. does not matter. that is not your issue whether he failed to quit. fault is for phase two. how cigarettes are designed. the choices rjr made. there are a lot of reasons that resulted in this disease, a lot of causes. but if the addiction contributed substantially, and if you take it away, you would not have gotten the disease, then it is the cause. if he was not addicted, he would not have been smoking that many cigarettes and he would not have gotten the disease. so the second paragraph specifically says addiction need not be the only cause. your honor, can i take an additional ten minutes out of rebuttal? the court: yes. i did not know why you did not reserve more to begin with. mr. uustal: i thought i was more concise than i am. sorry. it does not add any total time to what you have to sit through. so the only issue on this is would he have 2 gotten sick if he was not addicted. first of all, does smoking cause copd. and obviously it does. there was no witness who denied that. in fact, i think even dr. klotz admitted that. yes. cigarette smoke does not cause emphysema. actually he took this back. he said this at first. cigarette smoke does not cause emphysema in every case. it causes emphysema in 99 percent of cases, actually about 99-and-a-half percent. but he took that back. and he said -- talking about matthew buonomo now specifically, an expert for the defense. more likely than not, the bullae emphysema you found was caused by his addiction to smoking cigarettes. the lawyers have met with him like he told you for many, many hours, so he was careful to say -- i'm not saying the addiction caused it but it was caused by his smoking cigarettes. so all the treating doctors and their own expert admits it was caused by smoking. it is so strongly linked that dr. klotz initially said 99.5 percent of the cases. it is so strongly linked that dr. marks, their guy who came in who used this book, the dsm, to say he was not addicted had to admit that the dsm said a symptom of nicotine addiction is copd. that is how strong the language is. if you see someone with copd, you can consider that a sign of nicotine addiction, because the addiction drives the smoking, the amount of smoking that is needed to cause the damage in the lungs that results in copd. someone not addicted does not smoke as much. that is not enough smoking to cause the copd. the addiction drives the exposure to the things in the cigarettes. he switched to filters. remember when people started talking about cigarettes might be bad? he switched to filters to be safe. we know now those filters do not filter out the carcinogens and the other bad substances. and once you get a sufficient level of exposure, you will develop the damage to the lung, and if you are not addicted you just do not smoke enough to get that exposure. dr. cummings talked about why it is hard to quit. this is how the addiction drives the smoking. it is hard to quit. the main factor is how it is designed. cigarettes engineered that way. precisely. mr. geise: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. uustal: this is testimony in this case that this witness testified to. precisely, yes, they are. and who is choice is that. that is 4 the cigarette company's, reynolds. if they chose to, they could take the nicotine out. nicotine addicts would not smoke because they are smoking to get the nicotine. if they took the nicotine out, kids who smoked could not get addicted. but it is this addiction that drives the level of smoking. if you look at the parts of the cigarette that are designed to feed the addiction which increases the exposure, you see the chemical -- dr. cummings testified about this -- you see the chemical compounds that are added. they added flavorings to control the burn rate, to control ventilation. mr. geise: objection, your honor. phase two. the court: sustained. take that down. take that down. thank you. mr. uustal: the way the cigarette is designed is to feed the addiction. this one this morning i cut and pasted from the transcript so i do not have it fancy. dr. cummings was explaining how the addiction feeds the development of the disease. it is directly related to the disease we see from smoking. it is the people addicted who use the product repeatedly. he is talking about what he has seen in his studies. it is the people addicted and use the product repeatedly usually at a high level for many years that get the disease. social smokers do not get the disease related to cigarette smoking. heavy cigarette smokers are the ones that get the cancer, the copd, the heart disease. it is directly correlated. he is an epidemiologist. that is what he does. those are the people that first discovered that cigarette smoking was harmful and the cigarette companies said it is just epidemiology. they are the ones who discovered it. from his epidemiological study, he can tell -- that just means looking at people, groups, over periods of time and see what factors have what outcomes. heavy addiction is the factor that causes copd. this will give you a brief kind of physical example of the different type of exposure you get if you are addicted compared to a social smoker. this is one or two packs a day compared to a pack a month. you can see obviously that the exposure to the toxins in nicotine is far, far, far greater. so it is the addiction that drives the disease. i will be done in a few minutes. they used to say cigarettes were not addictive. now we hear cigarettes were not 6 addictive to matthew buonomo. it used to be we do not know if cigarettes cause disease, we need more tests. mr. geise: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. uustal: now we hear we do not know if cigarettes caused disease for mr. bounomo, we need more tests. same thing. but if he is not addicted and his copd was not caused by smoking, then we are right back to the old days, because if someone that smokes like him is not addicted and someone with this amount of medical records undisputed by every doctor who treated him for 13 years did not get copd from his addiction to smoking, then no one does. i'm going to have a chance to talk to you again after rjr is done. i promise you and so does the judge i'm sure will make sure it will be much shorter than this. we have a set amount of time but i have split mine. it has been a long road. i appreciate some of the things in this case were not as exciting as they could have been, especially the videos. phase two, no videos, i promise. it will be much shorter if you answer yes to both questions regarding the phase two. it is shorter in total. and there are no videos. mr. geise: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. uustal: that is the point where you will assign fault to mr. bounomo for his choices, and you will hear the evidence which you have not yet heard about the fault of others. mr. geise: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. we will take a stretch break until 2:35. you are excused until 2:35. (brief recess) the court: mr. uustal. mr. uustal: thank you, your honor. proof. how many times did we just hear that word? there is no proof. same thing we have been hearing for 50 years. how many doctors did they want us to bring in? would ten have been enough? fifteen? this is proof. i mean, i do not know what rjr means by the word proof. but the evidence, evidence is any witness. everything connie said is evidence. like any other piece of evidence, you decide to accept it or reject it. but what she said alone is evidence that can tip the scales that start out even. they spent days interrogating the treating doctors in this case. they could have called in anyone. if any doctor supported what they said, we would have heard from them. this is all his doctors. they did not want to come in here. it is not fun. you heard it from dr. henningfield. it is not fun to testify against rjr. think about all the time away from their practices in those depositions. it is not fun for them. but you heard from an rjr doctor it is fun to testify for a tobacco company. i felt during mr. geise's remarks that i was running around -- not running around but moving around trying to find things because i have to defend every page in here. what do you think i could do with $200,000 for doctors and untold lawyers from all over the country picking over those records to come up with something to argue about? i'll show you some of the things. this was just shown to you in rjr's closing. this is the first ct report, the one done to rule out lung cancer. we know why they would do a ct scan to look for lung cancer in a patient who has been smoking as long as he has. the radiologist they brought in did not know. did not know that smoking causes lung cancer. but we know. they were looking for lung cancer. you just heard this report says nothing about copd. but it does underneath that blowup. the clinical 2 diagnosis was copd. the ct scan was to look for lung cancer. and it says copd, but not in this blowup. the very next one you were shown says, well, dr. bolton agreed that ct scan did not show any signs of emphysema and that the question was after you read this you were asked you did not hear from dr. bolton that he read that ct scan and it said anything different. you did hear from dr. dautenhahn, their radiologist, that agreed. but guess what is missing? the film. dr. bolton could not have looked at that film at the deposition and agreed because he did not have it, and dr. dautenhahn admitted that he did not have it. somebody else we found, his daughter. his personality, did it change when he quit smoking in 1995? that does not mean the day he quit smoking. i think you all know that. after a long exchange in a long deposition she said once he quit smoking, he was the same person, but not while he was going through withdrawal. you heard that when dr. issa said that when you see chf in these medical records, it means cor pulmonale rightsided heart failure caused by copd. but he is not a cardiologist. and dr. yount is. so dr. yount knows what it means when it says congestive heart failure in these records. but guess what? dr. issa wrote chf. he knew what it means because he wrote it. then he was asked about it, specifically that. can you put up 160? "question: show me in your record where you used the word right ventricular strain? "answer: we usually do not use that word. we usually put it for simplicity, we call it congestive heart failure. "question: so would you agree then in your medical record you never used the term right ventricular strain? "answer: i would say that it is highly unlikely that i called it that because it is obvious when i signed a note or sent it to another medical -- somebody else in the medical field, whether it is a cardiologist or a pulmonologist, they understand looking at the records and looking at what we write this is, that is what we are writing. so there are two points there. the first one is he knows what he meant when he wrote congestive heart failure, and it is an important point that was left out that he wrote them. but the second thing is you will hear from a 4 guy who has never testified before and has nothing to do with lawsuits that when he writes chf, it is obvious to the other doctors looking at this it is rightsided heart failure. then you will hear from dr. yount that it is obvious it means leftsided heart failure. something is wrong. mr. geise told you it was not exactly right how i described the greater weight of the evidence. that is why i showed it to you. so we would be exactly right, this is no room for imprecision on the burden. the greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. the greater weight, the scale measures weights. we start out even. and you look to which side, after you weigh all the evidence, has the greater weight, more than the other side. greater, more than. and everything you heard from all the defense people, it is all evidence, and you assign whatever weight you want. but when you measure it, it does not matter if it is high like this and there is no doubt, or there is plenty of doubts, you look to which story you heard, which answer is more likely. if somebody says there is no proof, like connie was embarrassed to admit that matt told her about the dangers of smoking -- if somebody, when you are deliberating, says there is no proof. everything you heard is proof. this is proof. the question is what is the greater weight of the evidence. all of the treaters, all of the medical records, or four paid opinion witnesses, only one of whom said you need a pulmonary function test to diagnose copd. you were shown this, the quitting methods not used. i'm not going to go through this again because i think you remember exactly why each of these was not used. but it does not seem right to me to say he did not quit hard enough, he did not try hard enough, while the whole time they were whispering in his ear you do not have to quit today. there is no proof, and if there is ever any proof anything is wrong we will take it out. if you are worried about it, just switch to filters, you do not have to quit today. tomorrow see what happens, the jury will be back, the jury will be in. the jury never came in, not until 2000. so while they are whispering in his ear you do not have to quit today, which to someone who is an addict of any kind including a nicotine addict, it sounds a little different. you do not have to quit today. let me show you a couple of those. 6 can we see 952e, please? tens of thousands of doctors in all branches of medicine in all parts of the country were asked that question, what cigarette do you smoke, doctor? the brand named most was camel. yes, survey shows more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette. smoke camel, the cigarette so many doctors enjoy. 887, please. this is timothy v. hartnett, former president of a major tobacco firm and chairman of the industry research committee. mr. mauro, i would like to quote from a statement released at the time the tobacco institute research committee was formed. at that time we stated, we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business, and that is where we stand today. 235. "question: suppose the tremendous amount of research now going on including that of the tobacco industry research committee were to reveal there is a cancer causing agent in cigarettes. what then? "answer: well, if it was found by somebody working under the tobacco industry research grant, it would be made public immediately, and just as broadly as we could make it, and then efforts would be taken to attempt to remove that substance or substances. there are other videos that you will have the capability if you want to watch any of them. but if you remember the governors coming out and saying the various states when the surgeon general reports came out, if there is anything found wrong with cigarettes, they will just take it out. more importantly, all those things he said he did not do to quit, they are not on the verdict form. you see, whether he could have quit or whether he tried hard enough to quit or how much he wanted to quit, that is not on the verdict form. the only question was whether he was addicted. mr. geise said he is not big for labels. what does addiction mean? the real question is whether he could quit. the real question is on the verdict form. that is the one you have to answer. if somebody is saying i think he could have quit, that is not an issue for you today. just talk very briefly about dr. yount who you heard from today and mr. geise discussed. he told you the leftsided heart failure he talked about, there is two parts of leftsided heart 8 failure, systolic and diastolic. when you look at the systolic measurements, the function systolically of his heart in his entire life, five of the seven echocardiograms done showed no systolic dysfunction. he admitted that. and in the last year of his life, completely normal. so that one side of the coin, completely normal. the other side, diastolic, less than one month before he died, yes, there was a problem, which his treating doctors diagnosed and discussed at length in their depositions. and the cardiologist on the report says early grade one, not grade two, three, four, not endstage fatal like his copd was, endstage, and dr. yount admitted that. not just that it said early grade one, but he admitted that when he looked at the echo it was grade one. i did not realize it until he testified today. i thought i was going to tell you that congestive heart failure, there has got to be a reason for it, and they do not have one. they are just picking congestive heart failure and saying he had it. but congestive heart failure has to be caused by something. it is a syndrome. but they do have an answer for that. if you remember from opening and then listen to dr. yount today, mr. geise said in opening that just before he was hospitalized, matthew buonomo was hospitalized for the first time and diagnosed with copd in 1995, had gone to the doctor, he had been feeling ill for a few weeks, maybe months, maybe up to two months, short of breath, he went to the doctor, and was prescribed verapamil. verapamil is contraindicated. he said i did not know what contraindicated means when i started this case. he said he was prescribed verapamil. if you have congestive heart failure, it is going to exacerbate it and the verapamil sent him into the hospital. then dr. yount said today he was on verapamil for the rest of his life. so they are not just saying he did not have copd. they are saying he had congestive heart failure caused by a medication prescribed by his doctors. that is the cause, and there has to be a cause. so not only did they treat him for the wrong disease supposedly for 13 years, they gave him the medication that ended up killing him. he never called himself addicted. mr. geise said he never called himself addicted. i'm sure if they said no one remembers him saying that, what does that have to do with anything. he did not 10 know what addiction was. connie did not understand it until she saw dr. henningfield's deposition. but more importantly, we cannot ask him. his mother lived to 95, almost two-decade longer than him. we cannot ask him if he thought he was addicted because he died from copd caused by smoking cigarettes almost two decades before his mother. mr. geise said dr. cummings combed his archives for the most inflammatory videos he could find. you have not seen any evidence yet of what they did. mr. geise: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. uustal: there was some suggestion it could not have been copd because there were some findings you were shown in the medical record that showed that on some occasions he was better than on other occasions. dr. klotz, who is again their pulmonologist, not a treating doctor but someone hired for litigation, was asked do you agree that copd is with you all the time even when you do not have symptoms. and remember everyone agrees the damage to the lungs from emphysema is irreversible. but you get treated. they have various types of treatment including medication, spiriva, which is a new medication during one part of his treatment when he came out specifically for copd, it did wonders for him for awhile. but, yes, dr. klotz agreed, if you have the disease, it is always with you, even if you do not have symptoms. sometimes you have them, sometimes you do not. so, yes, sometimes in there he is better than other times. dr. silver was one of the doctors who wrote in there that sometimes no respiratory distress and things like that. can we see dr. silver 225? "question: when matthew buonomo comes and says he feels better, does he still have emphysema? "answer: all the time. "question: is shortness of breath a routine for him? "answer: that is just a baseline for him. a good day for him might be i'm not as short of breath today, but i'm always short of breath. today might be a good day. tomorrow might be a bad day. someone sneezes and gets a cold, that might be an awful day. to him a good day might be i'm able to walk across the room and i'm not gasping for air. there apparently was no pulmonary function test. you remember dr. silver said i do not know if 12 there was a pulmonary function test. you do not need one to diagnose it. but i do not know, i cannot tell from the record we have. but apparently there was no pft. mr. geise said when dr. bolton is not acting as an expert he gives his patients pulmonary function tests. so i do not understand that. in 1995, a decade, more than a decade before this lawsuit, when he was treating a patient, he did not give him a pulmonary function test because in this case he is an expert and he is not an expert. he was not paid to fly across the country and come in here and tell you things he knew nothing about. it was his patient. but once again, you heard from only one witness you need a pulmonary function test, and he said the exact opposite a couple months ago, that you can diagnose copd clinically. he told us what that was. radiologically he said x-rays. pulmonary function test. and he said well, i was wrong. that is what he told you. couple months ago i was wrong when i said you could diagnose it that way. he was right last time. because every single other witness you heard from agrees with that. and none of their experts other than him said that. the last thing i want to show you, his treating doctors saw him a lot. a lot. they would have you believe they did not know whether he had -- they thought he had copd and he did not, so i just -- i do not know if any of you know what it is like for someone with copd and how big a mistake, how obvious a mistake that would have to be. dr. silver talked about that. silver 222, please. "question: what can a patient with severe emphysema expect to go through as his or her condition worsens over time? "answer: that depends. if someone has a mild case, some mild shortness of breath. simple symptoms of maybe a cough or just not feeling totally normal, fatigued at times to people all the way up to severe where walking across the room is a great deal for them. it is a terrible, terrible condition because basically you are suffocating. you are unable to get enough oxygen into your body. it is a very, very terrible condition. you remember they all said he had severe copd. the last thing he talks about is endstage copd, fatal copd, which he was diagnosed with. silver 223. "question: emphysema is a condition 14 covered under the umbrella of copd? "answer: yes, it is. was that 223? "question: what do those patients go through whose disease progresses to endstage copd? "answer: unfortunately, it is just a debilitating disease that basically ends up ultimately killing them. they go through terrible bouts of shortness of breath, exacerbation, fatigue, unable to do their daily living, daily activities, because of severe lung dysfunction. basically they are sort of a captive from their illness because they cannot do their regular daily activities because they are too short of breath. the court: you need to conclude. mr. uustal: thank you for your patience. please, the questions are on the verdict form, those are the ones you need to answer. thank you.