19 mr. geise: thank you, your honor. counsel, mrs. bounomo, ladies and gentleman of the jury. we are at the end of the case. it started a couple weeks ago. you have heard from the witnesses. the evidence is in. all that is left now is for you to do your job as the judges of the facts. it has been my great pleasure to get a chance to try this case in front of the seven of you. years from now i'll look back on this experience and i'm remember your faces. we do not get to talk a lot, but i'll remember your faces. i'll remember how you reacted to certain evidence or something funny that happened in the courtroom, and it will be a fond memory for me. i got to tell you, you were on time every day. we never waited for one of you. you were here. you took your jobs seriously. as an attorney, that is all we can ask for, and i want to thank you for that. if it was not for you, our system would not work. but it does work. unfortunately for you, there is a little bit of work you have to do. you have to deliberate. but you have paid attention. you have taken notes. you have asked incredible questions. i have asked a lot of questions. that shows that you are paying attention, that you are listening to the evidence, that you are taking this seriously, and we appreciate that. for all you have done, i want to say thank you. as the judge told you repeatedly and said it a couple times while dr. cummings was on the stand, this case is about two issues and two issues only. i put this up in my opening statement, but i want to go back to them again. these are really the two factual issues that matter in this case. was mr. bounomo addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, did that addiction cause copd 8 before november 21st, 1996. those are the two factual questions that you need to focus on to answer the verdict form. we talked throughout that the plaintiff has the burden of proof on those two questions. the court will instruct you about what that burden means. counsel already talked about the greater weight of the evidence. it is the plaintiff, not the defense, but the plaintiff who has to prove that mr. bounomo was addicted to cigarettes, and that he smoked because of an addiction, not because he wanted to, not because of choice. it is the plaintiff that has to prove that mr. bounomo had copd before november of 1996. and the plaintiff has to prove both of those things by the greater weight of the evidence. plaintiff's counsel used these scales. he said we start out like this, and it just has to get just like that for them to meet the burden of proof. that is not exactly true because the fact of the matter is we do not have a burden of proof on anything. so i do not have to put one weight, one piece of evidence, anything on the scale. even if i do not do that, the plaintiff still has to prove this case by the greater weight of the evidence. it is not a question of what they put in versus what i put in. they have the full burden. and the greater weight does not equal just a little bit. the greater weight is not met through speculation. it is not met through bare conclusions. it is not met through hypotheticals. it is only met through proof. it is the burden of proof. he encouraged you at the beginning of the trial to demand proof. as you listened to the testimony, i think you will see that the plaintiff did not satisfy that demand for proof. the evidence in this case proves that mr. buonomo was a stubborn man who did what he wanted to do, especially when it came to smoking, but when it came to other things as well, and i'll touch on that. the proof in this case is that he quit in 1995 and he never smoked again. the proof is that it was his choice and his want that caused him to start smoking, that caused him to continue smoking, that caused him to stop smoking, and caused him to never smoke again. secondly, the plaintiffs simply cannot prove that mr. bounomo had copd before 1996. the medical evidence i'll go through demonstrates he had congestive heart failure, and that congestive heart failure, not copd, caused his death 13 years later 10 at the age of 80 years old. i want to talk first about addiction. in determining whether mr. bounomo was addicted to cigarettes, you have to consider what it means to be addicted. the instructions will not contain a definition for you. you will need to decide that. does it mean if you are addicted you have to smoke no matter what and you cannot stop no matter how hard you want to? is that addiction? or does it mean you can stop smoking but only with incredible willpower? or does it mean that smoking controls you and you do not control smoking? common sense tell us that addiction prevents from doing something you would otherwise do. for a smoker it means addiction prevents you from quitting if you want to, or it compels you to smoke when you do not want to. last, the evidence demonstrated mr. bounomo was a man who made his own choices. when it came to smoking, he made a lot of them. let us look at some of these. i showed you this in opening. i think all the evidence that came in supported this. he chose to start smoking. he chose to continue smoking. he chose what brands he wanted to smoke. he chose to switch brands. he chose to stick with his favorite brands. he chose not to quit, and eventually he chose to quit. maybe there is one other thing i could put on there we heard from dr. marks. he chose every day to quit and to not start again. that was 13 years of decisions. these choices mr. bounomo made based upon what he wanted to do. he controlled these choices. smoking did not control him. let us look quickly at his smoking behavior. we heard he started smoking in the early 1940s. no one knows exactly when he started. no one knows exactly why he started. no one knows what brand mr. bounomo smoked for that first ten years he smoked before he got back from korea. that is an interesting point. nobody knows if the brands he smoked were made by my client, somebody else's client, or just penny cigarettes. mr. uustal: objection, your honor. the court: sit down. overruled. mr. uustal: i had an agreement about this. the court: step in the juryroom. (jury absent) (record read back as recorded above) the court: there was evidence about that. mr. uustal: but, your honor, i agreed to 12 take out the jury instruction about r.j. reynolds' relation to the other parties. the court: the objection as to this phase is irrelevant. the issue is not whether he was addicted to reynolds' cigarettes. that has been established in every trial. the issue of whether he was addicted at all which is your company's fault because of your cigarettes is a phase-two question. so i'm going to instruct the jury about that, and then you can continue. bring the jury in. (jury present) the court: just so it is clear, as we proceed in this phase of the trial, it is irrelevant which cigarettes mr. bounomo was smoking as far as the question of whether he was addicted or not and whether or not it caused him to suffer a disease. it would be relevant in phase two if we reach phase two, but it is not relevant on the issues you are being asked to decide in this phase. you may proceed. mr. geise: thank you, your honor. we also heard from mrs. bounomo how mr. bounomo selected his cigarettes. she testified when he came from korea in 1952 he was smoking camels, lucky strike, and chesterfield. but she did not like the smell of lucky strike and chesterfield, so she asked him to smoke camel, and he did. that is how he settled on that brand, camel. it was not based on addiction or advertising. it was because his wife did not like the smell of the other cigarettes and encouraged him to smoke camels. he smoked camels from the 1950s to the 1970s. we heard he would try other brands, but he would return to camels because he liked their taste. later his wife told us that he switched to salem because he liked the menthol flavor of salem. again, he chose his brand based on taste, not advertising, not addiction, but taste. it was his choice, a choice based on taste. there is also no dispute in the case that mr. bounomo stopped smoking. there is no question whether he could or could not quit smoking. he did. he answered that question for you. it is a fact that mr. bounomo not only could quit smoking but he did quit smoking just like the 60 million other smokers who have quit, and the ninety percent of those smokers who have quit without using any aids or cessation methods. we heard testimony that mr. buonomo tried to quit many times. i think if we look at the evidence behind those quit attempts, we can see how serious those attempts were. mrs. bounomo told you 14 that he would have a pack of cigarettes in the morning, say he was going to stop, he would throw the pack away, but he would not throw the carton away. he kept a carton in the closet so when he wanted a cigarette he would go to the closet and get one. when he did this, she testified he was not even sure if her husband intended to give up cigarettes permanently. if you want to stop, you have to intend to give up permanently. other times mrs. bounomo said after he said he was going to stop, a little while later he would say well, maybe i'm going to cut back. again, these are not the actions of someone who is really serious about quitting, not someone who is motivated to quit. we heard about word search and hard candy and sweets and things mr. bounomo might have done to keep his mind off smoking at the time he was trying to quit. but we also heard that he did word searches and ate candy and loved sweets while he was smoking. you heard he was a big sweets guy. he did not use these things to replace smoking. it is not like he stopped and picked up sweats or did word searches to replace smoking to give him something to do. these are things he always enjoyed doing. you also heard that anybody could quit smoking, even smokers who were addicted. dr. henningfield, dr. cummings, everybody agrees addiction does not mean you cannot quit. sure, it might be harder for some people to quit than others. everyone is different. some people might never quit. but other people like mr. bounomo will quit. you heard from dr. marks that smoking does not take away your free will. smoking does not make you lose the ability to think rationally. smoking does not prevent you from being able to make decisions. smoking does not rob you of your ability to chose not to smoke if that is your choice. dr. cummings told you that motivation is the key. he said it a number of times. you got to want to quit. dr. cummings testified trying different methods to quit is an indication of motivation. let us look at some of the methods mr. bounomo did not use to quit. never used nicotine gum. never used a nicotine patch. never sought medical help. never visited a smoking cessation clinic. never tried hypnosis. never threw out his cigarette carton, his matches, or his ashtrays. not doing those things is a sign there was not the motivation to quit. you got to want to quit. why 16 did not he do those things? because he did not want to go without smoking. we heard that mr. bounomo would stop smoking briefly but then he would start again. mrs. bounomo told you when he would start again, she never asked him why he started smoking again and he never told her. let us assume that dr. berndt and dr. bolton, the two treating physicians that first saw mr. bounomo in may of 1995 and said he quit a year earlier -- we all remember those documents, and we remember the testimony from dr. bolton. let us assume they are wrong, that he never told them he stopped in 1994, and let us assume mr. bounomo did stop in 1995. the plaintiff will tell you the only reason mr. bounomo stopped in 1995 is because he was hospitalized and because he was on oxygen. you heard mr. bounomo had not been hospitalized or been to a doctor in 40 years. so for the first time in over four decades he is in a hospital. he is uncomfortable. does not feel well. he is in respiratory failure. he is irritable. who would not be? he is hooked up to tubes. he has doctors coming in. he is taken out of his normal life. of course you are going to be uncomfortable. while he was in the hospital he could not smoke. he asked for three things. he asked for a cigarette, he asked for a sandwich, and he asked for a newspaper. did he ask for these three things because was addicted to all these of those, or did he ask for those three things because those were the things that would make him comfortable, to take him back to what comforts him. the interesting thing is after mr. bounomo got out of the hospital he went back to eating sandwiches. he kept reading the newspaper. but he never went back to smoking. so does that mean he was addicted to sandwiches and the newspaper or the things he wanted to do? it is odd. dr. cummings told you that addiction is a loss of control. but when mr. bounomo lost control for the first time in 40 years, that is when he quit. dr. marks told you when he was in the hospital, this was the first time this gentleman lost control, that he could not do what he wanted to do, and it was that first time he lost control that he stopped smoking not just until he got out of the hospital but for the rest of his life, for the next 13 years. mrs. bounomo told us that mr. bounomo was first angry and irritable in the hospital, but after a few days he was calmer and okay. that is while he 18 was quitting once and for all. so we talked about the symptoms of nicotine withdrawal, and we talked about irritability, and we talked about how it changes your personality if this is a sign of addiction. mr. bounomo's daughter testified. look what she told us about his change in personality when he quit. she was asked: "question: i think you told us you did not notice any change in his personality after he stopped smoking in 1995. is that fair to say? "answer: yes. no change in his personality when he quit after smoking. even though we did not hear from mr. bounomo in this case, we learned a lot about him. we learned this was a man who did what he wanted to do. just think of the persistence of a person who decides they are not going to drive a vehicle. this is hard for us to fathom. he knew how to drive. he just made a decision not to. dr. marks told you this is an indication of somebody's personality, that they can make their decision and go forward with it even if it causes some inconvenience. mr. bounomo had the similar choices with smoking. in the 1950s after he and mrs. bounomo were married, she asked please do not light up the cigarettes in the bedroom. his response was he did it anyway. in the 1970s she kept nagging him about his smoking. they saw the warnings on the package telling him it was dangerous, and he kept smoking. in the 1980s she continued to get on his case, but he did not respond by not smoking. you remember what ms. bounomo said about her husband's personality? he was a very stubborn person who had his own mind and did what he wanted to do. while it was just a phrase, she said he was so stubborn you could not change his mind if he had a gun in his back. that was his personality. his daughter marilyn told you the same thing. she testified he was a very decisive man, and that he believed in his opinion, and it was very, very hard to sway him. the decisions to smoke was like other decisions in his life. he made up his mind what he was going to do, and no one could convince him otherwise. he did not want to stop smoking so he did not. i want to talk a little bit about the people who talked about whether mr. bounomo was addicted or not, the plaintiff's experts, their treating physicians who they made their experts in 20 this case that you saw on video. they testified that mr. buonomo was addicted. but when he saw each one of them, they already stopped smoking. they admitted they were not experts on addiction. all the doctors testified to that testifying by video. they knew nothing about his attempts to quit. they did not know when or how he quit. based on that simple fact he smoked, they said he was addicted. that is not enough. that is not enough proof. you also heard from dr. cummings. i want to spend a minute or two talking about dr. cummings. plaintiff's counsel talked about being a stranger to the courtroom in the first part of his closing argument. dr. cummings is no stranger to a courtroom. frankly, he spends more time in court than i do. dr. cummings is a general in the war on tobacco. you heard him say this. in this case, i think his battlefield maps were a little off, and he is at the wrong spot for this case. we talked in opening statement and voir dire about the right juror for the right case. i'm not sure what dr. cummings came here to talk about was pertinent to the two issues you need to decide. he talks about a quit line in new york that receives thousands of calls a year from smokers who want to quit. mr. bounomo never called the quit line in new york or anywhere else. dr. cummings talks about what he does in his smoking cessation clinics. mr. bounomo did not go to smoking cessation clinics. dr. cummings combed his archives to select the most inflammatory statements he could find to play for you, but there is not a bit of evidence in this case that mr. bounomo saw any of those clips he played or saw the articles from some of the newspapers from the boston globe. dr. cummings talked about sergeant bilco, the beverly hillbillies, and the flintstones. there was no testimony in this case that mr. bounomo saw those shows. dr. cummings showed you lots of advertising as well. but mrs. bounomo told you she does not know that mr. bounomo ever picked a brand of cigarette based on advertisement. dr. cummings talked about studying people in 20 countries to determine their smoking habits, but he never talked to you about mr. bounomo's smoking habits. he talked about different tools he uses to determine if a hypothetical person is addicted, but he did not tell you that mr. bounomo was addicted. in fact, if you go back to the transcript, he did not utter mr. bounomo's name once. 22 in all the sound bites and the film clips and all the things dr. cummings did put up about smoking and addiction, there was one person at left out of his montage, and that was mr. buonomo. you heard in 1975 when mr. bounomo caught his daughter smoking he reprimanded her that night and told her do not do this, you will never be able to quit. he told her that in 1975. he knew smoking would be difficult to quit. he told her that. this is 13 years before surgeon general koop calls it an addiction. i think dr. cummings was waging a different war from a different place, and a general did not belong in this case. dr. henningfield was the same way. let us look at a clip from dr. henningfield. "question: doctor, let us talk but your knowledge of the smoker or smokers in this case. you do not know the name or names of any of the smokers involved in this case do you? "answer: that is correct. "question: you do not know the smoking behavior of the smoker or smokers in this case, do you? "answer: no, i do not. "question: for example, whether a smoker quit or not is unknown to you? "answer: that is correct. dr. cummings and dr. henningfield know a load about addiction in general, but they did not say anything about addiction specific to mr. buonomo. ask yourself how they help you answer the question in this case about mr. buonomo because you need proof about mr. buonomo's addiction, not somebody else. the only qualified professional you heard from that diagnoses people with addictions and dependancies who offered an opinion about mr. buonomo was dr. marks. and his opinion about mr. buonomo was that he was not clinically addicted or dependent. he always had the ability to quit and he made the decision not to smoke in 1995 and every day for the next 13 years. now, i mentioned in opening statement that the words addiction and nicotine dependence are just labels. dr. cummings talked about the labels and how they changed over time. he said in 1964 the surgeon general and the world health organization called smoking a habit. they did not call it an addiction. then in 1977 and 1982 the surgeon general called it a personal choice behavior. then in 1988 the surgeon general called it an addiction. now other organizations call it a dependence. 24 i'm not sure what counsel is going to say when he gets up to rebut, but i'm sure you will see some of the film clips dr. cummings played for you. i'm certain of that. they will probably say that my client and other tobacco companies said those things to give a crutch to mr. buonomo and other smokers like them. if reynolds was giving him a crutch, what was the surgeon general doing in 1964? what was the world health organization doing? i do not want to get hung up on labels. but if you follow the bouncing label in this case, let us assume someone has -- their smoking behavior is what it is and it does not change. in 1964 that person is going to be habituated, in 1977 they are going to have a behavior, in 1988 they are going to have an addiction, and maybe now they have a dependancy. their smoking behavior would have stayed the same all along. that is why i do not want to get hung up on terms like addiction and dependence. those words are labels. at the end of the day, the only thing that matters is mr. buonomo's smoking behavior, not what we call it. and dr. cummings agreed on this. he said the fundamental question is whether people can quit smoking. mr. buonomo answered that fundamental question. he quit smoking. so when we talk about standard, fagerstrom, the heaviness of smoking index, the dsm, the best standard to use in this case to determine if mr. buonomo could quit smoking is whether he did, and we know how he answered that standard. a final thought about the label addiction. mrs. buonomo smoked for 19 years and then quit. but she does not think she was addicted and neither does her family. the family did not put that label on her. interestingly, mr. buonomo never put the label of addiction on himself. his daughter testified the following: i do not recall him ever saying the word addicted to me personally. mrs. buonomo testified in her response to one of your questions that he never called himself addicted. you heard that this lawsuit was filed before he passed away. mr. buonomo never called himself addicted after he stopped or before he stopped, or before he filed the lawsuit or after he filed the lawsuit. sure he thought it would be hard to quit, but he was able to quit. maybe that is not addiction. if mr. buonomo did not say he himself was addicted, should we? i want to switch gears completely now and talk about the medical issues. before i get to the 1862 medical evidence you saw and the testimony you heard, i want to point out something you probably noticed. during this trial you did not see a single medical record until we started our part of the case. plaintiffs did not put a single medical record up on the overhead with their witnesses to talk about mr. bounomo's medical condition. they did not show you a single x-ray or a single ct scan. they did not show you any echocardiograms. instead, they showed you canned videos from their four experts. that is what they showed you. they gave you their bear bones conclusions without walking you through all the reasons for their opinions. i hope you ask yourselves why that happened. plaintiff counsel has attacked the experts i called in, attacked a gentleman who is board certified in cardiology and testified today, a man who does it for a living. he is a cardiologist. he teaches other doctors how to be cardiologists. he works hard. that is what he does. they attacked a man who is a diagnostic radiologist. he is board certified. it is all he does is look at radiology. sure he does not have opinions on these other areas because that is was he does. that is his expertise. and they attacked the pulmonologist and what he does is pulmonology. he came in here and talked to you about pulmonology. they attacked dr. marks for doing the same thing, for doing what he does. they also seem to indicate there was something wrong for these people getting paid for the time they put in in this case, the time they put in to prepare, to come here, to sit here and answer my questions, answer their questions, and answer your questions. they wanted to prepare themselves for that, and they did. some of the time they spent, they asked, did you meet with lawyers, did you meet with mr. geise, did you talk this over? yes, they did meet with me. do you know why? because i'm not a cardiologist or pulmonologist, and i'm not a radiologist. so if i do not meet with the experts who can tell me about those areas, i cannot present a case to you knowing what is going on. now, the interesting thing is i needed to be taught about radiology and cardiology and pulmonology because just like dr. issa and dr. silver and dr. feinstein, i'm not a radiologist, i'm not a cardiologist, i'm not a pulmonologist. that is why i needed to be taught. 2 in order to win this case, the plaintiff must prove that mr. buonomo had copd caused by smoking and they must prove that he had that disease before november 21, 1996. if the proof does not support that claim, they cannot meet their burden and they lose. i talked in opening about different kinds of evidence that proves mr. buonomo did not have copd. after hearing the evidence, let us see how these line up. first one, no pulmonary function test. i was going to show you the clips from every doctor who testified there was no pft ever performed, but frankly i think we all got that point. a pft was never performed by any of mr. buonomo's doctors, not dr. berndt, not dr. bolton, not dr. issa, not dr. silver, not dr. feinstein, not a doctor he saw at any point between 1995 and 2008. no one. no one. that is the proof on the pft. when i think of all the doctors that could have performed a pft at some point over the 13 years, i'm reminded of a story one of my coaches told me in high school. i heard it again recently and i thought it applied. it is a story about four people, everybody, somebody, anybody, and nobody. there was an important job that needed to be done. everybody was asked to do it. everybody was sure somebody would do it. anybody could have done it, but nobody did it. so when the job did not get done, somebody got angry because it was everybody's job. everybody though anybody could do it, but nobody realized everybody would not to it, so the job never got done. that is what happened here with the pulmonary function test. dr. bolton, dr. silver, dr. issa, dr. feinstein, everybody, somebody, anybody, nobody, over the course of the 13 years the pft never got done. the absence of a pft alone is the absence of proof that would be needed to prove the pft is necessary. you do not need to do it. but look at the standards. you heard the testimony by dr. klotz about the standards set out by the american thoracic society and the gold, the gold standard, national and international organizations of doctors, pulmonologists who put the standard for how you diagnose copd. just like needing that blood sugar test to show if somebody is a diabetic, you have to conduct a pulmonary function test to see if someone has copd. let us look at some of the testimony from the plaintiff's experts on these points. dr. issa agreed the american thoracic society said a pft is necessary. he is asked to look through it. he has 4 pointed out that it said pulmonary function measurements are necessary for diagnosis and assessment of the severity of this disease. dr. issa says if it is written in this journal, i guess i agree. dr. bolton talked about the global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease standard. he was asked the following? spirometry should be undertaken in all patients who may have copd. it is needed to make a confident diagnosis of copd. if you want to have a confident diagnosis that gives you the greater weight of the evidence, you need to do a pft. it is not just the ats, it is not just the gold standard, or dr. klotz who says you need to do a pft. the plaintiff's own experts, when they are not testifying in this case, think the same thing. let us look first as dr. issa. you might recall dr. issa. i think -- counsel, if i may. dr. issa referred to cecil's as the bible of internal medicine. you might remember that from his videotape. he called it the bible. what dr. issa said is in his bible it says spirometry, the measure of fev1 and fvc is the gold standard for diagnosing copd. you heard dr. klotz talked about fev1 and fvc. the bible, according to dr. issa, says you have to do spirometry. dr. issa did not do a pulmonary function test or spirometry. dr. issa is not alone. dr. bolton is the one pulmonologist that the plaintiffs called. one. he was very confident he did not need to do a pft to diagnose copd. he is talking about the gold classification. here he is asked about it. said the gold classification relies on pulmonary spirometry, and in my opinio i do not need for the most part a pulmonary spirometry to make a diagnosis of copd. he does not need it. it is a standard recognized by national and international pulmonologists, but he does not need to do a pft. but let us at some of the other things dr. bolton does. he is flipping thru it in the video. he has a brochure he has in his waiting rooms, and he hands out to all his patients that come in. it is entitled a brief guide to copd including chronic bronchitis and emphysema. and the guide has a section in it that says how does copd get diagnosed. and the pamphlet that dr. bolton gives his patients says the following? on page ten of the brochure, under how is copd diagnosed, it says the healthcare provider diagnoses copd by combining an evaluation of your 6 symptoms with a breathing test that measures how much air you can exhale and how fast you can exhale. that is pulmonary function. the pamphlet that dr. bolton gives his patients says you need to do a pulmonary function test. but it gets even better. dr. bolton wrote an article and he was asked about the article. in his article he writes screening pulmonary function studies are needed to determine the type, obstructive or restrictive, and degree, and response to bronchodilator studies. more sophisticated pulmonary function studies will be indicated. you heard you do a pulmonary function test to determine the amount of obstruction. you heard it tells you the degree and response to broncho dilator studies, after you take the broncho dilator, you test again to see if there is an any impact. that is how you make this diagnosis. that is what dr. bolton wrote. now, here i do not need to do a pft. beyond the initial diagnosis of copd, dr. bolton also wrote this: following up pulmonary function studies at six-month intervals are indicated to determine the progress of disease. there are two reasons to do a pft. one, to make a diagnosis. two, to see what the person's lung function is as they progress. that is what dr. bolton is writing about, six-month intervals. let us see. then 13 years after mr. buonomo is diagnosed, if you took a pft every six months, that would have been 26 times you would have done a pulmonary function test according to dr. bolton. how many times did mr. buonomo's doctors do one? zero. so when dr. bolton is not acting as an expert, he writes that a pft is needed and he gives his patients literature that tells them the diagnosis of copd must include a breathing test. but he testified to you here that was not the case. dr. issa did not do a pft and said it was not necessary, but what he calls his bible says you need to do it. counsel put up a list of all the doctors who treated and diagnosed copd. i crossed off the top here because the same list applies to doctors who did not do a pft. same list. same doctors. all of them had the chance to do a pulmonary function test. nobody did one. not before any one of them diagnosed with copd, not when they were treating him for copd, not when he was originally diagnosed, not in the 13 years after that. without a pft, there is no proof necessary to demonstrate the diagnosis of copd, and that failure alone is enough to decide the 8 entire medical question. that alone is the failure of proof that tips the scales in my client's favor. but there is more. there is more medical evidence you saw. mr. buonomo's medical condition is at odds with copd. remember the c stands for chronic? there is nothing chronic about mr. buonomo's medical condition when he seeks treatments in may of 1995. i know you are tired of seeing the record from dr. berndt when he went in so i'm not going to put it up again. you probably have it memorized. no bothersome cough. no hemoptysis. he denied shortness of breath except on much exertion. this is a 67-year-old man in 1995. no shortness of breath except on much exertion. no chronic problems whatsoever. the testimony you heard from his family further proves that he did not have chronic health problems before 1995. mrs. buonomo testified he had not seen a doctor for 40 years. she testified in the decade prior to the diagnosis, the 1980s, he was healthy. he did not have a cough. he retired in '92 and '93 because he wanted to. he worked hard his whole life and he wanted to retire. a couple years later in the spring of '95 they called him and say hey, you want to come back to work part-time, and he did it. i asked her was there any medical reason or any concern about his going not back to work. there was none. he did not have any of these chronic symptoms at that point. ms. diaz, mr. buonomo's granddaughter, testified prior to 1995 she did not see him become short of breath and never heard him coughing. she called him being in good health, no trouble breathing, no cough, no shortness of breath. one of you asked mrs. buonomo daughter, paula levis, what took her father so long to see a doctor. why did it take 40 years? she told you he only went to the doctor if he was sick. that makes sense. he was not sick in the 60 years leading up to may of 1995. he had no chronic symptoms. he had no chronic sickness. because copd is a chronic disease, if mr. bounomo had it in 1995 and that was the reason for his symptoms, they would have presented sooner, but they did not. while we are talking about dr. berndt, the first doctor who saw him, the first doctor who started this chain of medical records, i'm sure counsel is going to make a bigger deal when he comes up here about the fact that my experts disagree with these treating physicians. he touched on it the 10 first time. i'm sure when i sit down he is going to touch on it again. but my doctors are not the only ones who said something in the treater's records was wrong. mrs. buonomo went through a number of errors in dr. berndt's records with you. dr. berndt says mr. buonomo was not compliant and did not like physicians. dr. berndt said he had not smoked in year. everybody told you that is not true. dr. berndt recorded he had quit drinking about ten years or so. she told you he never had any drinking issues. dr. berndt told you he did not exercise. she told you he walked all over the place. finally, dr. berndt said he did not drive because he lived in brooklyn, new york. she told you that was wrong. he was in new jersey. he was on the other side of the river. it must be okay for the plaintiffs to disagree with the treating physicians when they want to, but it is not okay for my medical experts to give you medical reasons why they disagree. i want to talk about this point of emphysema, emphysematous changes. again, i'm not at big label guy. but i want to talk about emphysema. no matter what people call it, emphysematous changes, bullae emphysema, or emphysema, i think everybody can agree emphysema is an anatomical feature in somebody's lung that is a destruction of the air sacs. and remember the doctor showing you those air sacs. that is what it is. that is what emphysema refers to. when you want to talk about bullae changes, that is what experts do. they stick in their field. for dr. dautenhahn as a radiologist, what radiologists say is emphysematous changes. they want to say he disagreed over everything. you saw a lot of x-rays, x-ray reports, ct reports from 2007, 2008, that use the same language that dr. dautenhahn used, emphysematous changes. you can have these changes, but not as copd. people who do not have copd have them. the only way to know if emphysematous changes, or emphysema, or bullae emphysema, the only way to know if that is copd is to do a pulmonary function test. more importantly, emphysema is permanent. dr. bolton said it is permanent and irreversible. if you have it, if you have that anatomical destruction at some point, you are going to have it from here to the rest of your life. so if it appears on one x-ray, it will appear on every other one because it is permanent and irreversible. there are two ways that you can diagnose 12 emphysema, pathology and radiology. two ways you can do it on pathology. you can do a lung biopsy. that is when a person is alive, they use a procedure, a surgery. they go into a person's lung and you get out a piece of the tissue of their lung and you look at it. if you look at it you can see the destruction of those air sacs. mr. buonomo never had a biopsy done. the second way you can do it on pathology is autopsy. after a person passes away, you can autopsy, you can look for these things. despite the fact that this lawsuit was filed before mr. buonomo died and cause of death was an issue. and his diagnosis was an issue, no autopsy was conducted either looking for pathological proof of copd or emphysema. there is not that proof in this case. it is not there. if addition to pathology, you can see these emphysematous changes or emphysema on radiology. plaintiffs did not call a single radiologist. none of their treaters were radiologists. they all admitted it. but reynolds did. we called dr. dautenhahn, a man who looks at thousands of chest cts. thousands of x-rays. he teaches radiology. he testified from his review of all the films and we went through them yesterday. went through one after the other. he told you the first time that he saw any emphysematous change, any emphysema at all, was in 2007. i want to talk a little bit about some of the findings before and see what happened in 1995 up to 2007. mr. buonomo had a ct scan of his chest in may of 1995. you heard ct is a much more sensitive way to see the changes, much more sensitive than a chest x-ray. if we look at the report, dr. styles was the radiologist who read the ct. you never heard any testimony from dr. styles. dr. styles' impression, moderate right plural effusion with focus of atelectasis or other infiltrate at the right lung base posterior. no evidence of discrete pulmonary nodule mass, no evidence of significant interstitial disease. dr. styles did not record hyperinflation, he did not record blebs. he did not record bullae or emphysematous changes. dr. dautenhahn agreed with this finding. dr. styles we assume agreed with this finding. the plaintiffs will tell you they were looking for mediastinal disease here. come on. radiologists have to look at the film and write down what they see. they do not write down what someone 14 else is asking them to look for. they write down what they see. that is their professional obligation. dr. styles did not see anything consisting with emphysema or copd in may of '95. dr. bolton, another plaintiff expert. he agrees with what dr. styles says. there is no mention of blebs or bullae in the lungs as one would expect in a case where a patient who had copd or emphysema. on this report, it is not mentioned. okay, and the treating radiologist here in his examination notes did not know of any condition in mr. bounomo's ct scan from may of 1995 consistent with emphysema? correct. there is no impression that would indicate emphysema by this cat scan. that is dr. bolton. did he look at the x-ray or ct scan and seeing something different? we did not hear about that. the x-ray report that lists bullae changes, october of 1995, lots of testimony on this. dr. klotz told you he looked at it and did not see it. dr. klotz said he thinks there was bullae emphysema in 2007. dr. dautenhahn showed you the x-ray, put it up there, and said there is no bullae changes in this. nothing. did plaintiffs call anyone to show you where the bullae changes were? did plaintiffs call the radiologist who wrote the record to have him show you or explain what he is talking about? did the plaintiff give you any proof at all as to where or what bullae changes they were referring to there? no. because they did not show you a single x-ray or a single ct in their case. the reason behind beyond what dr. dautenhahn said when he looked at the radiology, the reason we know there is no bullae changes or emphysematous change in october of 1995 is because they are not on the may ct that dr. styles talked about. he does not describe them. and you remember these changes are permanent. they would be there. they were not there. the only thing we know a month later in 1995, the radiologist does not mention them either. if he thought they were there in october, poof, they are gone in november of '95. that is not how emphysema works. it is not how copd works. they are permanent, irreversible. dr. dautenhahn admitted he saw emphysematous changes in 2007, but does not see anything prior to that. nothing prior to november 21, 1996. there is no proof mr. buonomo had copd before november 21, 1996. a pft is needed to make a 16 diagnosis. one was never done. mr. buonomo did not have chronic symptoms consistent with copd at that point. the doctors never took a biopsy, and you cannot see emphysema on any other radiology. when you consider all this evidence, when you demand proof, the plaintiff cannot provide it before november of 1996. as i said, we do not have the burden of proof to show you anything. but we did put on evidence and i think we proved what mr. buonomo had in 1995 and had throughout his life was congestive heart failure. the only cardiologist you heard from was today, dr. yount. that is it. the only one. there are seven other cardiologists who looked at the echocardiograms. with the exception of a minor thing here on a percentage of ejection fraction, dr. yount agreed with all of mr. buonomo's cardiologists. plaintiff never called a cardiologist to dispute what dr. yount was going to say. no one to discuss the symptoms of congestive heart failure. no one to discuss the fact that he had left-sided congestive heart failure, no one to interpret the echocardiograms. i want to go quickly and look at some of the records. dr. bolton testified to his medical record from early on may of 1995. he says when this patient comes to him in the hospital, i cannot rule out the possibility of heart failure. from day one, this condition was possibly due to heart failure and his doctors knew it. there are a number of reasons that demonstrate why he had congestive heart failure. i want to go over those quickly. the symptoms were consistent. the onset was consistent, echocardiograms were consistent, reduced ejection fraction, the subsequent history, and the bmp levels. about the symptoms, dr. bolton told you a productive cough is a symptom. dr. bolton told you peripheral edema, swelling, symptom of congestive heart failure. dr. feinstein told you bilateral effusions and confusion are symptoms. you know from the doctors, the testimony you heard, and the medical records that mr. buonomo suffered from these symptoms. we heard about the onset of his disease because dr. yount testified -- he is a cardiologist, i'm not. i cannot explain it the way he did. but he talked about the onset of mr. buonomo's disease in 1995 and how that severe respiratory failure is 18 consistent with congestive heart failure. we showed you the echocardiogram from dr. borshuk may 15th, 1995. the cardiologist agrees. he said impression, dilated left ventricle and left atrium with diffuse left ventricular hypokinesis, and moderate reduction ejection fraction to 38 percent. dr. yount just explained to you this is classic leftsided congestive heart failure. dr. issa agreed that mr. buonomo's heart problems of 1995 were leftsided, not rightsided, not cor pulmonale. dr. issa's testimony. as is reflected in the records from 1995, heart problems were leftsided, not rightsided. leftsided? yes, sir. we learned that congestive heart failure can describe all of mr. buonomo's respiratory problems. dr. yount explained that. dr. bolton talked about patients with leftsided heart failure. what did he say about that? the ejection fraction that was reported leftsided ventricular defect. you agreed with patients with leftsided heart failure are short of breath? yes. and depending on the severity of that leftsided heart failure, they can be in respiratory failure? correct. that is what happened to mr. buonomo in may of 1995. the evidence you heard demonstrates he had congestive heart failure in 1995. the symptoms, the onset, the echocardiograms, everything consistent with congestive heart failure. this is evidence of leftsided heart failure in may of '95, not evidence, not proof of copd. you also learned that leftsided congestive heart failure can be caused by hypertension, sleep apnea, obesity was mentioned by dr. yount. and you know mr. buonomo had hypertension. that was the first thing that dr. berndt gave him medication for. he underwent a sleep study. maybe he had sleep apnea, maybe he did not, but he wore a machine for it. neither of these are caused by smoking. heart failure is not caused by smoking. mr. buonomo's history after 1995 provide further proof that he had congestive heart failure. i said in opening that i thought the evidence was going to be that he did not see a doctor from december of 1995 until march of 1999. the plaintiff showed us an indication of medications where he got a prescription or was getting medication in 1998. i will agree, i did not see that before. he did not see 20 a doctor from 1995 until sometime in 1998. they can talk about missing charts or records not being complete. they can say that he saw doctors and we just do not have a progress note from it. but this case is about proof. saying something is not there, something might have been there, something might be missing, is not proof. if we look in the record, when you string things together, you can tell mr. buonomo was not getting chest x-rays all the time between 1995 and 1999. remember we had the october of '95 x-ray, the november of '95 x-ray, and the march of '95 x-ray. let us look at those quickly. october of 1995 x-ray. november of 1995, from the same diagnostic folks, it compares to the previous chest x-ray which was the month before. in 1999, the next x-ray we have, the next x-ray of approval the comparison study is way back to november 29, 1995. were there other x-rays in there? i do not know. there is no evidence of them. we have not seen them. we did not have a chance to look at them if they exist. that is no record from looking at these records that that was the case. dr. klotz walked you through a number of medical records that talked about the condition mr. buonomo was in. dr. yount talked today about out how congestive heart failure can compensate and decompensate. copd is supposed to be chronic, permanent. we looked at a number of records from 1999 to 2000. i think you got tired me going through them and i think dr. klotz was tired of me asking about them. all of these times where there are no complaints and the lungs are clear, the plaintiffs may argue mr. buonomo just was not a complainer, he did not go in and tell his doctors he was having any problems. but the doctors do their own assessment of him and their own assessment said the lungs are clear. clear lungs with no complaints are not proof of copd. the same pattern continued with dr. silver, 2002, 2003. we went through these. these are in evidence. you can look at them. no respiratory distress. breath sounds normal. this is not me saying he was having normal breath sounds in 2002, 2003. these are the treating physician. the folks who put a stethoscope up to his chest and listen. normal breath sounds are his only chronic condition here. we heard in 2004 he had a decompensation from congestive heart failure and he was back in the hospital. we also heard he was receiving digoxin 22 and lasix from 1995 that was supposed to treat and help compensate the congestive heart failure. but he was not always getting the right amount of digoxin, and we have a composite of these records that showed the digoxin levels below the therapeutic level. one of the doctors on video was saying it is only one tenth below, it is only two tenths below. this is a pretty small rating. it is supposed to be .9 to 2.0. it is a pretty concise measurement. all of those are below it. in 2004, mr. buonomo goes to the hospital and gets treatment. his condition improves. dr. yount told him he was able to go home. again, just like 1995. this is how congestive heart failure works. it is not how copd works. we get to 2007. he has another bout of respiratory problems. he undergoes another echocardiogram. we showed it to you this morning. left ventricular hypokinesis, reduction in ejection fracture 35 to forty percent. dr. yount told you this is leftsided heart failure. dr. issa agreed. let us look at what he said. "question: we went through all the findings of that ct and at the bottom, those are all findings consistent with leftsided heart failure; correct? "answer: correct. you did not hear from any cardiologist who disagree with dr. yount. there is no question mr. buonomo had congestive heart failure. dr. issa put him in a congestive heart disease management program. this is the same time mrs. buonomo testified no doctor told her that her husband had congestive heart failure, when he was in a program for it. dr. yount testified when doctors record congestive heart failure in a record, cardiologists refer to it as leftsided congestive heart failure. that is what he learned when he was becoming a cardiologist. that is what they told him when he was a fellow. that is what he does when he teaches people at lsu. that is the way cardiologists refer to heart failure. dr. issa said yes, i have all of these statements in my records of congestive heart failure, but they were not leftsided, they were all rightsided. dr. yount is a cardiologist. dr. issa is not. none of the seven cardiologists who looked at mr. buonomo's echocardiograms from 1995 to his last one said he has rightsided congestive heart failure or cor pulmonale. that is what the 24 cardiologists said. but there is even further proof of congestive heart failure. we talked a lot about bmp. we saw the bmp values throughout this case. let us look at the bar graph. normal goes up to 861. other diseases can cause an elevation. copd, as mr. mcpharlin elicited on cross, copd can cause an elevation, but dr. yount said it might take it up to a thousand, 1200. look at mr. bounomo's values. we even heard there were other ones that were 10,000. no other disease other than leftsided heart failure can cause bmp values like this. i am going show you a little bit of testimony about mr. buonomo's final illness. november of 2008 he is back in the hospital. chest x-ray is taken. the radiologist there is dr. rosendorf. dr. rosendorf said followup respiratory failure, congestive heart failure. that is what the radiologist said. dr. issa agreed that on that study. dr. rosendorf did not describe anything consistent with copd. see at the bottom? he does not describe any emphysematous changes; right? he does not use the term copd to describe what he sees on the film. correct. that is what dr. issa, their expert, is saying about dr. rosendorf. that is not something dr. dautenhahn is saying. that is what their experts are saying. another radiologist two days later, dr. klotz had a similar observation. no copd. x-rays on the 29th and 30th reveal bilateral pleural effusions consolidation, interstitial lung disease suggestive of congestive heart failure, and on the next day the same thing. december 8th chest x-ray read by another radiologist dr. joseph. no description of -- what does dr. bolton say about it? he did not describe blebs, bullae, or he did not describe emphysema, he did not describe hyperinflation, and he did not diagnose mr. buonomo with copd. based upon all of that, dr. issa reaches this conclusion. most of the chest x-rays looked like congestive heart failure. dr. feinstein admits the same thing about dr. palacia from a december 9th x-ray. dr. goldberg x-rays on december 10th. they go on and on. if you talk about disagreeing with the treating physicians, disagreeing with what doctors have to say, what were dr. rosendorf, dr. klotz, dr. joseph, dr. palacia, dr. goldberg. at the end of his life, congestive heart failure. none. copd. based on elevated bmp level, the chest x-rays, the ct scans, the symptoms, 1889 the echocardiogram, and mr. buonomo's history, the evidence is mr. buonomo died as a result of exacerbation of congestive heart failure, not copd. even dr. bolton admits he cannot rule out congestive heart failure as the cause of mr. buonomo's death. now, plaintiff pointed quite a bit to dr. feinstein, the doctor who filled out the death certificate. dr. feinstein agrees with all of these records. fist of all, he did not look at any records before october of 2007 i think. he did not go back more than a year to look at records. he determined the cause of death. but one of things dr. feinstein was asked, and he testified to this in front of you by videotape, would you refer to a board-certified cardiologist who said that mr. buonomo's death was due to congestive heart failure, yes. so the cardiologist weighing in his opinion on this would defer to his judgment. he said yes. that cardiologist, the only cardiologist you heard from in this case, is dr. yount. i do not know if one of the seven other cardiologists who had the same thing down in their echocardiograms would have agreed. what caused mr. buonomo's death in 2008 is what caused him to be hospitalized in 1995, congestive heart failure. so when you demand proof on this medical issue, this is the proof we have. there was never a pft. the radiology was consistent with congestive heart failure. there was no chronic symptoms before 1995. there was never any lung pathology of emphysema. there was no biopsy or autopsy taken. mr. buonomo had congestive heart failure in 1995 and thereafter. his congestive heart failure can and does explain his respiratory problems. his echocardiograms consistently show leftsided heart failure, both diastolic and systolic, and his bmp values demonstrate leftsided heart failure. when you consider this, there is no way that the greater weight of the evidence supports copd. in fact, it is just the opposite. you had a look at the verdict form before. i want to put it up and talk to you a little bit about it. two questions. the first one did matthew buonomo have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease before november 21, 1996. second, was matthew buonomo addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addition a legal cause of the copd. 2 if you decide the answer to either one of those questions is no, we go home. there is no phase two like plaintiff's counsel talked about. that ends this case. so this can be the last time i have the opportunity to address you. if you say the answer to either one of these questions is no, that ends the case. while i have enjoyed being before you and i have enjoyed trying the case, i think the evidence mandates this should and will be the last time i appear before you because the question, did matthew buonomo have copd before november 21, 1996, the greater weight of the evidence, the proof in this case is that he did not. the answer to that question is no. we talked in voir dire. and you all agreed if the evidence warranted it you would be able to return a verdict for my client, r.j. reynolds. you said you would sit there. you said nobody would hold anything against experts called to testify on behalf of r.j. reynolds. you said if the evidence warranted a verdict in r.j. reynolds's behalf, all of you could check no to that question. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence warrants checking no. i thank you again for your attention. i thank you for your patience. i thank you for your service. thank you.