closing argument by the defense mr. belasic: thank you. may it please the court? good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, counsel, mrs. burkhart. on page 11 of your jury instructions -- and as you heard judge jones say this morning, it was and still is legal to manufacture cigarettes, to sell cigarettes, and advertise cigarettes. now, as the judge told you, that does not mean the tobacco companies win. but what it does mean is that this verdict in this case will be decided on the facts that are specific to mrs. burkhart. now, you have heard their experts, and you have seen all the testimony about the warnings. and so you know that even when congress decided that cigarettes were dangerous, that cigarettes would cause premature death, congress decided that they would be able to be sold. mr. heimann: i object. this is the subject of the order, your honor. this kind of argument on the legality -- the court: overruled. and i just remind the jury, this is counsel's argument. mr. belasic: as their own experts admitted, congress decided that cigarettes could be sold even if they were dangerous, even if they were addictive, as long as they had the warning. and we know that for 50 years that warning's been on the pack. and we know -- we know that mrs. burkhart saw that warning. now, let us talk about the facts of this case. when mrs. burkhart took the stand, one of the first very direct questions i asked her is why she started smoking. and she said two words: her mother. and then i asked her, so it was not anything that a tobacco company did? and she said her mother smoked. the cigarettes were there. and i asked her, was it any advertising, you know, any advertising, let alone the false advertising that the plaintiff's claim? did that cause you to smoke? and she said, no, the cigarettes were there. so there is no dispute here that in 1958 when a smart senior in high school picked up her mother's cigarettes, it was not because of something that a tobacco company had did or had done or had said. she chose to smoke, and her mother made the cigarettes available. now, mrs. burkhart enjoyed smoking. she told you from the stand that she enjoyed smoking. later she gave some different testimony. but the eyewitness in this case, the man that i told you would be the most important witness in this case, the man that you did not hear about from plaintiff's counsel in opening, the man who was not called in plaintiff's case, was mr. burkhart. and you saw that mr. burkhart listed when mr. isasi questioned him that his wife enjoyed smoking, that it relaxed her, that she liked it in social settings, that it helped relieve stress. so when you were asked, why would someone smoke all of these years if she knew? plaintiffs say, well, it is a simple act. it is a simple answer. it is addiction. we know that she enjoyed smoking. now, you see on the screen in front of you that mrs. burkhart did not try to quit smoking for decades, even when she knew the risk. and i'll talk about some of that evidence. but it is not disputed that she saw the warning at a minimum in 1966. she admitted it when i asked her. she made no effort to quit in 1966 or 1967 or 1968 or 1969 or the '70s. so when mr. heimann says that she was desperately trying to quit, that is not what the evidence in this case shows. the evidence showed that for decades she knew the risks before she made any effort. the evidence shows that she stopped briefly in the 1980s. we all heard the smokenders evidence. now, her husband says it was only a few days, and now he remembers that, well, maybe he was in orlando, so it could have been three weeks. but whether, ladies and gentlemen, whether it was three days or three weeks, that is the only time she stopped smoking in 36 years until 1994 when, in her own words -- and you have seen their own experts agree. you heard mrs. burkhart say it, and you saw the videotape where mrs. burkhart says it -- the first time she got it in her head that she was going to quit, she did. and whether you call it addiction or habit or dependency, in her own words, when she really made up her mind to quit, she did. and her success rate at quitting was one hundred percent, one attempt when she really made up her mind. and then she quit. now, based on that, was mrs. burkhart's smoking involuntary? the evidence is clear that she made a huge variety of choices, but the evidence from plaintiff's experts, they admit smoking is not involuntary. you saw the surgeon general reports, and i'll show you some of those. smoking is not involuntary. and, of course, it is not. because mrs. burkhart had smoked for 36 years, their expert who says that she is addicted under some definition says that she was at the peak of her addiction. mrs. burkhart says that she was at the peak of her smoking, three packs a day. but the first time she put her mind to it, and, again, in her own words, that first time she was able to quit. it was not involuntary. if she could quit a 36-year-old, 3-pack-a-day habit in 1994, she could have quit in 1966 when she saw the warning or 1964 when she heard the surgeon general's report or 1974 when her own husband said that is going to kill you. there is no dispute that she had the capacity and the ability to quit, because she did. now, let us look at some of the key facts. mr. heimann said that he is not going to marshal the facts, but he certainly talked about some of them. i am going to marshal the facts. and the reason is we have had eight days of facts. you have seen many of them have been disputed. many of them have been contradicted by witnesses, and many of them have been contradicted by the same witness. so let us look at the facts that we have heard about mrs. burkhart's smoking. we know she started because her mother smoked. we know that nothing the company said caused her to start smoking. that is admitted on the stand just two days ago. we know that when she was a regular smoker, she was in college. when she started smoking as a senior in high school, she did not even inhale. do you remember the testimony that for the six months she did not even inhale her cigarettes? and i asked her, well, it was your friends who taught you to inhale, right? not a tobacco company? and again, she agrees. so by the time she was actually a smoker, let alone a regular smoker, she was an adult. she saw in the '60s from the very beginning her father telling her mother that smoking was bad for her, that she should quit because smoking was not good for her. so she witnessed her own parents arguing and warning about the risks of smoking. that was in 1968. she made no effort to quit. she smoked for another 16 years before she even thought of quitting. she did not try to quit in the 1950s. we know that. in the 1950s, we saw that the media reported the risks. and i do not know what you thought of the battle of the sticky notes, but you know that in the 1950s, there was a tremendous amount of publicity, "reader's digest," "time," "life" magazine, et cetera. she made no effort to quit smoking in response to any of that information. we know she read the newspapers, and you all saw those reports. she made no effort to quit when she saw them. we have heard that they liked tv news, the burkharts. we have heard that they liked to see walter cronkite. we have seen some of reports that were on television news. most of those were in the '60s, some in the '70s. but, again, during that period, not once did mrs. burkhart make any effort to quit. according to her, she went from 1958 all the way to 1984, 26 years, ladies and gentlemen. despite all the warnings, despite her husband saying it would kill her, despite the warning on the pack for 20 years, she made no effort to quit. she stopped briefly in the '80s. and then ten years later, she made up her mind. this is not the story of a desperate smoker who is 10 making attempt after attempt, quit effort after quit effort. this is the story of a woman who quit the first time. and, again, it is her own words. we did not need to have some expert witness hired by a tobacco company to come in and tell you why she quit and when she quit. she did. she told you that from the stand. we know the '64 surgeon general's report was one of the most widely reported public health stories of the century. you saw on video when dr. burns admitted that. 1964, she made no effort to quit. she would not even think of quitting for 20 years later despite a warning that it could cause a deadly disease, lung cancer. and then in '66, the first pack warning came on. i asked her, you saw that warning? she said she did. made no effort. it did not change her ability. now, mr. heimann asserted, well, if she had only known that it could cause disease, if she had only known that it was addictive, she would not have smoked or she would not have quit. but we know what she did when she was given direct and explicit information. we know what she did. and when the warning was on every single pack, she made no effort to quit. that was her right. no one's blaming her. but that was her right. and you will assess her responsibility for making that decision. she told me that in the 1960s, 1960s -- this 11 is 20 years before she makes any effort to quit -- that she was calling her smoking a nicotine fit. she knew what nicotine was. she knew it was in her cigarettes. she was expressing the fact that she thought she was smoking for nicotine. i asked her if she believed she was addicted at the time in the mid to late 1960s. and she agreed. now, mr. heimann says, well, there was a concealment. no one knew that smoking was addictive. the tobacco companies had a sentence in a document. out of 60 million pages, they had a sentence in a document that said the word addiction. how could she have known? she told you from the stand. i did not need to pay $4 million for an expert to come in or a man who has been -- or a man who testifies for a living. she told you that. in the 1960s, she thought she smoked for nicotine. she described herself as addicted. so what did she do in the 1960s when she knew and believed that? she chose to smoke. she made no effort to quit in the 1960s, made no effort to quit in the 1970s. now, all of us look back on decisions in our lives with hindsight. and obviously, most of the events that have occurred that we have discussed in this case are in the past. so it is only natural to look back and say, well, what should i have done or what would i have done? 12 but we know when she heard about addiction, when she heard about lung cancer, when she heard her own husband say it is going to kill you, she did not try to quit. and so the idea that if r.j. reynolds had put up a paragraph in the "new york times" and said all of that statistical evidence we have been disputing, we now think it is true, the idea that she would have quit the next day, ladies and gentlemen, that is not borne out by her own testimony. you know, they brought in a witness who is almost made $4 million, dr. burns. and, you know, he put on his thinking cap. he said, i think she was influenced. i think she relied. he did not even talk to her. he does not even know her. he did not even have all of the depositions. we know what she said from the stand. and for those 20 years, she was being warned over and over again. she did not try to quit. so the idea that a little more information or a sentence out of a document from a tobacco company would have caused her to quit, even her own testimony did not support that, ladies and gentlemen. we just saw the 1970 warning. she said she saw that warning. she made no effort to quit in the 1970s. but what we heard from mr. burkhart is that they would have conversations. and on this conversation, 13 mr. isasi specifically asked him -- and he specifically agreed -- that these kind of conversations started around the very first time they met in that first year, 1974 and 1975. now, when the man you love most and trust most says you are doing something that will kill you, that is a warning that is more direct, ladies and gentlemen, than a "time" magazine or the warning on the pack. and it is not disputed in this case. and her response was not to try to quit. it was not to ask a doctor for help. her response was to say, it is my life. and she was right because she gets to make the decisions. but in hindsight, she now looks back and says, i made the wrong decision. i could quit, but i quit later. and now we know that she wants 10 to $15 million for that decision. i asked mrs. burkhart if she had seen the 1985 warning. and that is important because it says emphysema right on it. and she continued to smoke. even though the packs of cigarettes that were in her hand, the packs of cigarettes that were in her purse, the packs of cigarettes that were on her table said, smoking causes emphysema. now, she told me that she had seen the warnings all the way back to 1966. but when it came to the 14 emphysema warning, she said, i had bifocals. i did not read the warning. and i asked her, you were not even looking for the warning? no. so her story is that because she wears bifocals, even though she read the newspaper every day with those same bifocals, the print much smaller in the newspaper, she said she never saw the warning. you have to judge the credibility, the financial interest, and all the other factors that judge jones has told you about when you evaluate every witness; and not just evaluating a tobacco company witness, but you have to evaluate the credibility of mr. and mrs. burkhart and what they said under oath. so she admits she was warned on the pack it could cause emphysema, but she did not see it. you will hear later, her husband said she did, and they talked about it. well, her husband says when he would tell her it would kill her, she said, yeah, i know that. she herself said, one of these days, these things are probably going to kill us. her husband says in the first year he met her, '74 and '75, she would light up and he would call it a coffin nail. she would light up and he would call it a cancer stick. did she 15 try to quit in '74 and '75? no. did she try to quit at all in the 1970s? now, those warnings coming from the man you love most are far more direct than a pack warning. and so we know what she would do. we know that if she got a little more information she was not going to quit. and mrs. burkhart said, frankly, it is a personal decision. we heard she would not warn her own sister to stop smoking because she said it is a personal thing. the smoker has to make the decision. and she did. we know she saw public service announcements. one ran in 1985. the ashtray ad ran in 1967. and finally, we know what mr. burkhart said that he had -- they had verbal fights about smoking. and when they would get mad, they would be blunt and direct: you are going to kill yourself. it is my life. you are going to kill yourself. it is my decision. no warning. no warning could be more explicit and more personal and more direct than that. but she decided to not try to quit. she quit once in the '80s for a few days or a few weeks. we heard from her husband that when she talked to her cousins, in her own words, she would say, i've got to 16 quit these damn things or they are going to kill me. ladies and gentlemen, that is an incredible amount of evidence of the sheer amount of information and warning, not something in a dry, scientific textbook. but she knew. she was warned about the risks. she chose to continue. it is a decision we all make when we decide whether to exercise, eat, drink, et cetera. things affect our health. she made that decision, and she did it knowing "it is going to kill you." nothing could be more direct. now, we asked her -- and i asked her directly right in the last five minutes of the cross-examination, and i asked her specifically -- is not it true that the only time you heard the tobacco companies -- she did not know who they were -- but some tobacco source say it was not proven was after 1984? and she said she was not certain and that she said she did not think so. and you saw i played the video. could not have been more direct. is not it true that the only time you heard a tobacco company say it was not proven was after 1984? and on the videotape, under sworn oath, she said, that is true. and then she explained why she knows that. she says she went to smokenders in 1984. and you saw on the videotape that she said under oath that she never heard a tobacco company or some unidentified tobacco 17 source say it is not proven until after 1984. and we know what her response was. she told me, who do they think they are kidding? who do they think they are kidding? she did not believe the very statements that the plaintiff's lawyer has relied upon to build this case. i did not need to bring in a doctor who is never met mrs. burkhart to guess what she might have thought 20 or 30 years ago. our witness, the defense witness, is mrs. burkhart. and literally, our witness, the defense witness, is mr. burkhart. you saw what they said. the last thing that mrs. burkhart told me when i decided to stop was, i did not believe them at all. and she talked about she did not believe that it was not proven, but she also said the idea that there was going to be benefits from filters, the idea that there was going to be benefits from lights. and she said, i do not believe them all. who are they kidding? now, mr. heimann says, oh, no, no. that is not what she meant. you have heard the testimony. it was just two days ago. she was on the stand for only 45 minutes on cross-examination. and you saw that testimony. that is why i stopped, because the woman who is suing for $15 million says that by the '80s, she did not 18 believe any claim. she had never heard it said not proven before that. and she did not believe any claim that lights or filters were better. that is why i stopped, because that is her testimony. now, we are not retrying the engle lawsuit, ladies and gentlemen. but you would not know it. because mr. heimann constantly is talking about issues that were already decided. you are not going to decide if the tobacco companies did something wrong or if they concealed information. we are not retrying that. and when you see the verdict form, every question on the verdict form is about mrs. burkhart. it is not about r.j. reynolds or philip morris or lorillard. it is about mrs. burkhart. we presented the key witnesses. mrs. burkhart's cross-examination, mr. burkhart. that is what we know. and that is why this case is about mrs. burkhart. miss gallagher is going to talk a little about this issue later, but i want to highlight for you that obviously mr. and mrs. burkhart contradicted each other. there were a whole variety of issues where their testimony simply did not sync up. but what i want to also note, and i'm sure you 19 remember a whole variety of incidents, is that they contradicted themselves. repeatedly, over and over again, a direct and simple question produced an answer that, now you know, was different than what they said under oath before trial. you saw us play videotape after videotape of what they said under oath. they contradicted each other. plaintiff has the burden of proof. and you will have to decide what the credibility of witnesses who disagree with each other and who contradict themselves mean as far as whether mrs. burkhart has established her burden of proof. now, the plaintiff's experts we know are paid millions. millions. i think the one that was paid the least might have been dr. cummings, who said he is only made 1.3 or only $1.5 million doing this, he admits, for a living. they never talked to mrs. burkhart, even though they said she was addicted. they never picked up the phone and talked to her. and you saw when i cross-examined them, and you saw on the videotape, that they would ignore her own testimony. when i had asked dr. cummings, is not this what she said under oath? he would say, i do not remember that. dr. burns told me on the video, well, that is not 20 in my notes. and then we learned that it was the plaintiff's lawyers who gave only part of the deposition to dr. burns. he did not even have the whole facts, ladies and gentlemen. did not even have the whole facts. and he laughed when i asked him, he said, well, obviously, mr. belasic, i do not know what i do not know. i do not know what i did not read. but that is the whole point, ladies and gentlemen. do not bring in someone who has made millions of dollars, who is never even talked to the plaintiff, who is never even read the full testimony of the person who now wants $15 million. that is not fair. you will decide what the credibility of witnesses who ignore the testimony of the people who actually were there. dr. cummings talked about advertising. i asked him one simple question: did you actually show the jury a single advertisement for a brand that mrs. burkhart smoked? and he said no. he is made a million dollars testifying. he is testified at 20 trials. but he could not put in the time to even find a single advertisement that mrs. burkhart ever saw. we are not retrying engle. his testimony had nothing to do with mrs. burkhart or her response to advertising. and when i asked him, well, wait a second, did not her husband tell her it was going to kill her? and she 21 said, it is my life and i'm going to smoke any way? he said he does not remember that. does not remember that. not in his notes. someone that is been paid $1.5 million and does not remember the sworn testimony that you saw, that you know exists, you decide why someone would do that. why would an expert not know the basic facts, and at the same time be picking up 10 or $20,000 a case for the last four years. now, dr. proctor has obviously been paid a lot of money, the historian. he admitted right off the bat, he was very open about it, he did not know anything about the burkharts. he was just there to talk about history. he did not say that there was anything that was done to a cigarette that mrs. burkhart actually smoked. he did not show any advertisement that she actually saw. he does not know what she smoked. he barely even said the name mrs. burkhart. now, we presume that he knew this was a case called burkhart, but he presented no testimony that would be relevant to her. and you have to ask yourself why he was even there. because the issues of what the tobacco companies did or the questions that judge jones talked about, those were decided. this was the case, this was the chance, this was the obligation of the plaintiffs to present the proof 22 from mrs. burkhart. and dr. proctor did not know a darn thing about her. now, dr. burns, obviously very distinguished in terms of writing articles, writing portions of surgeon general's reports. he is been paid almost $4 million. made almost half a million last year. but he never met her. he never talked to her. and he admitted the lawyers picked out parts of the depositions. parts. and so you saw -- and it got a little testy between me and dr. burns, because he would tell me, well, i do not have it. why do not you show it to me? well, that was a trial testimony, ladies and gentlemen. the time for homework was over. dr. burns admits he did not have all the information. you do. you actually know more than their expert. you know more than a man who writes articles for a living. and i say that because he told us that from 1990 on, from 1990 through 2007, he spent 95 percent of his time researching, writing, and testifying in litigation for lawyers who sue tobacco companies. he spent 5 percent of his time on patients. think about what that means. the man that they brought in to talk about when mrs. burkhart had copd, or when she had her 23 symptoms -- he is been retired for the last seven or eight years -- and going all the way back to '90, a quarter of a century, he spent only a tiny fraction of his time actually seeing doctors (sic.) that is why we brought in dr. cosmo, somebody who sees 800 patients a month, somebody who has been practicing in the real world of real pulmonology, with thousands of patients over and over again for the last 28 years. they brought you somebody that writes articles. one of the things that mr. heimann said -- and you will have to decide if there is any evidence in the record -- is, again, this speculation, wow, if they had opened their files, she would not have smoked. and we talked about what she knew, but let us just quickly review. these types of warnings -- and you have to decide, is a warning of death enough to motivate someone? because if it is, then we know that mrs. burkhart was warned. then we know that mrs. burkhart did not rely on a tobacco company saying or not saying something. she was not fooled. bottom line, she was not fooled. her husband tells her, here's another nail in your coffin. here's a cancer stick. he says it could kill you. and she says, i know. these conversations all happen in the 1970s. she says, it is my life. she says, i 24 know that. mr. burkhart, he said they got mad at each other. she was mad at his drinking. he was mad at her smoking. and you heard mr. burkhart say, in his own words, it was tit for tat. so he would say, you are killing yourself. and she would say, it is my life. well, now, 40 years later -- was the mid-'70s. forty years later, mrs. burkhart is saying that she knew but she made the wrong decision. and now her lawyer says that she should be paid $15 million for that decision. what we did hear is that in 1994, mr. burkhart quit drinking. and then a few months later, mrs. burkhart quit smoking. tit for tat. during the time that mrs. burkhart knew the risks and made no effort to quit, the 1960s, millions of people across the country, people that were smoking as much as her, smoking more than her, smoking the same type of cigarettes, people who would be considered addicted under the plaintiff's own definitions -- dr. cummings agreed, dr. burns agreed, dr. proctor agreed -- millions were quitting. ten years after the surgeon general's report, 30 million americans quit. mrs. burkhart did not try to quit. and, again, this is not a question of blame. she is in here suing, saying that her decisions were somehow 25 influenced, that she was somehow tricked. this is not blame. it is an assessment of responsibility. no one, no one could decide for her when to try to quit, when to quit. she says herself she would not even warn her sister. did not warn her husband. it is a personal thing, she said. no one else could control her smoking. so 30 million people were quitting around her, of every shape, size, and stripe of smoker. she did not even try. now she wants $15 million for smoking a legal product with the knowledge that it could kill her. we heard that in the first four years of the warnings, 13 million people quit. she did not even try. when mr. heimann talks about her -- that she is a desperate smoker, we all know and we have heard the evidence of mrs. burkhart's situation. but what mr. heimann was arguing was different. he said that when she was smoking, and even during the times she was perfectly healthy, that she was a desperate smoker. well, is that really true? putting aside everyone's natural sympathy for the situation that mrs. burkhart is in now, think about the objective evidence, even from mrs. burkhart herself, of what it was like in the '60s, '70s, and '80s. if you give her credit for quitting for three 26 weeks in 1984 -- her husband says it is a few days. he says, well, i was on construction duty, so i could not see it. okay. let us say she quit for three weeks in 1984. by her own testimony, she never ever, ever stopped smoking again until '94. and then she quit for good. she said, well, great american smokeout, but she did not stop. she said her doctor gave her patches. she kept on smoking. so we know she was not smoking for nicotine. she was getting nicotine through the patch. she smoked anyway. so the only time that she stopped smoking between 1958 and 1994 was for those three weeks. now, mr. heimann liked to talk about analogies to car accidents. well, let us talk about real life people who try to change their health. if you hear a friend say, i've been seriously trying to exercise. i've made a real commitment to change my life. and we then find out that that person exercised -- let us say they went on a treadmill -- for three weeks out of 36 years. no rational person would say, that is right. you really were making a commitment. you were really trying. but that is what mrs. burkhart told us, that for 27 three weeks she stopped. for three weeks she made an effort. and she says in her own mind that was not really the time that she made up her mind she was going to quit. no one, no one would say that a person that goes on a diet for a day and then takes the next decade off, or someone that goes to look for a job for a day and then does not look for a job for ten years, no one would say that those are desperate or serious attempts to change their life. but the facts for mrs. burkhart herself are that from 1958 to 1984, a quarter of a century, she made no effort to quit. so this is not a case of a desperate smoker. it is the case of a smoker who quit for three weeks in the 1980s and then continued to smoke. and then quit the first time she was going to put her mind to it. that is not a $15 million case, ladies and gentlemen. her own words, she says until you get it into your head that you are going to quit, you are just not going to quit. and then we asked her bluntly -- i think the -- testing. all right. the court: very good. appreciate your patience for just a moment, 28 please. mr. belasic: all right. we know that she said she quit the first time that she got it in her head that she was going to quit. and so i asked her directly, and she said, well, she thought, on the stand, no, she thought she did think it before. and so you saw that i had to play the videotape of her sworn testimony just five months ago in december. and what she said was, it was the first time that she got it in her head she was going to quit, was 1994. and then she said something extremely important. she said in her own words, i wish i had done that in 1984, but i did not. it is absolutely understandable that she wishes that. we all have sympathy for the situation that mrs. burkhart is in now. but by her own testimony, in 1984, she did not do that. in 1984, she did not make up her mind to quit smoking. now, if there is any evidence that had she quit then, she would have avoided her injury -- and apparently mr. heimann agrees that there is such evidence -- that is very important. but what it means, ladies and gentlemen, is that she had the ability to quit and that she herself 29 acknowledges she had not made the kind of effort ever before until 1994. and what it means is that she is asking for $15 million, maybe only $10 million according to mr. heimann, for that decision. regret and hindsight is absolutely understandable. but it is not the substitute for proof that judge jones has told you he requires. now, their own experts agreed. dr. cummings, i had to play the video, said anyone can quit if they make up their mind to do it. shook his head, oh, no, no, no, mr. belasic. we had to roll the video where he said exactly that. dr. cummings, the success rate for people who really want to quit and stick to it is one hundred percent. again, he denied he said it. he denied he meant it. i had to roll the video. he said, plain as day, in his own literature, he says the success rate for the truly motivated is one hundred percent. and that is what it was for mrs. burkhart. first time she got it in her head, first time she made her mind up, she quit. and she never, ever relapsed. now, we know that 60 million people have quit. what is important about that is that all of this argument and all of the evidence, all of the claims that, well, 30 cigarettes change your brain, they trigger dopamine, which dr. cummings admitted is triggered by any number of things, anything from watching an exciting game, to kissing and hugging, to food, to water, to sunshine. all of those 60 million people had brains. they had dopamine. they had serotonin. all of them had receptors in their brains, just like all of us have the same receptors. and they all quit. and there was no evidence that this -- the fact that you get some extra receptors when you smoke, that that is what stops you from smoking. the evidence is it is the most common health behavior change that people make. 60 million people have done it. and their brains, the cigarette design, the filters, none of that stopped them. and we know for a fact that it did not stop mrs. burkhart. because when she made up her mind for the first time, it was not nicotine or anything else. she quit. now, this is dr. cummings' own guide. this was their expert. and he says, there is no magic cure that can help you to stop. but if you answer yes to these three things, you can quit. do you want to stop? are you willing to make some changes? and are you willing to put up with some uneasy 31 moments? and that is their expert, ladies and gentlemen. that is not a tobacco company. that is the american cancer society and their witness. now, let us talk about the verdict form and some of the things you are going to decide. we know that mrs. burkhart has the burden of proof on each of her claims. as judge jones instructed you on the defenses, we have the burden of proof. you are going to be asked whether addiction -- addiction, not smoking -- but whether addiction was a cause of her injury. and this is the actual instruction that you are going to get. and the instruction is, in order to answer yes, addiction has to directly -- so that is the first thing, directly -- and in a natural and continuous sequence -- that is the second thing, continuous -- produced or contributed substantially to producing such injuries. so there is three major issues i want you to think about the evidence on: whether it was a direct cause, whether it was a continuous cause, and whether it was a substantial cause. you saw a lot of evidence. let us review it. this will be the first two questions. i think they are question 1-a and 1-b on the verdict form. 32 right off the bat, dr. burns, who wrote this report, admitted to me on the video there is no consensus -- meaning there is no argument -- on the criteria for diagnosing nicotine addiction in an individual. it is a little different to say, here's the definition of whether a drug is addictive and actually applying it to an individual person. what are the criteria? the surgeon general himself says no agreement on the criteria for diagnosing nicotine addiction. and dr. burns agreed, in a person. so plaintiff's, you have seen their definition. their definition is, it is a brain disease and it causes chronic relapse. a brain disease they call it that causes chronic relapse. well, let us see if their definition -- mr. heimann: excuse me. this is misrepresentation. it was about nicotine, diagnosing nicotine addiction. now he is -- mr. belasic: that is the whole point, your honor. the court: we will note the difference. i remind you that this is -- overruled. i'll remind you that this is counsel's argument. your memory of the facts is what prevails. counsel are not 33 witnesses. mr. belasic: counsel is absolutely correct. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is my point. they produced a definition of what makes a substance addictive. they produced no definition, they did not produce the criteria to diagnose an individual. the surgeon general says there is no agreement. now, their definition is from nida, the national institute of drug abuse. and they admit it just applies to any drug. could apply to heroin, cocaine, barbiturates. it is not a specific definition of nicotine addiction. it was not meant to apply to an individual. that is what dr. burns said when i asked him. and, in fact, if you look at their definition, it does not have individual criteria at all. but let us think, does mrs. burkhart meet their definition? but more importantly, did they meet their burden of proof? because they have to meet their burden of proof. the first thing is the nida definition talks about chronic relapse. mr. heimann: i object to this, your honor. there is no proof of any brain injury. you cannot have proof of brain injury in this sense unless she is dead and you do an autopsy. mr. belasic: objection to the argument. 34 the court: i do not understand the objection. mr. heimann: see the fourth bullet point here, no proof of any brain injury. it would be impossible to have proof of any brain injury, because she is alive. the only way -- the court: you may note that for the jury. i'm overruling the objection. but, again, counsel is not a witness. your memory controls. and counsel, of course, can point out any inconsistencies in his reargument. mr. belasic: so let us talk about the first part of their definition, or one part where they say chronic relapse. and chronic means more than temporary. it means continuous or over a long period of time. how many times did mrs. burkhart quit smoking and then relapse? and the answer is once. once in 36 years. the only time she quit smoking for even a day, even any length of time, was 1984, smokenders. and she went back to it. so if you count that as a relapse, that is one time in 36 years. never stopped, again, until 1994. and then in her own mind, the first time she really made up her mind, she quit. so whether we speculate as to what was going on in her brain, whether her brain was somehow different than the 35 60 million americans who quit smoking -- with the same nicotine and the same cigarettes and the same type of brain -- no matter what we speculate, we know that she does not meet the definition of chronic relapse. one time in 36 years. and one hundred percent success when she made up her mind. just like dr. cummings said in his own testimony. there was no relapse once she quit in 1994. now, did they present evidence that her brain was somehow different than every other smoker who quit? of course not. one last thing to think about, ladies and gentlemen. was she really smoking for nicotine? well, her own medical records suggest otherwise. we know that in 1993, she got nicotine patches. and i asked her, obviously she was getting nicotine during that period. she was getting nicotine from the patches. she did not stop smoking at all. she was not smoking for nicotine. and in 1994, when she changed her mind, she was not smoking for any reason at all. this is what her husband said, all of the reasons she enjoyed smoking: smoking, taste, relaxation, responding to stress, the social benefits. she even liked the feel in her hand. 36 and you saw me ask her repeatedly about each brand that she smoked, whether she liked the taste, and for each brand whether she was even thinking of quitting. and each time she said, no, she was not thinking of quitting, she was looking for a different brand. and for each brand, she said she liked the taste. for different reasons. sometimes she liked menthols and then ended up hating it. so virginia slims tasted better. sometimes she said the next brand. but for each brand, she testified that she liked the taste. now, however the plaintiffs define addiction, did it control mrs. burkhart? did it remove her ability, her free will, her ability to make her own decision? we know from the evidence it did not. she stopped smoking and tried to stop smoking only once, in 1984, before she quit for good. and she says, under oath, looking back on that day, looking back on that time, that that was not the type of effort that she made in '94. and she says, i wish i had done that, then she could have quit. and she could have quit earlier. and dr. burns admits that she did not lose the capacity to quit at any time earlier. after all, she was smoking more than she ever had in '94. and addiction 37 did not stop her from putting it down when she made her mind up. now, dr. burns did admit that mrs. burkhart would not have gotten copd if she had quit when the '64 surgeon general's report was published. 30 million people quit in the next ten years. she did not try. he admits that if she had quit when the warnings went on the pack, she would not have got copd. 13 million people quit in just the next four years. she did not try. and this is what dr. burns said, if you can quit before age 45. he said, if before age 45 you do not already have abnormal lung function and you quit, then you do not get copd. now, mrs. burkhart was born in 1941. i guess 45 would be 1986. but at a minimum that means that if she had quit in the 1970s, when warnings has been on the packs for years, if she had quit in the 1970s when her own husband said, they are going to kill you; if instead of saying, it is my life and i know that and it is my decision, if she had quit then, her own expert admits she would have avoided her injury. she said herself, it is an individual thing. but even more important, the surgeon general agrees. one of the issues -- and mr. heimann emphasized it -- is substantial. and he went into a lot of detail. 38 he gave various definitions for the word substantial. so i think it is fair to say that that is an important issue here. if addiction really was a cause, if you decide she was addicted under some definition, was addiction really a substantial cause? their definition is, you have this chronic relapse. well, what does the surgeon general say? does the surgeon general say that nicotine addiction or nicotine dependency is the -- is a substantial reason in why people relapse? here's what the surgeon general says. even in the best circumstances, tobacco -- the measures of tobacco dependence account for only a modest amount of variation. now, i did not pull out as many definitions of the word substantial as mr. heimann did. but modest, a modest amount, a modest effect, that is not substantial. that is a surgeon general's report. that is the consensus. that is the state of the art, according to their experts. nicotine addiction has only a modest effect on relapse, so she does not even meet her own definition. and we know she only relapsed once in 36 years and has only a modest effect. it is not substantial. and if you need one issue to decide on whether she was addicted, it is this: the surgeon general does not say 39 that nicotine addiction has a substantial effect on whether you relapse. look what the reason is. that is important. surgeon general says, this finding is consistent with the notion that relapse is a function of multiple person factors. surgeon general says it is person factors. mrs. burkhart says it is a personal thing. they are on the same page. now, you have heard the evidence about choice, control, and responsibility. i do not have to repeat that it was her choice in '94, the first time she made up her mind. we know she was able to control. we know their own experts say that smokers are responsible for making that decision. but think about all of the evidence you have seen about her ability to quit when you answer this question. if addiction was really the cause of her disease, if addiction was really forcing her to smoke, okay, then what happened between august 9, the last day she smoked three packs a day, three packs a day, and august 10, the day she quit and never smoked again? and we know her cigarettes did not change. we know the cigarette design did not change. we know her nicotine did not change. nobody suggests her brain changed. and what changed was her mind. and her mind 40 changed because she made a decision, and she made a decision that this time she was going to make a serious commitment to quitting. as i said in opening, ladies and gentlemen, when she changed her mind and made that decision, she changed her life. she went from, it is my life, i'm going to smoke; to, it is my life, i'm going to quit. and in her own words, she quit the first time she made that decision. now, what happened to addiction on august 10? what happened to the substantial effect that mr. heimann talks about? the truth for mrs. burkhart and from what we know is that when she made that decision, suddenly addiction not only did not have a substantial effect, it did not have any effect. now, does that mean that i'm claiming it was easy for her to quit? are we saying it was not hard? no, of course, not. changing your life, going to work, going to school, losing weight, starting an exercise program, giving up smoking, life is hard. but there is no line on your verdict form that says, was it hard? the verdict form says, was addiction a legal cause of her injury? and it was not. because she stopped when she changed her mind. and once she changed her mind, 41 addiction did not have a substantial effect. it had no effect. and for that reason, let us look one more time about whether this choice issue is made up. we know the surgeon general has called cigarette smoking personal choice. you see it right there. look what the surgeon general says about the individual smoker. even though it is addictive, it is up to the individual smoker to decide whether or not to continue that behavior. and their expert, dr. burns, says smokers are responsible for those choices. this is the most recent surgeon general. and you saw me ask dr. burns about this. and it compares secondhand smoke exposure. it says secondhand smoke, if you are around someone that is smoking, that is not your choice. that is involuntary. but look what they talk about for regular smoking. individual choice. it is secondhand smoke that is involuntary. after all the discussions with dr. burns, the bottom line is he says even an addicted smoker is responsible for their smoking behavior, and it is up to the individual smoker to continue smoking or quit. now, based on all of that evidence, their own 42 definition, their own lack of proof, the fact that addiction did not stop her from quitting, that she made only one effort, that she herself says, looking back on, was not serious, you should answer no to the question of addiction and you should answer no to the question of whether addiction was a legal cause, a legal cause of her injury. now, the next part of the verdict form, you are going to see a series of questions on whether mrs. burkhart relied on things that tobacco companies said. there is a whole series of questions. but they are all the same question over and over. did she rely on a statement or an omission from a tobacco company? did she rely on a statement or an omission that was the result of an agreement? well, the evidence here is she did not rely on those statements, and it comes directly from mr. and mrs. burkhart. so what you will be doing is looking at questions 2, has three parts -- or four parts -- and question 3 that has four parts. all of them are on whether or not she relied on a statement. and we had some discussion this morning. one of the things you will be asked is to decide, did she rely at all? and if she did, was it a statement that was made before may 5, 1982, or after? well, we asked her that. i asked her that on the 43 stand. and you saw the videotaped testimony that she did not hear any statement that it was not proven until after -- until after she went to smokenders in 1984. so she had not even heard a statement to rely on until after may 5, 1982. and we know what her response was. who do they think they are kidding? of course it is harmful. i did not believe them at all. now, i mentioned a little while ago that at the very end, mrs. burkhart -- you remember mrs. burkhart became -- talked a little louder. she was a little more direct in her answers. and you saw what her very last answers were. and she said, i did not believe them at all. and at that point in the cross-examination, we were talking specifically about the improvements that she says the tobacco companies promised. and you saw the testimony. you saw the videotaped testimony that by the time it was the 1980s she not only had never even heard a statement that it was not proven -- she did not believe it when she later heard it -- but by the time she got to the 1980s, she said she was not believing that any cigarette was better for her, whether it was filters or lights. we are going to talk about the brands she smoked. but that was her testimony. there is no evidence in this record that after may 5, 1982, mrs. burkhart heard a 44 statement and that she relied on it. and more importantly, as mr. heimann even showed you the instruction, she has to prove -- its her burden to prove that she relied on a statement and that is what caused her injury. well, where is the evidence of that, ladies and gentlemen? what is the statement she relied on after 1983 that caused her to get copd? did any expert say, well, if she had not heard a statement, she would have quit smoking? even though mrs. burkhart did not say that. i asked her every time, when you switched brands whether it was to lights or to filters, were you even thinking of quitting at that time? she said she was not. and we know she was not from the evidence. so mrs. burkhart, there is no evidence that she relied on a statement by r.j. reynolds, american, brown & williamson, no evidence she relied on a statement by lorillard or philip morris. in fact, there is no evidence she even heard of the industry organizations tirc, the ctr, the tobacco institute. they did not even present evidence that she had ever heard of those organizations before she filed her lawsuit. and those 1950s blurry videos of, you know, some of the men or scientists talking about it, there is no 45 connection to mrs. burkhart. she says she did not hear anything about it not being proven until 1984. and then she said, who do they think they are kidding? so she did not rely. you know, we have had a lot of talk about advertising. but what is ironic in this case is how many ads, how many ads were you folks shown that she actually saw? is it surprising that in a case where they claim false advertising, they did not present evidence through their experts of an ad that the plaintiffs actually saw? you decide that. i asked dr. cummings -- it was one of my last questions -- dr. cummings, did you show a single ad for a single brand that mrs. burkhart actually smoked? and he said, you know, i did not, like it was not a big deal. well, it is a big deal, ladies and gentlemen, because mrs. burkhart has the burden of proof. and so what they did is show every other ad under the sun for every other brand. let us talk about the only advertisement that she said was appealing to her. and she admitted that two days ago. the only advertisement that appealed to her was a virginia slims lady in a business suit. and we know the slogan, "you have come a long way, baby." she said that appealed to her. 46 well, ladies and gentlemen, that is not fraud. that is not fraud to show an attractive woman in a business suit, in a swimsuit, or anything else. it is not fraud to have a slogan. judge jones told you in the middle of the trial, capitalism is not on trial. advertising is not on trial. and they do not identify anything in that ad that was false or that she believed. we will talk a little more about her brand choices now. but this was the virginia slims ad. remember, dr. proctor came in. and we do not dispute this. he sort of bragged. he said, i have the biggest database of advertising or cigarette advertising in the world. well, good for dr. proctor. that is probably true. and out of the biggest database in the world, from a man that is been paid $1.5 million to do this over and over again, how many ads did he pull out that mrs. burkhart even saw? none. zero. this is the ad he showed you. and you will remember that the question was, from miss london, what does the body language of the woman tell you? i objected. he is not an expert on women's bodies. of course he is not. but there is nothing in this ad, this ad that mrs. burkhart did not see, that anyone showed was false. 47 and remember what they left out? i actually had to request the judge to order them to read it. they left out the box. and the box is pretty important because that advertisement says, the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. now, it is not fraud to have an attractive woman. we would not expect someone to advertise their products with unattractive models. it is not the american way. it is not fraud to have a brightly colored dress on. and it is not fraud to have a slogan of "you have come a long way, baby." so the only ad that their expert actually showed is something she did not see that has the warning on it that congress determined is appropriate, that congress determined is legal to put in the ad. well, when she started, we know it was not ads. she told me she never even saw a pall mall ad. she smoked because of her mom. she told us when she switched to filters that it was to keep tobacco out of her teeth. now, it was back in the early '60s, ladies and gentlemen. she could not have been more direct. it was not ladylike. you did not want to have tobacco in your teeth, and that is why she switched to pall mall filters. it had nothing to do with health. now, i know she claims later and her lawyer claims later it had to do with 48 health. but we will get there. then she switched to raleighs. raleighs had coupons. legal to have coupons. capitalism is not on trial. no one is claiming that having a coupon is fraud. so she switched to kents. mr. heimann says, well, kents was fraudulent. we asked her very specifically, you did not switch for health reasons. she denied it. i played the videotape. you saw the one-sentence question, one-sentence answer. and on videotape, just two days ago, she said she did not switch for health reasons. then she talked about the filter. she was asked specifically, you did not think kents were safer? we rolled the videotape. she said she did not think kents were safer. that is her direct testimony. it is not a tobacco company document or an executive. her direct testimony, she did not think kents were safer. that is why we brought the videotape, because sometimes witnesses change their stories at trial. and in this case, unfortunately, that is what happened with mr. and mrs. burkhart. so you saw the videotape. now, she agreed with me right off the bat. she was not trying to quit. this was not a question, as mr. heimann suggested, i'm desperate to quit. throw me a lifeline of a filter. she said she 49 was not interested in quitting. she said she was looking to a filter for taste. and when we asked her, when you say you thought the filter was better, is not it true that the most you thought the filter would be better at would make it better tasting? she agreed. and i had to play the videotape again that said just that, the most she thought the filter would do was make it taste better. and then we asked her, well, did kents taste better? and she said they did. now, there is no evidence that any kent ad caused her to develop copd. there is no evidence that if kent went off the market, she would have quit smoking. there is no evidence that anything that you would have said to her at that point would have caused her to quit. she had the surgeon general's warning in her hand, and she never quit. virginia slims, she told us she switched for taste because she was sick of menthols, hated menthols at that point. said that the very first brand -- she did not shop around. the very first brand she went to was virginia slims. and she agreed, they tasted heavenly. that is her words, not mine. they tasted heavenly. and we heard what she said about the slogan and the woman in a business suit. 50 that is not fraud. what we did ask her is, did you switch for lower tar? she said she did not. what we did ask her is that the warning, at the time she switched, whether it was the '80s, early '80s, late '80s, whatever it was, every single advertisement in america had to have the surgeon general's warning. that is not fraud. congress determined it was legal to advertise with that warning. and she saw those warnings. so there was not any fraud. now, i put up this instruction because the same definition of legal cause that applies to addiction has to apply here to reliance. they have to show that not only did a tobacco company say something that was false, that not only did mrs. burkhart actually see it, that not only did she actually change her behavior, meaning decide to continue rather than quitting, but then prove that that would have caused her injury. and they do not have any of that proof. it is just speculation. mr. heimann says, well, she would have quit. but we know what she did when she got direct warnings. forget whether she thought a filter was safer. her husband said, the cigarettes you are smoking right there that had filters and were lights, they will kill you. that 51 did not have an effect on her. that did not cause her to change her mind. there is no evidence that some sort of concealment or statement caused her injury. and her own words, the very last part of her deposition when i said, we do not need any more questions or answers, she said i did not believe them at all. so when you go to question 2-a and 2-b and 2-c, the answer is they have not met their burden of proof. there is not any proof. the answer is, no, she did not rely. the answer is, no, reliance was not a legal cause because there is no reliance. question 2-d, did she rely on anything before or after may 5, 1982? there is no evidence she relied on anything. the evidence is that she said the first time she heard someone say it is not proven was after 1984 she did not believe it. she said, who are they kidding? and so based on the evidence, you should answer no for all of those questions. and i think here the judge instructs you to select all that apply. well, none of them apply. there is no evidence that she relied on concealment, either before '82 and certainly no evidence, ladies and gentlemen, after 1982 when she says in her own words, i did not believe them at 52 all. who were they kidding? question 3-a, did she rely to her detriment? we know she did not. same question. you should answer no based on the evidence. 3-b, was reliance a legal cause? it does not exist. the answer is no. and the same for 3-c and 3-d. there is no evidence she relied. and what the evidence is we do not have to speculate because what mr. heimann is suggesting, imagine if she heard something else. we do not have to speculate because we know what she heard. and what she heard was a warning that it could kill her from the man she loved most. and we know that did not change her behavior. there is no evidence anything a tobacco company could have said that would have changed it. she told us herself, you cannot tell a smoker to quit, she said, because it is a personal thing. now, there is a question here of comparative fault. what i want to remind you is that right off the bat, mr. heimann said, well, we do agree, partially at fault, partial cause of her own injury. he emphasizes that it is partial. but let us think about what that means, that the plaintiff admits that her own actions are a partial cause of her injury. well, that has to admit -- that has to mean that she had the ability to quit smoking. well, we know 53 she did. but that has to mean, how could she cause her own injury, even partially, if she did not have the ability? it would not be admitting that, ladies and gentlemen. they would not be admitting any fault at all if she could not quit. so they are admitting that she had the ability to quit. and they have to be admitting that she had the ability to quit at a time that she could have avoided her injury because if it was too late to quit, well, it would not be a cause of her injury, and they would not admit that. so they are very upfront. she doused her own injury. they say it is only in part. but the evidence is, based on their own admission, that she did cause her own injury. now, you have seen the form. and you have been given the instructions. what i want to talk about is the evidence that goes to the issue of whether her choices were the causes. well, she started because her mother smoked. that had nothing to do with the tobacco company. we know nothing the company said caused her to start. we know she was a regular smoker as an adult. she was not a little kid. all of these things about youth advertising, she smoked her senior year of high school. and she says it was not because of advertising. she did not even start inhaling and become 54 a regular smoker until she was an adult. so this claim that youth advertising are in, it does not apply to this case. i mean, they did not present a shred of evidence that in 1958 there was an ad directed to youth that she even saw it. she was very, very candid. advertising did not cause her to smoke. well, we know that she saw her father and mother have the same type of discussions that she had with her own husband. she saw the warnings to her mom. we know in the '50s she made no effort to quit even though the media was reporting risks. we know she read the papers. she saw this information. her own husband says that. we know they watched the tv news. we know -- heard about the surgeon general's report. according to dr. burns, basically, everyone did. it was front-page news. it was the top story. we know she saw the warning. and we know that she made no response. 1966, her own expert admits she could have quit smoking then. she was warned. we know even in the '60s she was aware of nicotine. those are her words. they are not mine. we know that she believed that she was addicted, so addiction was not concealed from her. we know she believed that 50 years ago in the 1960s. 55 we know she made no effort to quit in the '60s, despite her knowledge, despite the warning that was on every pack that she held in her hand. we know in the '70s she saw the warning. she admitted that. we know in the '70s, '74 to '75, her husband basically told her, smoking is dangerous, harm your breathing, and it could kill you. did she try to quit in the 1970s? no, she did not. not at all. we know that this warning was on the pack. she says that she just did not see it. and i asked her because i have a legal obligation. i have to ask some hard questions, no matter how sick mrs. burkhart is. she understood that i had to have her answer a question. you know that both she and her husband are experienced witnesses in litigation. they have both testified in five or ten lawsuits before, at depositions. you know, when i asked her, you know, how is it that you could see the warning for the last 20 years, the '66 warning, the '70 warning, all through the '70s, and then when the warning says emphysema, suddenly she did not see it. and we heard about, well, the type is small. she did not look at it. and you will have to decide whether that was credible. and miss gallagher will talk a little more about that. but we know her answer to the risks of smoking 56 far, far back was that she knew it. we knew that in her own words she said that it could kill her. we know that her husband in the '70s used these terms to say she was killing herself. we know she saw these public service announcements. we know when they had their verbal fights about smoking, that her response was, even though it could kill her, it is my life and i'll make my own decisions. and we know, according to her husband in her own words, she said that cigarettes could kill her. we know for decades she had a smoker's cough. we know that even though she went to smokenders, she smoked one day after three weeks. did she smoke a pack that day and then go back to quitting? did she smoke two packs that day and go back to an effort to quit? no. she never went back to smokeenders. she never stopped again until 1980 -- until 1994, and then she quit for good because she said when she really made her mind up, when she really got it into her head. and so the response of the plaintiffs is, blame it on the issues that were decided in engle. blame it on the statements that she did not hear. blame it on the statements that she did not believe. she did not believe them at all when she heard them. and, ladies and gentlemen, you will decide. but 57 based on that evidence, based on that evidence, mrs. burkhart chose to smoke. and we know from her own expert that smokers are responsible for their decisions, and we know from the facts that she was the only person who could decide. she said you do not even tell a smoker not to smoke. it is a personal decision. there was not someone in an office at a tobacco company that could take the cigarette out of her mouth. there was not someone at a tobacco company that could make the decision for her. and when she did make up her mind, she quit, and she was responsible. now, i want to talk briefly about the issue of may 5, 1990. you know that one of the things the law requires you to decide is whether or not mrs. burkhart knew or should have known of her injuries before may 5, 1990. i'm going to go through the evidence pretty specifically. but i want to emphasize what judge jones instructed you -- and you will have it in writing. the question is not whether mrs. burkhart knew she had copd. it is knew or should have known. and it will say that should have known means exercising reasonable care. and you will use your own common sense. but the question is not, you do not get to say, well, i did not know the name of the disease or i did not actually know i had it. the instruction on the verdict form, knew or should have known. 58 now, let us look what you saw, and you will decide. i think this is question -- this is going to be question 5. i want to say one other thing on the verdict form before you. you know that question 4 is going to ask whether each -- plaintiff's smoking of each defendant's cigarette was a legal cause of her injury. and that is their burden of proof. you will decide that issue. when we get to question 5, the statute of limitations, this is the type of evidence that we know is true because all the experts agree. everyone agrees that copd is progressive. it takes time. it takes a lot of time to reach a severe stage. it takes years. dr. burns agreed to that when i asked him on video, and certainly dr. cosmo agreed. we know that she had copd symptoms. and one of the things i want to emphasize is that both sides' experts agreed. dr. burns agreed that there are symptoms of copd that include chronic cough and that include shortness of breath. he agreed she had those symptoms. he agreed it was reasonable to assume. he said, well, we do not know for sure, but he said it was reasonable to assume. well, since dr. burns has not spent much time seeing patients at all for the last 25 years, we brought in the expert who sees thousands of patients a year. and that was dr. cosmo, who is been a board-certified pulmonologist 59 for 28 years. he sees, he said, about 800 patients a month. we know she was aware of the symptoms. the symptoms, they were not secret. it was not like tumors in your symptom. none of us would know. the symptoms that she knew about were open and obvious. they were complaints that she had. she woke up in the morning in the early '80s unable to breathe because her coughing was so severe. she had tightness of the chest. she had shortness of breath in the early '80s. remember her husband says when they are living in houston, she starts exhibiting shortness of breath, especially when they travel. and he says that she attributed it to smoking. so these symptoms are things she knew. we do not even have to guess, should she have known? we know she knew them, and we know she had these symptoms before may 5, 1990, because that is what she says and that is what her own husband says, and that is what the experts say who looked at the testimony. no question she blamed those symptoms on her smoking. now, mrs. burkhart, on the stand, agreed she had a smoker's cough in the '70s when she met her husband. she said by the late '70s or the early '80s she linked it to her smoking. she thought smoking was causing a cough that 60 dr. cosmo says was progressively getting worse and was not just a simple smoker's cough but was the kind of cough that was a symptom of copd. and by the early '80s, there were times she could not even breathe in the morning. and that is the reason i asked dr. burns, were not these symptoms of copd? now, you might expect well, he is on the plaintiff's side, that he would say, heck, no. no way. but what he did say is the opposite. he said, well, it is reasonable to assume that they were symptoms of copd. so there is not a lot of daylight between the experts on these issues, between dr. burns and between dr. cosmo. those are symptoms of copd. she knew she had them. and there is no question she had them before 1990. well, did she know she was addicted? well, mr. heimann admitted that she was. she told me that she believed then that she was addicted in the '60s. there is not going to be any question about whether she was aware or believed that. now, no one questions dr. cosmo's credentials. i mean, i guess miss london said, well, you do not write surgeon general's reports. well, you know, in this case, that is a good thing because we want a doctor who has seen thousands of patients and not a man who writes articles. dr. cosmo, you heard, in 14 years of reviewing 61 medical records, he is made about $80,000. 14 years, $80,000. that is about $5,000 a year. dr. burns has pulled down almost $4 million. and you heard he is worked for 25 cases with these lawyers with the law firm. every time he takes the stand for these lawyers, he says the smoker was addicted. every time he takes the stand for these lawyers, he says addiction was the cause. dr. cosmo never, ever, ever testified for a tobacco company before. he is not someone whose opinions, you know, are the result of millions of dollars. no one disputes his credentials. and no one disputes this piece of evidence. and the reason no one disputes this is because this is objective. it is a scientific medical test that measures a person's lung function. and then they take what your lung function is, what you measure, against what the predicted value is supposed to be for a person your age. and i'd like to direct your attention to the 34. and dr. cosmo explained that that means at that point that her lung function, mrs. burkhart's lung function in 1993, was only 34 percent of the predicted value. and he said that is very severe. very severe. 80 percent is mild copd. eighty percent. 62 he then explained that to get from eighty percent, mild copd, all the way down to 34 percent, severe copd, it takes a long time. because you only lose 3 percent a year, 4 percent a year. he said maximum, 5 percent a year. so if copd is at eighty percent, that is mild copd, and she was all the way down to 34 -- you lose 3, 4, 5 percent a year as he explained -- that is over a decade that she had copd. so there is no question that her copd, it did not start in 1993. and it did not start in 1990. as dr. cosmo said, it could have started as early as the mid-1980s. and that is just simple math. no one disputed the pulmonary function test. i'm not sure that dr. burns even talked about this issue. no one disputed that you only lose a certain amount of lung volume a year. and that is why it was so important when dr. burns told me, yeah, it is reasonable to assume she had those symptoms. dr. cosmo was asked, look, is there any way, is there some unusual circumstance, anything in her background where she could have not had copd by may 5, 1990, and it just developed in only a couple of years? and he said no. it is impossible. it is impossible. and he was not challenged on that. 63 miss london did not challenge that when she cross-examined him. that is undisputed. so when you answer the question on statute of limitations, did she know or should she have known of her symptoms, did she know or should she have known that she was addicted and that it was linked? well, in her own words she did know. she believed she was addicted. she knew she had all of these symptoms. she knew she did. and there is no question, this is not something where you have to -- where anyone has to make up the evidence. she believed she was addicted in the '60s. she believed that -- she knew she had these symptoms in the '70s and '80s. she said she believed they were related to smoking. and as dr. cosmo says, it is impossible that she did not have copd. that is the burden of proof, ladies and gentlemen. and we submit, we have met it. and maybe that is why dr. burns told me, well, it is reasonable to assume that i'm right, that she had those symptoms of copd. i'm not sure what to say about what mr. heimann said about damages. he did not give you a single basis, a single basis for his number. he did not tell you why he came up with it. he did not tell you how he calculated it. what he said was, he thinks if you have a broken ankle, you get $10,000. i do not know, ladies and 64 gentlemen. that is not this case. he said if you have a crushed leg, maybe you get a couple hundred thousand. i do not know where he is getting that. but the bottom line is, there is not any specific evidence that suggests that the number that he got was anything other than a plaintiffs's lawyer who pulled that number out of the air. he did not give you any rationale for that. he said -- you know, at first he started saying, well, i cannot come up with a number. and i thought, oh, he is going to leave it up to the jurors. but sure enough, he came up with a number. what he did not do was provide any basis and any rationale for it. now, i think under the evidence -- and we have talked about that -- that you should not be even reaching that portion of the verdict form. because the evidence is clear that addiction was not the cause of her injury, that her choice to smoke was. and that we know her choice to smoke was something she exercised, despite and regardless of addiction. and that when she stopped, she could quit, even if you call her addicted. so i do not think you are getting there. but he did not provide any rationale for that number. 65 i think they knew it was shocking, right? remember when miss london said, we are going to give you a number and you are going to find it shocking. they did not give any explanation of why that number, $15 million, is justified. and i'll ask you to think that there is 60 million people who quit smoking. one of them is mrs. burkhart. we know that tens of millions of people were quitting smoking in the '60s and '70s, when her own expert says she could have avoided her injury. and they do not prevent -- or present any evidence that she was different than the 60 million people who quit. but what they say is because she chose to smoke until '94, that when she gets a disease, they say now she gets $15 million, even though 60 million people quit and tens of millions quit when she was being warned. you decide if that makes sense under the facts of this case, not what some engle jury who never even heard of mrs. burkhart thought. now, finally, he argues they are entitled to punitive damages. the judge's instructions say punitive damages are for the purposes of punishment and deterrence. and i'm going to talk a little about those. that is going to be the final question on the verdict form. you have to find by clear and convincing 66 evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant. now, mr. heimann himself said that the issue of compensatory damages means that once -- if you reach it, and i do not think -- i do not think you should be reaching it. but if you reach, with all respect, ladies and gentlemen, this question, compensatory damages are designed to fully compensate the person. and mr. heimann read the instructions, full and just compensation. so once you get to punitives, you would have already decided that she is fully compensated. punitives are extra money. and it is extra money that is going to go, if awarded, only to mrs. burkhart. not to a charity or for people who quit smoking. this is her claim for additional money. you have to find that the defendants actually had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of their conduct. and they intentionally pursued that conduct and that resulted in the plaintiff's injuries. now, mr. heimann suggested that one of the reasons that you should award punitives is because they sold cigarettes even though cigarettes were dangerous. and that is why i reminded you that congress decided you can sell cigarettes, even if they are dangerous, with the 67 warning on the pack. mr. heimann: again, i object to this. the court: i'm going to have to sustain that one. i just remind the jury, i told you that the sale and/or advertising was legal. but that does not absolve the tobacco companies from potential liabilities under the standards i've given you. this is not a claim, i'll repeat again, under mislabeling. they have not made that claim. this is a claim on the fraudulent issues for withholding information, concealing information that they were aware of, and on negligence for selling a defective and dangerous product. that is the claim. it has nothing to do with mislabeling. go ahead. i'm sorry. mr. belasic: now, mr. heimann says, well, you know, they kept the dangers secret so she gets extra money. you know, he did not mention any figure, and so we do not know, but what we do know is that the information on the dangers of smoking were not a secret. what they are actually saying is the tobacco companies did not agree at a certain moment in time. we know they were not secret. i mean, we had this battle, who could put up the most evidence of historical knowledge and information? and i will not belabor this. but one of the things is we ran out of room on the board because it only went back to the 68 1940s. and the florida department of health was saying 100 years ago that you could call nicotine addictive. as far back as the 1920s -- mr. heimann: i'm going to object. this is challenging the engle findings. the engle findings are they concealed information that was not known or knowable. that is the finding. he cannot challenge that now. the court: he can. i'll just simply partially sustain. but i'll have to overrule the objection as to his argument. he has the right to argue that punitive damages are not warranted because there is no need to deter or punish the conduct. mr. belasic: and, ladies and gentlemen, if you look in your instructions, you will see a specific written instruction from judge jones that says punitive damages cannot be based on the engle findings. this is a question of mrs. burkhart. the court: solely on the engle findings. it is not enough to find warranted damages, punitive damages solely based upon application of the engle finding. mr. belasic: all right. so there is no dispute that as far back as the 1920s they were talking about smoking causing cancer. 69 i'll just give you a few examples. just click through. 100 years ago, our state government was saying it was addictive. it is not a secret. dr. proctor admitted 70 years ago, the year she was -- the year mrs. burkhart was born, a "reader's digest" was saying that nicotine was the reason people smoked. they compared it to other drugs. we know that -- you saw this claude teague document from the '50s from reynolds. "reader's digest" was saying the same thing in 1924. we know in the 1950s they were talking about cancer by the carton. dr. proctor himself said this magazine that came out years before mrs. burkhart smoked talked about cancer. we know that the first document, the very first document they used with their experts from 1935, not only was it a secret, but, ladies and gentlemen, i had to wait five or six hours to finally get up there and say, hey, that was something that was sent to doctors. it was not a secret at all. we know in 1942 they were publishing that if you looked at it one way, a cigarette could be a means of administering nicotine. that was not a secret. even "reader's digest" was saying nicotine is the essential ingredient. and remember -- 70 the court: i think i have to re-emphasize, he cannot challenge the engle findings. he cannot do that, say the engle findings are not true in this case. cannot do that. the engle findings were to the effect that there was fraud and that there was negligence. what he can do, however, is to say that in this case, punitive damages are not warranted under the standard i've given you in the legal instructions. so just that caution. i'm not going to stop his argument here. i just remind you, as a matter of law, he cannot challenge the engle findings. mr. belasic: and so there is no question, ladies and gentlemen, that is exactly what i am arguing. mrs. burkhart, her lawyer says she wants 10 or $15 million for choosing to smoke, and choosing to quit in 1994, because she got sick. now she says, and he says, that she wants additional money. punitive damages are not warranted under these facts. so let us talk about whether or not it was concealed and what the experts said. we know this is the evidence. mr. heimann: objection. the court: i'm going to sustain the objection, sir. you cannot challenge the engle findings that there 71 was misstatement or not misstatement. mr. belasic: all right. may i present the evidence that dr. burns presented? the court: no. mr. belasic: all right. now, one of the things we know is that mrs. burkhart said that when she saw the statements, she did not rely. that she said she saw them in the '80s, and she said, who are they kidding? and we know from dr. proctor that was not unusual. the question of reliance here is an individual question. and dr. proctor says for the last 50 years, only 3 to 5 percent of people ever said the tobacco companies were reliable. and mrs. burkhart was not one of them. because we have reviewed the evidence. she did not believe -- when she finally heard some statements in the '80s, she said, who are they kidding? and she did not think her cigarettes were safer. and she certainly did not refuse to quit because of some advertisement. now, they brought up dr. cummings to show some research documents. and i emphasize research, because the documents that he showed you about cigarette design were not about actual cigarettes for the actual brands that 72 mrs. burkhart smoked. he was very careful to show research documents about what researchers were looking at. and he said, well, the ph of cigarettes can effect it. what he did not tell you was that the reynolds' document, one of the 60 million documents, and one apparently he did not review, says there is no evidence from the historical data, going all the way out to 1996 after mrs. burkhart quit, there is no evidence from this data that smoke ph was purposefully increased to enhance sales. if you look at the sentence before, what happened is, there is no correlation between sales and ph. and when i asked dr. cummings, do you even know the ph level of any brand that mrs. burkhart smoked? he said no. he had not looked at this data. look at this. r.j. reynolds comparing sales and ph values. well, the ph is the top line. it goes up. it goes down. it goes up. it goes down. dr. cummings said, it varies from year to year, that even agriculture variations -- hot year, dry year -- ph is going to change. but look at the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, every year, down, down, down, down, down. 73 dr. cummings' assertion, based on a handful of cherrypicked documents from the '70s, that there was some connection between ph and sales, he did not look at the data. and he did not -- he admitted he did not look at anything for an actual cigarette that mrs. burkhart smoked. now, did the cigarette companies design cigarettes to be more addictive? were mrs. burkhart's cigarettes more addictive than they were in the old days? dr. cummings said, and his conclusion, his own studies, roll-your-own cigarettes -- you buy tobacco and you roll your own -- those are more addictive. the people who smoke roll-your-owns are more addicted than the people who smoke the kents and the marlboros and the winstons and the virginia slims and the kools. he says that the people who smoke roll-your-owns are less interested in quitting. and that is their expert, ladies and gentlemen. i asked dr. cummings, is not it true that the surgeon general knew about all of these design changes and reviewed them in a report. so the 1979 surgeon general's report is in evidence. the 1979 surgeon general's report -- look, if you would, ladies and gentlemen, along the left side, under tobacco processing. you see reconstituted tobacco sheet. he talked about that. look what the effect on tar and nicotine is. 74 it is a plus. well, in this case, plus is good. at the bottom, where i've highlighted, it tells you what plus means. it says reductions. not increases. reductions. two pluses means a fifty percent or greater reduction. a one plus means a significant reduction. surgeon general knew about this, researched it, published it. it was not secret. and the surgeon general's conclusion was that reconstituted tobacco sheet gets a star, they get a plus, because it reduces nicotine, it reduces tar. and look what the other column i highlighted says. carcinogenicity. means cancer producing ability. reconstituted tobacco sheet, a plus, meaning significant reduction. the surgeon general goes down the line. look under cigarette production. paper porosity, it reduces tar and nicotine, because a plus means a significant reduction. perforated filters. dr. cummings spent a lot of time on that. he did not tell you that the surgeon general knew about it and had studied it. and the surgeon general's report card here, perforated filters are a plus. that means a significant reduction. the same thing for the cellulose acetate filter, a plus, a significant reduction. 75 now, under those facts and under the admissions of their expert, there is no evidence there was anything done to one of mrs. burkhart's cigarettes that stopped her from quitting. she quit smoking when she was smoking lights. there is no evidence she was smoking -- that there was some effect on her. there is no evidence that there was deliberate wrongdoing. and remember, when the companies were making these design changes, the surgeon general knew about it back in the '70s. and the surgeon general did his own research, not biased or tobacco company research. he did his own research. and the surgeon general said those are positive changes. because, as dr. cummings says, it is a good thing to reduce carcinogenicity. it is a good thing to reduce tar and nicotine. that is a surgeon general's report card, ladies and gentlemen. the company should not be punished for doing something that the surgeon general at the time researched and said was beneficial for health. now, we know that this did not happen by accident, because we heard that the companies worked with the government to make safer cigarettes. that was dr. cummings. i cross-examined him. it was called the 76 national cancer institute tobacco working group. and the title of the program was "less hazardous cigarette program." it was voluntary. the tobacco company top scientists agreed to participate. they participated for ten years. dr. cummings says they researched for years. they came up with all kinds of alternative cigarettes. and the research was published. and he admitted the top scientist at lorillard, the top scientist at philip morris, the top scientist at r.j. reynolds took their time. the tobacco companies spent their money. the tobacco companies did the lab research. they shared that research in publications with the government from 1968 to '78. and he admitted it was the government that shut it down. now, they voluntarily worked with the government to make safer cigarettes. and here's one of the things we saw from an internal government record that shows the meeting. that was the national cancer institute meeting of 1976. we went through that at length. the national cancer institute was there. the department of agriculture was there. 77 and dr. cummings admitted that the government told the tobacco companies as part of this program to figure out ways to make a cigarette that would have a small level of tar but an extra level of nicotine. and dr. cummings admitted at that time there was a theory that would be a safer cigarette. because if you are smoking for nicotine, if you could have a cigarette that had more nicotine and less tar, that could be safer. this is not a secret tobacco company document. if anything, it was a secret government document at the time. but it was the government that was supervising a program that he admits was designed to make cigarettes safer. and we went through it. it talks about ph in there. it talks about reconstituted tobacco sheet. and when they shut down the program, the government thanked the tobacco scientists. all right? now, 40 years later, a man that is been paid $1.5 million comes in and pulls out some 1970s research documents and attacks the company. now, there is a phrase, "damned if you do and damned if you do not." when the tobacco companies take out nicotine, like philip morris did when they made an extensive effort to make the nicotine-free cigarette next, it was not welcomed by the public health community. it was attacked. 78 when the tobacco companies are told by the government it could be safer to have a low tar, medium nicotine cigarette, when we see in the own secret government documents that that program was being directed by the government, dr. cummings comes in and says, well, you should not have done that either. the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, that there is not any evidence that the design of a cigarette that the only smoker in this case, mrs. burkhart, smoked made her get copd or made her addicted or stopped her from quitting, because we know she can quit. we know that the companies cooperated. lorillard and philip morris did. we have got an internal memo from the '60s where reynolds says let us work on the safer cigarette program, push the cooperation with the government. and one last thing on design. dr. cummings admitted that the companies were trying to make safer cigarettes. and after the government safer cigarette program disbanded, that continued. and look what reynolds did. they made a cigarette called premier that only heated tobacco and did not burn it. and this is not a secret tobacco company document. it is a secret government document that came out of litigation. preliminary research conducted by the 79 developer showed there were fewer carcinogens in premier. right off the bat, dr. cummings said it was a safer cigarette and that it did have less carcinogens because it did not burn tobacco at all. look at what the government said about this cigarette that was developed by a tobacco company to be safer. look what they were concerned about. the panel was concerned about the ramifications of a cigarette that is actually safer. actually safer. the government was worried that r.j. reynolds had developed a cigarette that was actually safer. was reynolds engaged in deliberate wrongdoing when they made a cigarette that was actually safer, a cigarette that the government attacked? was lorillard and philip morris engaged in deliberate wrongdoing when they sent their top scientists for ten years to work hand in hand with the government to design cigarettes, only to have them pull out a '76 document from lorillard or a '73 document from reynolds and say, oh, you were researching the wrong things? when we know, and dr. cummings admitted, that the government's national cancer institute less hazardous cigarette program was behind in endorsing that kind of research. ladies and gentlemen, mrs. burkhart has not proved 80 that she is entitled to get the bonus award of punitive damages. look what the government did when they found out that there was a safer cigarette that cut the risk of cancer. they said, should not wait for the scientists to complete research. research should continue. but look at that last sentence. there is no need to wait to initiate a war, a war against new tobacco products. this is the government's record. this is not a tobacco company spokesman. the government thought they were making safer cigarettes. dr. cummings had absolutely no explanation of why the government shut down the program where the companies worked with them to design. he had no explanation why the government would be more scared about a cigarette that is safer. he did not say a thing about that. so they say that filters are fraudulent. they say that the companies deliberately and wrongfully sold filters. there was not any evidence. but, ladies and gentlemen, what dr. -- i believe it was dr. proctor, admitted is that the surgeon general actually was looking at the effect on actual people. they looked at the people who smoked filters. and they looked at the people who smoked what they called low 81 yield, low tar, low nicotine. and they tracked their cancer dates or their cancer rates. and so they could figure out, wait a second, are filters actually working? are the people who smoked filters getting lower rates of disease? i do not have to go into the tobacco company files. let us just look at what the surgeon general said when the companies like the companies here were making filters. '79. she is smoking filters, mrs. burkhart. the surgeon general's report says the people who use -- use of filter cigarettes and smoking of cigarettes with lower amounts of tar decrease lung cancer mortality rates. that is real people, real death rates, and a real benefit. how is that fraud? how is that fraud? in '81, again, today's filter-tipped, lower tar and nicotine cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer. it is not a trick. it is what the surgeon general found when he actually measured the lung cancer rates. so, you know, mr. heimann can pull out a document that says, oh, the illusion of filtration. or he can pull out a document that dr. proctor showed you that said let us change the color of a filter. and then dr. proctor had to admit it never even happened. but if you want to know if filters are really safer and you want to know whether the companies were doing 82 something wrong at the time, look at what the surgeon general said. filters, they believed, based on real data for real smokers, were decreasing death rates. that is not fraud, ladies and gentlemen. that is not wrongdoing. and none of it had anything to do with mrs. burkhart. 1989, the same thing. reduces the risk of lung cancer. 1990, when they observed smokers of filtered cigarettes, they find a lower risk of lung cancer. how is that fraud? how did they show -- does this make any sense? would the companies want to kill their own customers? would the companies engage in wrongdoing if they are going to spend all this money to make a safer cigarette that the government tries to shut down? would the companies be engaged in wrongdoing if they are working for ten years on published safer cigarette research, and the tobacco companies are the ones that are doing it, and the government shuts it down? mr. heimann: not really. there is no evidence of this. this is -- he is coming up with -- the court: i have to sustain it. i'm sorry. the standard i've given you under the legal instructions, which i think counsel is trying to change, is 83 punitive damages. this is on instruction number 17. punitive damages are warranted if you find the plaintiff has proved by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of its conduct. i remind you here that wrongfulness of its conduct has already been determined by the engle jury. after listening to more than a year's worth of evidence, i'm not putting you through that burden. the engle jury has already decided that, including the withholding of information about the effectiveness, according to their own research, of filters and/or perforated filters and/or menthol. the engle jury already decided the wrongfulness. to the extent he is arguing that it was not wrongful conduct, he cannot do that. i'm sorry. the burden here on the plaintiff and the issue here for you to decide on punitive damages is whether they have proved by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness, the defendant had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness. the engle jury has already said it was wrongful. the question is whether they had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness and that there was a high probability of injury or damage and despite that knowledge 84 intentionally pursued that course of conduct resulting in the plaintiff's injuries. that is the issue. were they aware of the wrongfulness, not whether the wrongfulness occurred and, therefore, i have to strike those portions where he is simply arguing there was no wrongful conduct. the engle jury has already decided that for us. but the plaintiff's burden is actual knowledge of the wrongfulness and despite high probability of injury and despite that knowledge pursued the course resulting in the plaintiff's injuries. that is the standard. i have to remind the jury of that. mr. heimann: and your honor, he is almost two hours now. i would ask -- mr. belasic: i'm finishing up, your honor. the court: no. i'm not going to limit him, nor will i limit you. mr. belasic: as judge jones read to you -- and you can read in black and white -- the instruction says that mrs. burkhart has to prove actual knowledge of wrongdoing. we have reviewed the evidence of what the companies knew and what the companies did. you will determine whether it was actual knowledge of wrongdoing under these circumstances. but also as judge jones said, you have to 85 determine whether the companies then intentionally followed a course of conduct that they knew was wrongful and that it caused an injury to mrs. burkhart. that is why i'm reviewing that evidence. you will decide. and what i suggest to you is that based on the evidence from dr. proctor and from dr. cummings, the evidence admitting cooperation with the government and the evidence that did not link any of this conduct to mrs. burkhart -- and after all, that is why we are here. that is the only reason we are here -- that she is not entitled to punitive damages. and so you should vote no on that final question. now, i'll leave you with this. at the end of the day mrs. burkhart was a heavy smoker. and at the end of the day mrs. burkhart chose once to stop in the 1980s. and at the end of the day she chose once to quit for good in 1994. and if it was not for a lawsuit, we would say that that was a smoker who could control her behavior and who quit for good by her own words. but because this is a lawsuit, plaintiffs argue, well, they have somehow proven that addiction was the substantial cause. we know that the only time she put her mind to it, she could quit. and addiction did not stop her. it is not something that a company made up. she is 86 not a desperate smoker who tried to quit in the '50s or '60s. she did not; made no effort. she is not a desperate smoker who was being warned every day by her husband that it would kill her. she is not somebody like that. she is someone who is being warned by her husband it could kill her but was not doing anything at all to quit in the '70s. she says she only -- the first time she ever tried to quit was the '80s, quit for three weeks. by the '90s, smoking the same brand, same nicotine. she was smoking more than before. if she was addicted, dr. burns says she was at her peak of addiction. and when she changed her mind, she changed her life. and when she made the decision, she no longer smoked. ladies and gentlemen, under those circumstances, even if smoking is the medical cause, addiction cannot be a legal cause of a person who knows the risk of smoking and who chooses to smoke and then chooses to quit successfully the very first time they put their mind to it. it is been a long trial. and i think this is the last time i'll get a chance to talk to you. one thing that i wanted to tell you is, i know by now, i said for some of you, it was an inconvenience; for others, it would be a sacrifice. i know by now it is a sacrifice for every one of 87 you. you do not take nine days out of your life to decide a civil dispute without it being a sacrifice. and, again, i know you were drafted. everybody else volunteered. so i thank you for your tremendous attention, and i thank you for your service. closing argument by the defense mr. rowley: good afternoon, everybody. mr. belasic just covered a whole lot of ground. i'm not going to repeat the things that he told you. i will tell you that i agreed with all of them. but today, i want to focus with my limited time, as judge jones said, on issues that are a little bit more specific to lorillard, and i will be brief. so i want to start by reminding you of some of the facts that are related to mrs. burkhart's smoking history in relation specifically to lorillard. the only lorillard product that mrs. burkhart smoked was kent, kent cigarettes. she started smoking them, she says, in 1965, and she says she stopped smoking them in 1974. after 1974, she never did smoke any other lorillard brand. that is the entire span of her lorillard smoking. in 1965, when she started smoking kent, mrs. burkhart was 24 years old. she was married to her first husband. she had already moved from home. they 91 moved out of town and then back to kentucky. and she was certainly old enough at that time, at the time she started smoking kent, to make an adult decision to smoke. mrs. burkhart was already smoking filtered cigarettes at the time she switched to kent cigarettes. and you heard her testimony -- and mr. belasic referred to it briefly -- that the reason that she switched was that she believed that kents tasted better. that was her motivation for switching. and when she tried them, she found that they actually did taste better. and her sworn testimony -- you saw it on video -- was that she was not even thinking about kent as being safer at the time that she switched to kent. now, that was in her deposition. when she came in and you saw her testify live here at trial, she said something about the companies not working to improve their products or take stuff, i think she said, out of the cigarettes. but you folks saw the testimony of dr. proctor. remember, he was the second witness who you saw. and he described all of the efforts, many of the efforts that lorillard made during this precise time period to improve its products, to identify potentially harmful components in the smoke. lorillard's work with some of the leading 92 scientists of the day, remember, these folks were described as giants in american public health. during my cross-examination, he said that they were the leading figures in public health. towering figures, in fact, is what he called them. so some of the things that dr. proctor described were that lorillard identified what he called then phenolic compounds. remember the discussion of ciliostasis, the hair cells in the lung. that was the predominant theory of lung disease at the time. so lorillard collaborated with scientists, dr. dietrich hoffmann, who was at sloan-kettering medical center, to try to identify and isolate these then phenolic compounds, and then lorillard developed for kent the filter that filtered out phenols. so when mrs. burkhart said that she thought lorillard and the other companies were working on this, she was right. they were working on it. and you heard this testimony directly from dr. proctor during his cross-examination. that is not the only thing that he told you about. can you pull up -- okay. if you will remember, this is one of the first exhibits that the plaintiff's lawyers used in the case. this is the "life" magazine article relating to the 93 mouse skin painting studies. and remember, dr. proctor told you that it was lorillard who sought out dr. graham and dr. wynder after their publication of the first epidemiologic study that showed a relationship between smoking and lung cancer and offered to help them. now, that is not reprehensible conduct. it is not punishable conduct. and it does not show an intent to harm or an intent to harm consumers. he reached out to them, provided them with hundreds of cigarettes for these studies. and dr. proctor told you that this help lasted for decades. in fact, lorillard provided these scientists with cigarettes, both before and after this "life" magazine article. and he told you about all the other efforts, many of the other efforts that lorillard made during this time period before the kent cigarette was introduced, these efforts to make the kent filter, like pmo. you may have made a note about pmo during the trial when dr. proctor testified, trying to reduce ciliostasis, trying to remove phenols, trying to remove potentially harmful constituents in cigarette smoke. i want to talk just for a minute about this allegation that the companies did things to try to make cigarettes more addictive. and mr. belasic covered aspects of it. 94 and remember, he said that these -- these efforts were in response to public health recommendations, including recommendations from the national cancer institute. but it was also recommended by the surgeon general of the united states. remember the plaintiff's lawyer showed you documents that talked about nicotine addiction and changing smoke ph and filter ventilation, things like that. i wanted to show you one lorillard document, because lorillard's program, as i think dr. cummings mentioned, lorillard's program to follow these public health recommendations was called the nicotine augmentation project. the document i'm going to show you was admitted by the plaintiff's lawyers. it is the first document, the seminal document in the program. and it explains exactly why they were pursuing this research and who recommended this research. can we put that up, please? this is from may of 1976. so it is within days of the nci tobacco working group recommendation that mr. belasic showed you. the very first sentence of the very first paragraph that established this program -- and the snippets that the plaintiff's lawyer read to you came from this 95 document and other documents that were part of this program. the first sentence says, recommendations from health-oriented agencies and pressures from competitive companies make it imperative that lorillard develop a flavorful cigarette delivering lower tar, while at the same time delivering a level of nicotine higher than could be obtained by normal conventional cigarette construction. that is the very first sentence. the contemporaneous documents say that this work was an attempt to make a safer cigarette. that is the purpose of the work. and lorillard's documents at the time reflect it. all right. mr. belasic talked with you a little bit about damages. and i agree with him that you should not reach the issue of damages in this case. but the court's instruction was that damages must be fair and just. there is nothing in the instructions about giving an award that is shocking. the award, if you reach that question and if you were to award damages, must be fair and just. the number that mr. heimann gave you, $10 million, is shocking. a fair and just award, if mrs. burkhart could meet her burden in showing that she was addicted to nicotine, and in showing that nicotine was a cause of her 96 injuries, and meet all of her other burdens, a fair and just award would be one where you would take a zero off the number that mr. heimann suggested. only if mrs. burkhart could meet her burdens. and we do not believe that she can for the reasons that mr. belasic explained. so one other topic regarding lorillard that i want to talk with you about. mr. heimann talked with you a little bit about marketing. you heard testimony about lorillard's marketing, in particular, from both dr. cummings, one of the plaintiff's experts, and dr. proctor, one of the plaintiff's experts. and both of those folks told you that lorillard tobacco company had a policy that dated back decades, more than 40 years, against placing products in movies and films. it was the first thing, in fact, that i asked dr. proctor about. and they not only had that policy, when they were solicited by agencies and producers, they rejected those solicitations. many of the things that mr. heimann talked about as being reprehensible or evidence of bad intent were actually efforts to make a safer cigarette. and 97 lorillard's nicotine augmentation program is just one example. so i am out of time. i want to thank you for your service in this case. i appreciate it very much. and lorillard also appreciates it. thank you. closing argument by the defense ms. gallagher: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. as the judge has instructed you, the plaintiff has to prove every essential element of her claims in this case, and she is got to do that by a preponderance of the evidence. and you have an instruction on that. but it is not just that it has to be a preponderance of the evidence, it has to be the credible and believable evidence. as you will see when you look through your instructions, you actually have three different instructions on credibility of the witnesses. that is how important it is. and that is what i want to spend my brief time with you today talking about. one of the instructions you have goes to the credibility of experts. can you get it? 98 there we go. and you will see these. you have got these. when a witness is being paid for reviewing and testifying concerning the evidence, you may consider the possibility of bias, and you may view with caution the testimony of such witness where court testimony is given with regularity and represents a significant portion of the witness' income. well, you know that the plaintiff's experts, drs. cummings, burns, and proctor, have testified with great regularity. dr. cummings has testified in 60 to 70 trials, dr. proctor in over 30 trials, dr. burns in 40 to 50 trials. between them, these three experts, in the last five years, have testified in over 150 trials like this. and that does not count the amount of time they spend reviewing records, giving depositions, and writing reports. the other thing that you can consider is whether these experts make a significant portion of their income from testifying. and you know from listening to the cross-examinations of these witnesses that each one of them have become millionaires by testifying in this litigation. and, in fact, they are actually making more and more money as the years go by. dr. cummings made well over half of his income 99 last year testifying in tobacco cases. dr. proctor said last year that he earned almost half a million dollars. and this year he will earn more than that. and dr. burns makes ninety percent of his income testifying in cases just like this. so should you view their testimony with an eye as to whether they are biased? well, you do not even have to wonder about that because they have told you they are. dr. cummings is the general in the war against tobacco. and you have dr. proctor, who thinks that shocking, large verdicts act as a tax on cigarettes, cigarettes that he wants banned. these experts have an agenda. and it really does not have anything to do with the specific plaintiff, a plaintiff like mrs. burkhart. they are here for other reasons. and they did not tell you much about mrs. burkhart. you heard very, very little about mrs. burkhart from those experts, the very person that this case is about. so what other evidence did the plaintiff bring you? the plaintiff brought you mrs. burkhart, the smoker in this case, to tell you about the decisions she made, what she heard, and the decisions she made about her own smoking. 100 and then we brought you her husband, the man who has known her for 40 years. and you have another instruction on the credibility of other witnesses. and it says, when i say you must consider all the evidence, i do not mean that you must accept all the evidence as true or accurate. you should decide whether you believe what each witness had to say and how important that testimony was. in making that decision, you may believe or disbelieve any witness in whole or in part. so let us review what you have heard about some of the key issues in this case. the plaintiffs want you to believe that mrs. burkhart smoked filtered cigarettes because she thought they were safer. the evidence that you heard from mrs. burkhart was that when she went to kent filtered cigarettes, she chose a filtered cigarette because it kept the tobacco out of her mouth. she specifically said that she did not switch to kent cigarettes because she thought they were safer, that she thought they were better for her health. but then she said she switched to filters because filters reduced nicotine and tar, because they were better for her. so you had every bit of testimony from, no, i 101 switched to them because they kept tobacco out of my teeth, to i switched to them because i thought they were better for me. well, keep in mind when mrs. burkhart switched to filtered cigarettes, because that was in 1960. and if you think that she switched to filtered cigarettes in the 1960s because she thought they were safer, then she had to know that smoking was dangerous in the 1960s. and what did she tell you about that? when she was on the witness stand here in this courtroom, she told you that she did not know that there were any health risks associated with smoking until the 1980s. and then she also told you that if she had known in the 1960s or the 1970s that cigarettes caused disease or were addictive, that she would have tried to quit sooner. but then she also told you that she knew she was addicted in the 1960s, that she used the term "nicotine fit" to refer to her own smoking in the 1960s. and you heard from mr. burkhart. mr. burkhart said that he and mrs. burkhart had conversations about smoking, about the health risks of smoking, that smoking could be dangerous for you, that smoking could be bad for your lungs, that smoking could kill you, back in the 1970s when they first met, in 1974. but then mr. burkhart said, no, no. those 102 conversations were actually later that i had with my wife, that smoking could kill you. so if you believe the testimony of the burkharts, then you have to believe that mrs. burkhart was first aware of the health risks of smoking in the 1960s, that she was first aware of the health risks of smoking in the 1970s, and that she was first aware of the health risks of smoking in the 1980s. mr. heimann has also said that mrs. burkhart smoked light cigarettes or low tar cigarettes because she thought that they were safer for her, that she thought that they were better for her. but when mrs. burkhart was asked about her switch to kools, which would have been the first light cigarette that she smoked, she said she switched to them because they were menthol; that she had a cold and her friend said, try a menthol cigarette, and that is when she picked up her first light cigarette. she told you that she smoked her second light cigarette, the second brand, virginia slims lights, because she was trying to get off the menthol from the kools lights. she also told you that she never compared tar amounts between cigarettes. and she told you that she never chose a brand based on the tar levels. 103 so mrs. burkhart told you that she chose low tar cigarettes because of the low tar; she thought they were better for her. and yet at the same time she told you that she never chose a brand of cigarettes based on the level of tar. i add, mrs. burkhart told you that she picked virginia slims because of the ad campaign, you have come a long way, baby. she started smoking virginia slims in 1980 -- 1980s, somewhere around the mid 1980s. and as you have heard from dr. cummings, you have come a long way, baby, that ad campaign started in the late 1960s, some 15 years before she ever tried a virginia slims cigarette. mr. burkhart also talked to you about ads. he said that the reason he and mrs. burkhart switched to light cigarettes was because of tv ads they saw in the 1980s and the 1990s. and you know that is impossible, because there have not been tv ads for cigarettes since 1971. the last one i'll give you -- and i know a lot of you have been taking notes and you have probably got notes of your own on some of these topics. let us talk about the 1985 warning. mrs. burkhart told you that she never saw the 1985 warning on emphysema, that she could not read it because the print was too little. 104 but then she also told you if she had seen that emphysema warning, she would have stopped and thought about it. and then you heard from mr. burkhart who said they had very specific conversations about the 1985 warnings. and he told you that mrs. burkhart believed the 1985 warnings. and then mr. burkhart told you mrs. burkhart did not believe the 1985 warnings. so if you believe the burkharts, mrs. burkhart never saw the warning about emphysema, or she had a very specific conversation with her husband about it and she either believed or did not believe that warning. you decide whether you believe what each witness had to say. those are in the judge's instructions. and you may believe or disbelieve any witness in whole or in part. and if you decide to believe the burkharts, you have got to believe absolutely contradictory evidence. and a third instruction you have from judge jones about the credibility of witnesses is whether those witnesses have changed their testimony on important matters. and that is something that you need to consider. because if you go by the evidence that the plaintiffs brought you on important issues, like, did mrs. burkhart know about the health risks of smoking in the 105 1960s, the answer is yes and the answer is no. if you go by the evidence the plaintiffs brought you about whether mrs. burkhart saw warnings and paid attention to them, the answer is yes and the answer is no. if mrs. burkhart relied on ads in choosing a brand of cigarettes, the answer is yes and the answer is no. all of these important issues have both yeses and noes as the answer. and that is not clear, credible, preponderance of the evidence proving the elements, essential elements of the plaintiff's claims. what facts are clear, that mrs. burkhart believes that smoking is an individual choice, that mrs. burkhart believes the cure for smoking addiction is to quit. and that when mrs. burkhart made up her mind to quit, she did so. there are no yeses or noes, no maybes on those facts. those facts are undisputed. mrs. burkhart's smoking decisions were her own. and that is why addiction was not the legal cause of her copd. ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your attention over the last week and today. and thank you for your jury service.