mr. heimann: may it please the court. good morning once again, ladies and gentlemen. in a little while, probably in the middle of the afternoon or so when we have all got done talking to you, you will go back into your room and you will begin your deliberations; and when you do that, you will have three jobs to do. the first will be to answer the questions on the verdict form that his honor will give you. the second will be to follow the instructions on the law that his honor gives you with respect to the questions on that verdict form. and third will be to explain to each other why you believe the answers should be what you think they are. and that last point is important, because you are a jury of eight persons; and in order to return a verdict in this case, you all have to agree as to each of the questions on the verdict form and as to the ultimate verdict. 55 so it will be necessary for you to explain to each other why you think the answer should be one way or the other for each of those questions and why you think the verdict in the end should be what you think it is. so what i'm about here this morning is to try and give you some ways to go about thinking about the issues in this case. i'm not, by the way, going to try and marshal the evidence. sometimes we see that on television or in the movies about trials. that is not something i will do here. i will make reference to the evidence, but i'm not going to try and put it all back. you have heard all the testimony and so forth. i'm not going to go back into all that testimony, but i am going to try and explain to you why we believe your answers to those verdict form questions should be in favor of mrs. burkhart and why your verdict in the end in this case should be in favor of mrs. burkhart. so at the heart of this case is the following question, really: when large corporations, powerful corporations abuse their power, use their money and resources to lie about the safety of the products they make and sell, to conceal the dangers in those products from the people who use them, all for the greed for money and all the while knowing that doing that is going to cost millions to suffer, do they bear some responsibility for the harm that they inflict on people like mrs. burkhart, some responsibility for 56 that harm? now, we accept -- ms. london told you at the opening statement we accept that mrs. burkhart bears some responsibility, even though -- and i'll come to this in a minute -- she was addicted to the cigarettes manufactured by these defendants, but she still bears some responsibility for her own actions. we do not deny that. defendants, on the other hand, deny any and all responsibility for the consequences of their action. so that is the real question at the heart of this case for you to decide. do they bear some responsibility for the injuries and suffering that mrs. burkhart has as a result of cigarette smoking? let me start -- burden of proof. his honor has already talked with you about this, but i'd like to start out a little bit more with this. this is the burden of proof that we bear on most of the questions that will be put to you on the verdict form; and that is to establish our claims, we need to prove those claims by a preponderance of the evidence, which really means simply that it is more likely true than not, more likely right than wrong. even if only by a little bit, that is the burden that we bear on most of the claims in this case. you may in the end have some doubt about the evidence in the case. you may have doubt both ways about the 57 evidence in the case, but your responsibility is to weigh the evidence; and if you find even by a little bit that the evidence favors mrs. burkhart's claims, then your verdict should be in favor of mrs. burkhart. so if in the course of your deliberations one of you says, "look, i've got some doubts about this. i'm not absolutely sure about how the evidence is," you have got to tell that juror, "no, you do not have to be certain." this is not a case where you have to be certain. this is where you simply have to believe and conclude that the evidence, more likely than not, is in favor of mrs. burkhart. the first issue -- and we have heard this from the judge now on numerous occasions. the first issue for you to decide this case is whether or not mrs. burkhart is a member of the engle class. now, to be clear about this, the engle class does not include all smokers in florida who suffered injuries. the engle class is quite narrow, actually. for the most part, it only includes folks who began smoking in the 1940s and the 1950s, people who typically were born in the 1930s and the 1940s, like mrs. burkhart. so we are not talking about people who took up smoking in the 1970s or the 1980s. we are talking about people who took up smoking originally when there were no warnings on the cigarette packages, when there were no 58 warnings of danger, and when, for the most part, people had no clue that cigarette smoking could cause things like lung cancer or copd, and at a time when the culture in this country was a culture of smoking, where most of the adult men smoked cigarettes, where smoking was literally everywhere. and that culture, by the way, did not come about by accident. oh, no. that culture came about after the extraordinary efforts on the part of the tobacco companies to make that culture in the first half of the 20th century, through advertising after advertising after advertising. you saw -- i think dr. burns showed you and other witnesses showed you, too, that scale, how the amount of smoking, per capita smoking, in this country began at almost nothing in the early part of the 20th century, and then after the first world war, when the modern cigarette really came into vogue and manufactured -- that was camel, actually, back then -- it skyrocketed over the years to the point where it reached its peak in the '60s or '70s or '80s. i've forgotten the exact date, but there were some different measurements on that. that culture was created by these defendants deliberately to make smoking okay, to make it culturally acceptable. in fact, to make it popular. i should also say that the plaintiffs, who are members of this class, for the most part, were smoking during the early part of the campaign of doubt and deception that we 59 know from the evidence began in the early '50s, when the first credible scientific reports came out and got widely circulated in the united states, and most -- this is -- mrs. burkhart is one -- began smoking in the heart of that campaign, 1959, when she was -- '58 or '59, when she was a teenager. here's what is required for class membership, two things and two things only: was mrs. burkhart addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and did that addiction lead to her copd caused by smoking? that is it. there is no question of fault here. fault may be an issue in the case, but it does not have to do with class membership. we will get to that in a little bit. so that is it. that is all there is. addiction and addiction as the cause of what led to her smoking, which led to her disease, copd. so here's the first question. and let me say this. i have tried to get these -- this is a verdict form question. i tried to get the text exactly into what you will see. there may be some slight variations, but you are going to have the verdict form in your hand in the jury room. so that is the text that you are going to be looking for. so if there is any difference between the text that i show you here, it is a mistake on my part and you should ignore it and just use the text that you have and the verdict 60 form that you have in the jury room with you. but here's the first question: was pauline burkhart addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? i think in your heart of hearts, applying common sense, based on what you have heard in this courtroom, there cannot be any doubt that mrs. burkhart was addicted. i do not even think you needed to hear the testimony of expert witnesses on this point. she is an intelligent woman. she smoked for something like 35 years. you heard her talk about the compulsion that cigarettes had over her, the hold they had over her; but there was a lot of evidence otherwise, and so let us take a look at it. here are some facts about addiction that you heard from the testimony on behalf of mrs. burkhart in the course of this case: nicotine addiction is a brain disease. nicotine changes the structure and the function of the brain. once one is addicted to nicotine, the brain cannot function normally without nicotine. it screams out for nicotine when nicotine is not in the brain. so-called enjoyment -- you heard a bit about this yesterday. when mr. burkhart was on the witness stand, he was asked did mrs. burkhart enjoy smoking. "yeah. 61 "why? "because she was addicted." so-called enjoyment of smoking is simply the relief of withdrawal symptoms and the stimulation of the brain's reward system. you heard that from both dr. cummings and from dr. burns. in terms of the addictive power of nicotine, only three percent of regular smokers who attempt to quit each year actually succeed in quitting. on average, it takes somewhere in the neighborhood of five to seven serious attempts to quit before a smoker successfully gets off addiction to nicotine. an individual's level of nicotine addiction is a huge factor in whether they can successfully quit. and you heard about how deeply addicted mrs. burkhart was. some people who start smoking -- people who start smoking cigarettes at a younger age have a higher level of addiction to nicotine. you heard that from the expert witnesses and you know that applies to mrs. burkhart. once a person is addicted to nicotine, her ability to exercise free will is constrained. i'm going to come back to that because that is going to be an essential issue of this case, free will and choice versus addiction. nicotine addicts use psychological defense mechanisms, like denial and rationalization, to justify 62 continued smoking. you heard a lot of that from dr. burns. he uses a fancy term, "cognitive dissonance," which has to do with conflicting information in your mind and how addiction affects a person's resolution of that conflicting information. the fact that a person is able to successfully quit does not mean that she was not addicted to nicotine in the first place. and, finally, addiction causes disease because it leads to continued use of cigarettes, and it is the continued use of cigarettes that causes the damage to the body. you heard from both dr. cummings and dr. burns about the modern scientific definition of addiction; and this applies not just to nicotine, but to all other addictive drugs as well. "addiction" is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. it is considered a brain disease because drugs actually change the structure of the brain and how the brain works. and that is what mrs. burkhart suffered from. this is the definition, as you heard, that doctors are taught to use, all across this country that doctors are taught to use in diagnosing nicotine addiction and in treating nicotine addiction. 63 receptors in the brain accept nicotine and respond to it. the wiring in the brain is altered as a result of the ingestion of nicotine. nicotine becomes necessary in order for the brain to function normally; and without nicotine, the person does not feel normal, feels abnormal, goes into withdrawal. the surgeon general on any number of occasions has talked about nicotine addiction. this is from the 2010 report. this is a repetition, a repeat, of what was reflected in the 1988 report when the surgeon general finally and for the first time concluded, based on information that was finally then available about addiction and nicotine in cigarettes, that nicotine and cigarettes was addictive. cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting, according to the surgeon general. nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. and the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. you heard both dr. cummings and dr. burns, who have a wealth of experience and background in dealing with addiction and treating addicted smokers and diagnosing addiction, concluded -- and they explained to you why -- that in their judgment, there is no question but that mrs. burkhart 64 was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. now, i do not know whether the defense, when they argue here today in front of you, is going to contend that she was not addicted. they really have not made that plain to me, at least. but i do know this: did you hear any testimony from any expert in this trial for the defense on the question of whether or not mrs. burkhart was addicted to nicotine? no. of course not. they had the ability to go out into the world and get any expert that was qualified to speak on this subject come in here and testify, if they could find an expert who would testify that mrs. burkhart was not addicted, but they did not. this is what we see. no defense experts testified in this trial on whether or not mrs. burkhart was addicted to nicotine, and i think that is important in terms of your assessment of that issue. so here's the answer i submit you should give to that first question on this -- the issue of class membership: was pauline burkhart addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and the answer is yes. now, the second question on class membership i put before you has to do with whether or not the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a cause of mrs. burkhart's copd. 65 and the answer to that question, you are going to be instructed -- the judge has already given you an instruction; i'm just repeating it for you -- on what "legal cause" means in this case for this purpose. and as his honor instructed you, to prove that addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine caused mrs. burkhart to develop copd, she must prove that the addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or substantially contributed -- you see, i've underlined that one -- to producing one or both -- to producing the disease copd, and that but for the addiction, the disease would not have occurred. there is a second part of this instruction. here it is. his honor gave you and will give you again at the end of this case. "addiction may be a cause of a disease even though it operates in combination with some other cause, as long as the addiction contributes substantially to producing the disease." so in both aspects of the instruction, the notion of substantial, substantially contributed or contributed substantially, is important, features prominently in the definition, and that is because it does not have to be -- addiction does not have to be the only reason that mrs. burkhart continued to smoke in order for the addiction to be a legal cause of smoking and disease. as long as the addiction was part of the reason, and a substantial part of 66 the reason, that is all that the law requires. so what do we mean by "substantial"? i should say to you in this instruction and for this purpose, the language that is being used is not legalese. it is not supposed to be special to lawyers. this is supposed to be language that is common to us all, common usage. so when we use the word "substantial," that does not have any special legal meaning. it has the meaning that you use it in everyday common application. so what does it mean? here are some synonyms. actual, real versus unreal, more than trivial. one way of trying to understand what a word means is to try and understand what the opposite means. so we have substantial. what about insubstantial? what does insubstantial mean? trivial, inconsequential, of little or no importance, negligible. so another way of putting the instruction to you is if mrs. burkhart's addiction to nicotine was more than a negligible reason why she continued to smoke, that has a legal cause. if it was more than of little or no importance, it is a legal cause under the instruction. the issue of legal cause really in this situation has two parts to it. the first part is here: was 67 addiction -- because we are talking about smoking. addiction in and of itself, obviously, does not have any import. it is a question of what you are addicted to. so in this case the first part is, was addiction a cause of smoking, mrs. burkhart's smoking, a cause? the second part: was smoking, the smoking that resulted from the addiction, a cause of her copd? so with the idea of what "substantial" means and what "insubstantial" means here is really the question for the first part of that two-part question. here it is: was addiction a substantial part of the reason that mrs. burkhart persisted in smoking cigarettes -- mr. belasic: and i object to this as contrary to the verdict form and the instructions. the court: overruled. mr. heimann: -- or was addiction only a trivial or inconsequential part of the reason that mrs. burkhart persisted in smoking cigarettes? that is really what this question boils down to, legal cause question boils down to. now, how did the witnesses answer that question? the witnesses for mrs. burkhart, because no witnesses testified on this question for any of the defendants here. dr. cummings and dr. burns both testified about this. they both concluded that it was the addiction that caused mrs. burkhart to continue to smoke cigarettes for the 68 period of time that she did. the surgeon general's report -- this is from the 2010 report -- has the same point. sustained use and long- term exposures to tobacco smoke are due to powerfully addicting effects of tobacco products. powerfully addicting effects of tobacco products. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist, persist, in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to the diseases described in that 2010 report, which includes emphysema and copd, by the way. it is not just our experts who are of this view and of this conclusion as to mrs. burkhart, and it is not just the surgeon general who is of this view. the defendants admitted -- here is dr. gentry from r.j. reynolds testifying just a couple years ago. what did he say about it? you heard him on the video. he acknowledged nicotine addiction is a fundamental reason people use tobacco products. nicotine is the reason people smoke. now, once again, did you hear from any expert in the field of addiction or medicine from the defendants about this question of whether or not addiction was a substantial cause of mrs. burkhart's continuing to smoke? once again, no. once again, they certainly had the ability to go out into the world, this country, and if they 69 could find somebody who was credentialed and credible who could come in here and testify that nicotine addiction was not the substantial part of the reason that mrs. burkhart persisted in smoking for 35 years and was not related to her coming down with copd, you can be sure that person would have been there, but they were not. they do not exist. let us come back to the issue, was pauline burkhart addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine a cause of her copd? the answer is yes. but before i leave that, i want to remind you -- i'm not going to repeat what she said, but you saw mrs. burkhart on the witness stand and you heard her testify as to how hard she tried to break addiction over the years and how her failure, for the most part, in the '80s affected her, how it drained her of her self-esteem, how she struggled, struggled, to overcome the addiction and, because of the compulsion of that addiction, went back to smoking. that, it seems to me, is important for you to consider. the point has been made time and again by the defense, and questioned the witnesses, that mrs. burkhart is an intelligent woman, very well-educated, wise. do you think that the person of that character would continue to smoke day in and day out, week in and week out, year after year two packs a day, three packs a day if she could stop, just stop? does that make any sense at all? it was -- it was the 70 addiction. the second part of this two-part question is an easy one because -- it is not here. the second part is, did her smoking -- remember, i said there are two parts to this: did the addiction cause the smoking, persistent smoking; and did the smoking -- the second part -- cause the disease? the defendants have agreed as to the medical causation part, the second part, that the smoking caused the disease. so that is not in doubt or in play, i should say. now, the defendants, i know, will argue, well, she really chose to smoke. even if she was addicted, she chose to smoke, and it was that choice that was the reason she continued to smoke and it was not related to her addiction. once again, you heard from the folks who know what they are talking about in this regard, dr. burns and dr. cummings, that addiction constrains choice. it overcomes choice, free choice. that is the nature of addiction. that is why it is addiction. if all one had to do was freely choose, then they were not addicted, clearly. and, again, if there was anybody who knows what they are talking about in this regard, who would come in here as an expert and be qualified to speak to this question of whether or not choice is the reason people smoke versus addiction, the defense could put them up. put them up, let them tell you that, but they did not. they did not because 71 there is not anybody out there who is qualified who will come into court and say that. so that is -- those are the two questions, verdict form questions, that determine class membership; and your answer "yes" to both of those then establishes that mrs. burkhart is a member of the engle class, and that then -- but only then, that entitles her and you must apply the findings that that engle jury made after the year-plus of testimony that they heard and the trial verdict that they reached. i want to move on to the order that his honor instructed you today to talk first about the intentional tort, the claims of fraud and concealment here, and the first is fraudulent concealment. and this is the verdict form, i hope, that will be presented to you on this question. did pauline burkhart rely to her detriment on statements made by the defendants that concealed or omitted material information concerning either the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes? you will be asked to give yes or no for each of the defendants. and there is a second, very closely related question. this has to do with the conspiracy aspect of this. did mrs. burkhart rely to her detriment on statements made in furtherance of the defendants' agreement, because there is -- according to the engle findings, not only did they do it 72 individually, not only did they make misstatements and conceal information individually on their own, they agreed with the other tobacco companies to do the same thing. why? to make their plan more effective. if one of them only was out there talking -- giving false statements about the addictiveness of cigarettes or concealing what they knew about the addictiveness of cigarettes or the same with respect to health, it would be very ineffective for the industry as a whole, but they all got together. they agreed to do this. so you will be asked again to determine whether or not those -- that conduct and the court has instructed you on this multiple times during the course of this trial, whether that conduct affected mrs. burkhart's conduct, whether she relied on that, those statements. and here are -- what i've done here is tried to compress the engle findings, because there are two separate findings on this that are closely related, and this is what you will accept: that the defendants, each of these companies, knowingly concealed or omitted material information and that they entered into an agreement with each other to conceal or omit material information that was not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects and/or the addictive nature of cigarettes with the intent that smokers, like mrs. burkhart and other members of the 73 public, would rely to their detriment on the concealment or omission. so that is the finding that is binding upon you here. now, just to give you an example, what are we talking about in terms of the kinds of statements that the tobacco companies engaged in over the years from which they concealed and omitted material information? there are all sorts. in their advertising, every time they advertised a cigarette and failed to disclose what they knew about the health effects of smoking, what they knew about the addictiveness of smoking, that was a misrepresentation. ms. gallagher: your honor, object to that post-'69 preemption. the court: overruled. mr. heimann: in their television appearances, of which there were many, every time the tobacco company is on television, either, you know, sponsoring a show or having some spokesman on and they failed, because they did every time -- they never admitted in any of those appearances that cigarettes were -- caused health problems, caused copd, never admitted it was addictive. they concealed and omitted that information, and every time they opened their mouths in press releases, in statements to the news media, in press conferences, in testimony before congress, in sporting events 74 which they sponsored, nascar, for one, tennis, what was the virginia slims tournament, another, permeated the american culture. movies and product placements and also when they offered filter cigarettes and when they offered low-tar cigarettes, and every activity, every activity on the part of the tobacco companies that reached mrs. burkhart and reached the public, they concealed -- according to the findings by engle, they concealed information, material information, about the health effects of smoking and about the addictiveness of cigarettes. let me come back to this notion of reliance in this context. the court will instruct you that reliance may be a cause of a disease even though it operates in combination with some other cause, as long as the reliance contributes substantially to producing the disease. now, in this context, what that means is there may have been other reasons that mrs. burkhart continued, persisted in smoking cigarettes aside from her reliance on the omissions and concealments on the part of the tobacco companies; but if those omissions or concealments were part of the reason in this case that she did not quit sooner, part of the reason, then that satisfies the legal requirements for proof of reliance. how do you really determine whether or not mrs. burkhart relied on all of this misinformation? 75 well, you know she was exposed to it, could not help but be exposed to it. it was everywhere in terms of the tobacco companies' marketing and promotion and statements and appearances on television, on radio, everywhere. she knows she was exposed to it and she said she was. she testified she was. what does "reliance" mean under those circumstances? it just means it influenced her behavior, influenced her behavior. and how do you know it influenced her behavior? well, one, she told you; but, two, she continued smoking. that is proof of reliance, that it influenced her behavior. that she did not quit sooner, that is proof of reliance. let me take a closer look with you at the elements of what the engle jury concluded was a conspiracy in this regard and how it affected people like mrs. burkhart. so we start with what i'll call that campaign that began in 1954, five years before she began smoking, four or five years before she began smoking, of denial of the health risks of smoking, denying that it caused disease, denying that it had been proved to cause disease, creating doubt about whether or not it would prove to cause disease, of deceiving people about whether smoking caused disease, creating a controversy to itself create doubt on the part of the public and particularly on the part of people smoking 76 cigarettes. there are two components to this. the first had to do with health effects. you are talking about health effects on the one hand and addiction on the other. you heard from dr. burns how the creation of doubt, the denial of proof has an impact on cigarette smokers, people like mrs. burkhart, that cognitive dissonance, among other things, again. they desperately want to continue smoking because of the addiction, and yet they are hearing from the health authorities that there is serious question, at least initially in the early '50s, about whether cigarettes caused disease; and then as time moved on from, the scientific community's point of view, there was not any further doubt. it was established. so mrs. burkhart was exposed to that information. no question. i mean, there is a little open question in my mind exactly at what point in time one can say she really was exposed to it in full. there is certainly some question in my mind about -- and maybe in yours about at what point in time she started to accept the reality of the health effects of smoking. we have heard different testimony about that, but there is not any question that certainly at some point in time she got -- not only had been exposed to the information, but began to accept that it was right and that it might be a problem for her. 77 but at the same time she was getting the information from the other side that was telling her, "look, it may not really be bad. it may be okay. we are working on it. and, by the way, we are making cigarettes that are better for you." i'll come more to that in a few minutes. what do the tobacco companies think about how successful they were being in what they were doing? just a couple of exhibits. here's exhibit 71 that we gave you. and this is an internal document, one of those documents that did not become available to us, to you, until the late 1990s. "we must in the near future" -- i think this was from 1964, if i'm not mistaken, shortly after the first surgeon general's report came out. "we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and the self-rationale to continue smoking." that was the objective of the campaign of doubt and deception, just as you heard dr. burns talk about it. it was to give people like mrs. burkhart a reason to continue smoking, if only for a little while longer, to avoid having to go through the pain of breaking through the addiction. another one, this is exhibit 27. "doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the," quote, "'body of fact' that exists in the mind of the general public." 78 let me stop there. so the body of fact they are talking about here, of course, is what the scientific and health authorities have been trying to get out to the public, that it is been demonstrated that smoking causes a disease and that it is harmful. so, instead of trying to beat back with some science that does not exist or refute that, they create a doubt, a doubt about it. it is also a means of establishing a controversy. again, controversy so that people like mrs. burkhart would be hearing both sides and would be put into a quandary over which is right; and as addicted persons -- i've got dr. burns there -- they are conflicted, and this has the effect of causing them to fail to quit sooner, of causing them to continue to smoke cigarettes even though they are coming to the realization that there is a serious potential problem. on this issue of reliance and what the companies intended, robert heimann, you heard from him. i'd like to play just a brief piece of dr. -- of mr. heimann's testimony that you heard yesterday, i think. (video played as follows: first voice: "your tenure with not only american's position, but with your position with cigarettes are injurious to health. is that accurate?" 79 second voice: (indiscernible). first voice: "yes." second voice: "yes" (indiscernible). first voice: "that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?" second voice: "yes." first voice: "it is a statement that american tobacco" (indiscernible) -- second voice: "we issued that statement, yes." (indiscernible). first voice: "as far as you are concerned, a person was justified in relying on that statement?" second voice: "yes." mr. heimann: so that is what the tobacco companies intended. they intended that people like mrs. burkhart rely upon their false assertions that it had not been proved, that cigarettes did not cause disease, and that they could continue to smoke while they, the tobacco companies, were working on improving cigarettes. and what did they think -- inside the tobacco companies, what did they think about whether or not they had been successful in their efforts to induce people like mrs. burkhart to continue smoking? here's what they thought. this is exhibit 83. this is from the early 1970s or maybe a little later. maybe 80 this is '81. you can see the exhibit yourself in the jury room. you will have it available to you. "for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself. the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles" -- and here we go again -- "creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." there is one other aspect of this that is -- how do i blank that? there is one other aspect about this that is really important, because it is something that mrs. burkhart testified in considerable detail, and that is one of the other things that the tobacco companies repeatedly said was, "we are working to remove anything that might be harmful from cigarettes, and we will remove anything that we find is harmful in cigarettes," and that was a theme that permeated this whole period of this doubt and controversy and so forth. you have heard mrs. burkhart testify specifically that that was one of the messages she got, that they were going to remove and were removing the harmful chemicals that they found in cigarette smoking, and -- in cigarettes. i'm sorry. and this is from 1971. is this a video, my exhibit 63? this is the sort of things that were said -- this is what was said and repeatedly said during the course that 81 mrs. burkhart was smoking. would you give me that. this is from 1971, face the nation. (video played as follows: "from cbs washington, in color, face the nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with joseph cullman, iii, chairman and chief executive officer of philip morris, incorporated, and chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. mr. cullman: "we have no program that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we -- we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that, because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient." a voice: "do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman?" mr. cullman: "i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe." mr. heimann: that is good. "when and as if -- and if anything in cigarettes is found to be harmful, we can remove it and we will remove it," that is what they said time and time again, and that is what mrs. burkhart heard. and then, of course, there is the whole notion of 82 selling other types of cigarettes. we are talking about two types basically, filters and low-tar and light cigarettes, as safer products. the tobacco companies realize there was a segment of the population that was concerned about smoking based on reports that were -- that came out and the information that the health authorities were putting out, and they devised, literally devised, a way to fool people about the dangers of cigarettes that they marketed as filter cigarettes and light cigarettes. at the same time, the tobacco companies knew full well, knew, that filter cigarettes were no safer, that low- tar cigarettes were no safer, that light cigarettes were no safer. they knew that internally based on their own research, but that is not what they said to the public and that is not what they said to mrs. burkhart. but here's what they said internally. this is exhibit 357. this is -- i've forgotten exactly. this is a guy by the name of pepples writing, and i cannot remember whether he was r.j.r. or philip morris, but you will see it when you see the document. "the tobacco industry has reacted to the challenge of the smoking and health controversy" -- remember this is an internal document now; we did not see this until the late 1990s -- "in the following ways: number one, produce more 83 filter brands and brands with lower tar delivery." but then he goes on to say, "in most cases, however, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. he had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of reduced risk to health." and you heard that from mrs. burkhart. that is exactly what she did. in fact, you heard her testify about the kent cigarette and the wonderful filter that was marketed by the folks who made kent -- that is lorillard -- and they marketed that cigarette deliberately as a safer cigarette than other cigarettes. that was the plan on the part of the manufacturers of kent, lorillard. and mrs. burkhart was exposed to that market and she talked about having been attracted to that really good micronite filter that would remove the bad things, if there were bad things, in cigarettes that were harmful. let me show you what lorillard, inside the company, was saying about their marketing of kent cigarettes. exhibit 1500, "as all of us are aware, kent was marketed as a," quote, "'safer' cigarette for the smoker who was concerned about smoking and health." i do not have it up on this slide, but you will see in that exhibit they went on to describe how when they put out this campaign of safer cigarette for kent with the 84 micronite filter, the sales of kent went from near nothing to millions in a very short period of time. they knew what they were doing when they marketed the cigarette as safer when they knew it was not safer. they knew that people concerned about the health effects of cigarettes would buy and use those cigarettes rather than taking the step that would have really helped, which is to quit smoking, because that was the whole point of filter cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes and light cigarettes and safer cigarettes, was to get people who were addicted to switch over to those cigarettes rather than to quit altogether, because they held up the promise, the hope that they were safer and the person could use those cigarettes instead of the regular cigarettes and have less chance of injury. mrs. burkhart, as i said, testified that is exactly what happened with her, exactly what happened with her. now, that is been talking about the health issue. now, let us talk a little bit about the addiction part of it, the concealment by the companies of what they knew about the addictive nature of cigarettes and, even worse, their deliberate design and engineering of cigarettes to make them even more addictive than they otherwise would be. you heard a lot of that from dr. cummings. i'm not 85 going to repeat the testimony that he gave, but you heard all about that in his testimony, about the research that the tobacco companies engaged in and to nicotine, the human research that they did on smoking behaviors, and how they then used the knowledge that they obtained in all that research and all that study to design and redesign and engineer their cigarettes so that they would be as addictive as possible. here's from 1959, an internal document: why do people smoke? physiological reasons, not psychological, although there is a psychological component to it, but they knew then there were physiological reasons and one of them was addiction. that is exhibit 96 from 1959. exhibit 76: tobacco products -- again, this is the internal document. we did not see these until the late '90s. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. then exhibit 163. this is from 1963. we are -- we, the industry -- is in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. that is what they knew inside the companies, but they did not say that outside, just the contrary. they denied that nicotine was addictive, they denied that cigarettes were addictive. they denied it, denied it, denied it right up 86 through 1994, when they testified before congress about it. you remember that? they never admitted it until they were forced to admit it in the late 1990s, either 1999 or 2000 or just after the turn of the century. and they concealed what they knew not only from the public. they concealed it from the public health authorities and in particular in one instance from the surgeon general. do you remember this? this is a telegram that the author of the memo i just showed you, "we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug," this is a telegram that he sent to his colleagues saying, "finch agrees" -- finch was the president of bmw, i think, at the time -- "submission battelle" -- battelle was that study by the swiss company that he was talking about here when he says, "we are in the business of selling nicotine." this business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, came from the studies that they had commissioned the battelle company to do in switzerland about the addictive nature of cigarettes and nicotine. so here he is saying, despite the fact that the surgeon general -- you heard about this -- had asked the tobacco companies to turn over to the surgeon general in 1963, when they were working on that first report, to turn over their research, tell the surgeon general what they knew about the health hazards of cigarettes, tell the surgeon 87 general what they knew about the addictiveness of cigarettes, they asked for that information, and here's how they responded: "undesirable. submission of our knowledge, undesirable," and it was not provided to the surgeon general, and the surgeon general in 1964 concluded that cigarettes were not addictive. there would have been a different conclusion, i assure -- there certainly would have been a different conclusion at that time had the companies, the tobacco companies, turned over what they knew, because their science -- and i'm not going to go into these documents, but you saw them -- their science -- and they said this internally. their knowledge about addiction and nicotine and cigarettes was miles beyond that in the scientific community outside of the tobacco industry, and it stands to reason. i mean, who was the most interested group in the world in knowing about cigarettes and addiction? it was the tobacco companies. and so they spent an enormous amount of time and money and effort to understand addiction, how it works, why it works, and how to take advantage of that knowledge in designing their cigarettes, the cigarettes that mrs. burkhart bought and used. here's that design -- demonstrative that dr. cummings showed you and testified about. the various ways in which they modified the cigarettes, engineered the cigarettes 88 to maximize their addictive nature. they manipulated the amounts of nicotine in the cigarettes. they manipulated the percentage or amount of nicotine that would come out of the cigarette when smoked. they manipulated the ph of the smoke to make the nicotine that did come out more addictive than it otherwise would be. they altered the design of cigarettes to make the smoke such that it would go deeper into the lungs and therefore be even more addictive, that is, as it turns out, even more harmful on a health basis. this was the subject of intense research on the part of all of these companies for years and used in the design of cigarettes to make them as addictive as possible so that people like mrs. burkhart would become addicted and would stay addicted and would keep buying their products and keep putting the money into the companies. now, we are talking in part about reliance here. at some point in time, certainly mrs. burkhart came to the realization that she was addicted. certainly by the 1980s, she testified how she thought that she could just put the cigarettes down if she wanted, but she found out that was not so. so, okay. at some point in her smoking history she became aware of that, but you can be sure she did not know anything about it, anything at all about what the tobacco 89 companies were doing inside behind their walls in terms of designing the cigarettes for addiction, in terms of making them as addictive as possible. that, she did not know. she could not have known that. the government did not know about that. the surgeon general did not know about that. how could she have known? so if you take all of these in combination, the campaign of doubt and deception, the denial of the health effects of smoking, the efforts to create doubt, the efforts to create a controversy, what they did in terms of the addictive properties of cigarettes, the selling of filter cigarettes as safer, the selling of light cigarettes as safer, if you turn all of that around, if you say that none of that happened, that instead of doing that, instead of concealing what they knew, instead of failing to disclose what they knew about all of this, if the tobacco companies had instead gone the other direction and been straight up forward, honest and revealed it all, here's the question: how would that have impacted mrs. burkhart? do not you think that her behavior, her smoking behavior, would have been affected had that information, all that information, been made available to her, particularly if it had been made available to her in the early part of her smoking career? she started smoking in the late '50s. all of this 90 information was in their possession by that time, and their campaign of doubt and deception began in the early '50s. how about if they had been straight? there is a good chance she would have never started smoking in the first place, because it would have impacted the culture in the 1950s, and it is that culture that in large part is people like mrs. burkhart began smoking, the culture created by the tobacco companies. but at the very least, if all that information had been made known, it would have given her the opportunity to try to quit earlier in her smoking career, presumably when she was less addicted, because she was not smoking nearly as many cigarettes then as she got up to later on. that is reliance. that is influencing behavior. the court: counsel, is this an appropriate point just to take a stretching break? mr. heimann: sure, your honor. the court: i'll just ask you to stand in place for a moment and we will not take a full recess, but we will just. . . mr. heimann: are all screens working? the juror: it is like in the middle. i can see ahead. mr. heimann: your honor, if i may? the court: sir? mr. heimann: i'm told there may be a problem with 91 one of the screens. the court: she says that she is turned it off because exhibit number 76 was not admitted. is that what you were using? mr. heimann: i did use 76. i thought for sure it had been admitted. the court: i'm sorry. madam clerk, what are we talking about? a video? the courtroom deputy: no. one of his exhibits that he displayed, it has not been admitted. so i turned it off. the court: did we display it during the course of trial to the jury? the courtroom deputy: no. the court: we did not display it during the course of trial, sir. mr. heimann: okay. the court: did we? mr. heimann: i thought i did. i have it in my notes as something that i had a witness testify about. the court: madam clerk says we did not. mr. heimann: i'm sorry. i'm mistaken. mr. belasic: move to strike then, your honor, and instruct. the court: very good. 92 all right. thank you very much. the juror: it says, "analog error input." the court: it still says, "analog"? the juror: yes. the juror: only on a couple of the computers. we can see in front of us perfectly fine; but on our specific screen, there is an analog error. the court: well, the plug has become unplugged or whatever. let us ask madam clerk, can you go over and wiggle their plugs or see what the fault is? the courtroom deputy: judge, can they move down? the court: is this turned on now for their display? let us turn it on for their display. the courtroom deputy: it is on now. the court: and yet some are not receiving it? why do not you display that chart, please, sir, counsel. are you seeing that display? the juror: we see the display, but there is a black box with an error message in the middle of it. it just says, "analog display did not display." this video mon -- the courtroom deputy: on just the one monitor? the juror: this one, that one. 93 the court: we do not care about any that are not in front of you. is one of them in front of you not -- is displaying the error message? the juror: yes. the court: is there any place that you can move to? the juror: yes, the one right next door. the court: right next door? the juror: yes. the court: you can move down, if you like, so that you can see it. does that solve it? the juror: uh-huh. the court: very good. please continue. mr. heimann: all right. so, in terms of the instructions that his honor has given you and will give you, the question really is, have we established through the testimony of mrs. burkhart and the other witnesses and the evidence that we have admitted that it is more likely than not, more right than wrong that if all of this information, all of the truthful information had been provided to her about all of the things we have been talking about, including filter cigarettes and light cigarettes, if all of that information had been provided to her in the late '50s and the early '60s, is it more likely than not it would have influenced her 94 behavior to quit smoking sooner? that is the question, because if you conclude that it is more likely than not, more right than wrong that that would have impacted her behavior, then your verdict should be in favor of mrs. burkhart on the question of reliance on the material omissions and concealments that the engle jury has found that the tobacco companies engaged in. and the same thing is true on the conspiracy, because the conspiracy just means that r.j. reynolds, for example, is responsible for lorillard's acts and omissions, and lorillard is responsible for philip morris's. so they are all responsible for each other's. so if you conclude this it is more likely right than wrong that her behavior would have been positively influenced to stop smoking earlier, if all of that information had been available to her, if they had not lied, if they had not tried to get her to believe there was a controversy, if they had not offered up filter cigarettes and light cigarettes as safer, they said they are just as bad as the regular cigarettes or never offered them at all, which is better yet, would that have -- more likely than not have influenced her behavior to stop? because if you conclude that it did, then you conclude that she relied -- that is the one element that you are supposed to be resolving -- and you will also find 95 that it was the legal cause, reliance was the legal cause of her injury, because had she stopped smoking -- and actually the defense brought this out with dr. burns. had she stopped smoking within, say, the first ten years or so, smoking, so if she stopped smoking by the end of the '60s, she would not have gotten copd, in all likelihood. so i'm saying on the verdict form questions, was the concealment a cause of mrs. burkhart's copd, your answer should be yes, if you conclude it is more likely right than wrong. and did she rely to her detriment? the same thing. and was reliance a cause of her copd? the same thing on the conspiracy claim. now, we come -- i want to address this a little bit. this is kind of an odd duck. we do not tell you why this issue is important, whether the reliance occurred before may 5, 1982, or after. and i'm sure his honor will say you do not need to know the technicalities of this. this is a legal technicality. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. it is not a technicality; it is the law of florida. the court: well, i think what i need to do is ask you to pause and give brief explanation why this question is there. mr. heimann: all right. 96 the court: i'm not going to explain the technicalities of it, but i do need to give the explanation. the answer to these questions will not influence or adjust your verdict or change the judgment of the court in any respect. these questions are there because there is a pending issue before the florida supreme court. the lower appellate courts in florida have come out with different answers. so this question has been presented. it has not yet been argued nor decided by the florida supreme court, and that is on statute of repose. under florida law, like a statute of limitations, there is also a statute of repose, and they are phrased alternatively. if you have not brought your suit within the period of the statute of limitations, four years, you cannot sue; and that is a question for you to decide. you understand why you have to decide that question. the criteria for that is before the four years -- before the lawsuit started, did she already know or have reason to know that the fraudulent statements were not true? that is the statute of limitations. but florida also has what is called a statute of repose. that means regardless of when she knew, if the wrongful acts are more than twelve years ago, whether she knew or not, whether she had reason to believe or not, even if the statute of limitations had not expired, we do not want 97 lawsuits in which the wrongful conduct complained of was more than twelve years ago. so the normal statute of limitations is four years; but the statute of repose, regardless of the elements of the statute of limitations, we do not want lawsuits where the wrongful conduct, that is, the wrongful conduct and the reliance thereon occurred more than twelve years ago. that is why we have this may 5th, 1982, date. you will recognize that as exactly twelve years before 1994, when the engle class action was filed. the only reason we have included the question -- because it does not affect our judgment or your verdict here -- is it helped us save your verdict or understand your verdict, depending on how the florida supreme court rules. the florida supreme court can rule several different ways as to how and when the statute of repose starts, and therefore we need your additional statement -- again, these statements and answers will not affect your verdict nor your judgment in any respect. they are special interrogatories. they are side issues, and therefore you should not concern yourselves with the technicalities of the statute of repose, and i have not instructed you on the legal technicalities of the statute of repose. but this simply tells us of when the reliance was made so that, depending on how the florida supreme court 98 comes out about the elements that caused the statute to start to run will affect your judgment. so, again, in summary, this will not affect your verdict, but we just need your unanimous statement, unanimous statement, as to when the statements on which mrs. burkhart relied were made; and the second part of this is relative to may 5th, 1982, when was her reliance. mr. belasic: just note our objection to the instruction and legal description. thank you, your honor. the court: sure. mr. heimann: may i proceed, your honor? the court: please. mr. heimann: all right. so you will be asked then -- and, actually, the form i'm showing you here is in slight error. you are only going to be given on your verdict form the 7(a) and 7(b). you will not get 7(c). so you are just going to be asked were the statements on which mrs. burkhart relied made by the tobacco companies before that date and were they made after that date? and you can check one or both, depending upon what your findings are. so if you conclude, as i just was suggesting, that it is more likely than not that sometime prior to this date she was relying upon statements in the sense i've been describing, then you would check the first box, and 99 everything virtually -- not virtually -- everything i've been talking about in terms of the concealments and omissions and misinformation that came out from the tobacco companies that was -- that mrs. burkhart was exposed to, all of that certainly came out before 1982. it continued thereafter as well. but the question is, did she rely upon it before? and i made my argument on that. on the after, we have a little bit of a complication, i think, based on the record, because i think you could find, based on mrs. burkhart's testimony and mr. burkhart's testimony, that by may of 1982 mrs. burkhart was no longer in doubt about the hazards of cigarette smoking. it is not clear to me, frankly, based on the testimony, whether that is the case. i mean, there is a point in 1984 when she makes that really, really hard effort to quit, and one could say that it was at that point in time that she had concluded that she did not believe the tobacco companies' statements about their being doubt and controversy and it is only -- it had not been proven and so forth and so on. so that is possible you can come to that conclusion based on the testimony, but that does not mean that she was not still relying on other aspects of the tobacco companies' concealment and omission, and in particular the three that i'm going to mention now. 100 one, the continued statements that they were going to make cigarettes safer and that they were working to make cigarettes safer, she testified she heard that and that was something she believed right up to the end and she was relying upon. the second point is the filter cigarettes, because she continued. she testified to this. she continued to smoke filter cigarettes after this date of may 1982, believing that they were safer because of what the tobacco companies had said about them. and then third has to do with low-tar and light cigarettes. you remember she testified that she switched to virginia slims lights in the mid- to late 1980s, i think is the date -- you will recall better than i -- and that she did that for health reasons because she understood, based on what the tobacco companies were saying and implying, that those cigarettes were safer. so, in response to this question, i would submit to you that the evidence shows, both more likely than not, that she relied both before and after this date of may 1982. now, i'm going to move on to this question of -- that i said at the outset is at the heart of this case, which is whether or not the defendants in this case bear some responsibility for what they did and, if so, what responsibility do they bear and what responsibility does 101 pauline burkhart. . . the court: i think -- again, i apologize for the interruption. subject to your corrections or objections, i believe i already explained to the jury that comparative fault only applies to the unintentional torts, that is, negligence and strict liability -- mr. heimann: yes, sir. the court: -- and it is not a defense to fraud or concealment, but it is a defense to negligence; and therefore we ask you this question, and it does only apply to negligence and strict liability negligence, that is, if she is at fault, then what percentage is she at fault? that is comparative negligence. and, again, it only applies to the latter two causes of action. mr. heimann: so the point here -- let me take it back to basics. if you find that mrs. burkhart is a member of the class, if you answer those first two questions yes, that she is a member of the class, that means that you will have found that the defendants here are liable to her on the negligence and strict liability claims. if she is a member of the class, that establishes the liability of the defendants. her negligence is strict liability, all right? then the question is -- the defendants bear the burden of proof on this, as the court has told you many times. 102 then the question is what, if any -- at that point, they are one hundred percent responsible for the injury once you make that finding of class membership. then the question before you is, what percentage, if any, of the responsibility for her injuries she bears. and in this respect, i think it is important to give consideration to this fact: everything that mrs. burkhart did in her life with respect to smoking was what the defendants here wanted her to do, urged her to do, did everything in their power to get her to do. she started smoking cigarettes as a teenager, just as they intended. she became addicted to their cigarettes, just as they intended. she smoked the cigarettes that they designed and engineered to maximize her addiction and she became deeply addicted, just as they intended. she smoked filter cigarettes, thinking they were safer, just as they told her and just as they intended. and she smoked light cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes, thinking they were safer, just as they intended, just as they told her, to keep her smoking, to keep her buying cigarettes, to keep them getting her money and the money of millions of other americans just like her. so that, it seems to me, is important for you to give thought to when you are considering what percentage of responsibility, if any, mrs. burkhart bears. 103 but now let me talk a little more about this idea of responsibility on the part of, in this case, mrs. burkhart for negligence, because that is what we are talking about. was she negligent in her activities with respect to smoking? we are all taught from the time we are children that we have a responsibility for ourselves to protect ourselves. that is a given. so let me give you an illustration. we are taught as children not to attempt to cross a busy street without looking both ways first, okay? so if a pedestrian -- if i step into a busy intersection street and i do not bother to look both ways and i get struck by a car where the driver could not see me in time to stop and i get injured, it is my fault, okay? pretty clear. but now let me change the illustration a little bit. let us say i do fail to look both ways. i step out in the street and the driver who is coming along is not paying attention to his driving. he is texting. it drives me nuts to see people texting while going down the street. but he is texting, so he is not paying attention. had the driver been paying attention instead of texting, looking down, he would have been able to stop well in time to avoid the accident, but he is not. he is not paying attention and so the accident takes place. 104 so now what do we have? we have got the pedestrian, who is partially at fault because he did not look both ways. had he looked both ways, he would not have stepped in the street and got hit. but the driver is at fault, too, because he was not paying attention. he had a responsibility, an obligation in driving a car safely to be paying attention. now, i'll just change it a little bit. now, this may seem strange, but you will understand me, where i'm getting to. let us say the driver in this case knows the pedestrian and, for whatever reason, really has it out for that person, and he sees the pedestrian step off a curb into the street and he takes advantage of that and deliberately runs into the pedestrian with the car. now, you have got a negligent pedestrian, but an intentional wrongdoing on the part of the driver; and under those circumstances, it seems pretty obvious that if you are trying to decide -- allocate responsibility, fault between the two, who gets the lion's share of the fault? surely, the person who acted deliberately, the person who acted intentionally, not the person who was simply negligent. now, look at that in this case, what that means here. we have got -- let me see if i've got -- we have a finding that the defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that does not really necessarily mean they did it intentionally, okay? 105 they may have been negligent in putting on such products. so if you are you are talking about -- if that was all we had here, if we had mrs. burkhart's smoking cigarettes on the one hand and the defendants selling products that were unreasonably dangerous -- were defective and unreasonably dangerous and that is why she got copd, because that was the nature of cigarettes, you might have a situation where there is more or less equal responsibility between the two; but that is not all that we have here. we know that the defendants knew their products were dangerous, that they would cause disease, that millions of people would get sick and hundreds of thousands would die every year. they were not merely negligent like that driver who was not paying attention. they were like that driver who deliberately ran over the pedestrian. but it actually is much worse than that, because we know from the evidence that these companies deliberately marketed to teenagers, to youngsters, to get them to start smoking; that they lied both to them and to adults; that they concealed critical information both about the health effect of smoking and about the addictive properties of smoking; that they rigged their cigarettes to make them more addictive. what was the purpose for all of that? what was their purpose? 106 this was their purpose: money. "all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank," at the expense of, as it says here, 400,000 deaths a year. actually, it is a good bit more than that today. ms. gallagher: object, your honor; harm to others, williams, state farm. the court: pardon? objection what? harm to others? cases. ms. gallagher: and williams and state farm, the the court: i'm going to overrule it. i'll just simply remind the jury this is just -- this is argument of counsel. mr. heimann: back to that illustration of the driver and the pedestrian, this kind of conduct on the part of the tobacco companies, inducing kids to start smoking and then getting them addicted and keeping them smoking, knowing what the outcome is going to be, that is like the driver. you have seen this happen. the driver's in the car and he sees the pedestrian is intending to cross the street. and so the driver, purporting to be kind, says, "sure. go ahead," and then runs him over. that is what you have here. it is hard to understand how you could allocate much responsibility to poor mrs. burkhart in that situation as compared to the fault on the part of the tobacco companies. 107 and i know that the judge has told you this time and time again, but i'll put it up in red letters. it is the defendants' burden to prove the degree to which mrs. burkhart is at fault by a preponderance of the evidence. so, as i say, if you find that she is a member of the class, at that point in your deliberations, it is 100 percent on these folks, on the defendants. they have to prove to you what percentage of fault that they would otherwise bear. you will assign to mrs. burkhart. and moving forward, so this is -- i think this is an accurate reflection of the sort of verdict form question you will be asked here, and you will decide what percentage, based on the evidence and based on how persuasive the tobacco companies are in proving that you will assign to each of the tobacco companies. obviously, to be honest, we do not care how much you apply to any particular company. let them tell you about how they think that should work out. i'm concerned with how much percentage responsibility you assign to mrs. burkhart; but whatever it is, that is what you should assign in your best judgment as appropriate. now, let me talk in the last two minutes here -- i do not want to try your patience too much -- turn to the question of damages. one of the -- assuming that you find that mrs. 108 burkhart is a member of the class, which then means that the defendants here are liable for negligence and strict liability, and whether or not you find in her favor on either of the intentional torts, that does not matter for this purpose, although i'll come to a purpose for which it does matter, then you will have found them liable and the question will be what damages, if any, to award. now, this is totally separate and apart from the comparative fault. for purposes of awarding damages, you should ignore what you decide in comparative fault. the court will take care of the effects of your allocation of fault later. your damages determination should be strictly based on the criteria for damages and without regard to this issue of comparative fault. and here's one of the instructions that the court will give you on this issue, which is you will be asked, what is the total amount of damages suffered by mrs. burkhart for the bodily injury and resulting pain and suffering, disability or physical impairment, mental anguish, inconvenience, loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life in the past and in the future as a result of copd? mr. belasic: i have to object, your honor. it totally misstates the actual verdict form that we all have right now. the court: what does the verdict form state? 109 mr. belasic: the actual verdict form simply says, "what amount of compensatory damages do you find for plaintiff," without all of the other language in there. the court: all right. mr. heimann: all right. i assume it is in the instructions. the court: say it again. read it one more time. mr. belasic: question six on the verdict form, "what amount of compensatory damages do you find for the plaintiff?" mr. heimann: okay. the court: very good. but i do remind you that that is the total amount of damages. any allocation of fault, i'll take care of. you will tell me what -- allocate fault, but this is intended to be the full amount, without any discount or any allocation of the damage. it is the full amount of damage to her that he wishes to argue for. mr. heimann: i apologize for having it wrong, your honor. the court: that is okay. mr. heimann: i'm confident that the language that was in that slide i showed you will be in the instructions, because that is the definition of the elements, if you will, of damage that you will be taking into account in making a 110 determination as to the amount of damages. but let me make sure -- i know we said this a little bit in opening. in determining the amount of damages to allow in this case, the only thing that you all should be taking into account are the actual harms and losses that mrs. burkhart suffered as a consequence of the defendants' conduct, the harms and losses to her. so i know we have said this several times, but i want to say it again. sympathy is not a matter that you should take into account in deciding how much to allow in damages. you should not be taking into account the money is not going to bring back her lungs to being healthy. that is not a matter that is relevant to the question of the harms and losses she suffered. you should not be taking into account whether or not the amount of money is too much for one person. that is not -- that is outside the box of what you should be considering. there are lots of other reasons that you might think about in terms of awarding damages, you know, like, well, if we award too much, it will hurt business or a money award is not going to take away her pain. a money award is not going to save her life. none of those things are to be taken into account in determining how much money to allow in damages here, just the harms and losses that she is suffering. 111 and the court will tell you -- and i'll put up, i think, another aspect of what you will be told about -- the amount of damages to allow, is that you should allow an amount that is full and just and reasonable compensation for all of the damages that mrs. burkhart has suffered. we are not asking you in this case to award damages for -- what we call "economic damages," what her medical expenses were or what her loss of income was as a result of her copd. what we are asking you for are pain and suffering, damages for an allowance of money for pain and suffering. how do you value pain and suffering in a case like this to achieve the result of full, just and reasonable compensation? so let me see if i cannot help in that respect. one of the things you should certainly be considering is how much pain mrs. burkhart -- did she suffer from, how long did it last or will it last, and how serious was the pain and suffering that she has incurred and will incur. you know, let us talk about how much pain is involved. if you are talking -- i want to try to do some comparisons to help you. if you are talking about a case that involves, say, a broken ankle, an accident that results in a broken ankle, we are talking about a relatively modest amount of pain for a relatively short period of time. a case of that sort, probably you would not 112 amount -- you would not think an allowance of damages for more than a few thousand dollars, maybe a few tens of thousands of dollars would be appropriate. if you are talking about something more serious -- i'm focusing on legs here -- a crushed leg, something way beyond merely a broken ankle, that would require some hospitalization, probably several months' worth, now you are talking about something more serious in terms of the amount of pain involved and the amount of time involved. maybe you are talking now you are into the hundreds of thousands of dollars for pain and suffering. but now let us go beyond that, let us say a broken back that incapacitates a person for a prolonged period of time with significant pain and incapacity at the same time. now, you are talking about a case that is worth in the millions, in all probability. that is one way you sort of measure how to evaluate an allowance of pain and suffering. let us talk about in terms of the period of time involved for the person who is suffering. if you are talking about something in the -- a few days or a few weeks, we are at the lower end of the scale, thousands or tens of thousands of dollars. a year, a couple years, maybe we are in the middle scale, maybe up to a million dollars, something in that range. 113 but now let us talk about a prolonged period of time, 20 years, mrs. burkhart's case, and more, her life. i'm not going to try, because i would not be able to do it, to get into the details of what you heard from mrs. burkhart about her life. and you heard from dr. burns about what cop (sic) is like to live with. the pain and the suffering is not just physical; it is mental. it is not momentary; it is prolonged. it is life-ending. it is progressive. it never gets better. i do not know what that is worth. you have to decide. can i just have a moment? the court: yes, please. mr. heimann: if i suggested a number to you, which i will -- i think we kind of promised that we would in opening statement -- i would say you are talking ten, fifteen million dollars, maybe more. that is up to you. that really is up to you all, to take into account all of what you know and have heard about the impact on mrs. burkhart of the injuries that she suffers and the disease from which she is suffering, and you decide what is appropriate for bodily injury, resulting pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, mental anguish, inconvenience, loss of capacity. these are the elements that you should be taking into account in making that determination. and i'll skip that since that one is wrong. 114 okay. so let me get to the very final point before we break for lunch, which is the next -- the final question, actually, on the verdict form that you will be given, which is whether or not you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against one or more of the defendants in this case; and you will be asked to say yes or no for each of them in turn. the judge will instruct you as to the matters that you take into account in deciding whether or not punitive damages are warranted, and this is a basic -- one of the basic aspects of the instruction that he has given you and will give you again at the end, which is the punitive damages are warranted if you find that, from the evidence, the defendant had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of their conduct and that there was a high probability of injury or damage to mrs. burkhart, and despite that knowledge, they intentionally pursued that course of conduct, resulting in the injuries to mrs. burkhart. i would submit to you that the conduct that you have heard about in this case fits, is in excess of the kind of conduct they are talking about here. we have heard about -- dr. gentry talked about the fact that r.j. reynolds -- and i'm sure the other tobacco companies now -- recognize that they sell, they manufacture and sell a risky product. 115 what does that mean? what it really means is that from the standpoint of the person who is smoking cigarettes, that they are at risk for developing a disease as a consequence of their smoking cigarettes. not everybody who smokes cigarettes is going to get sick from cigarettes. we do not know why. there is some percentage. and they get the various diseases and consequences from smoking cigarettes and not everybody gets all of those, by any means. i think dr. gentry said that he understood somewhere between a third and half of regular cigarette smokers die from cigarette smoking. i think that is probably right. it is curious that he does not know better, exactly what it is. there are statistics on this. it is kind of -- i do not know what to say about the fact that a man who is in that business does not know the answer to that question without any hesitation. anyway, that is beside the point. but that is the point. from the standpoint of the individuals, they recognize that there is some risk that they are going to be harmed as a result of smoking cigarettes. okay. but if you look at it from the standpoint of the companies that make and sell the cigarettes, in terms of what the consequences are going to be of their actions, it is 116 not a risk that people are going to be harmed. it is a certainty. they knew from the beginning that their cigarettes were going to cause disease, massive disease, among americans and were going to kill thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people. they knew that to a certainty. so it was not from their perspective a risk; it was a known fact. and that is where we say, did they have actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of their conduct? of course they did. they knew when they were lying to the american public that that was wrong, and they knew that it was going to cause, for sure, massive damages. it was not a high probability, as is in this instruction. it was a sure thing, and they intentionally pursued that course. we know that from the evidence. and they persist to this day. here's what it is cost us. i'm sorry. let me do this. this has to do with -- and his honor instructed you a little bit on this. one of the things is whether or not the tobacco companies recognize that somebody like mrs. burkhart was going to be affected. the other question is whether or not they recognize that other people are going to be affected. so this is another part of the instruction you will get on punitive damages. 117 in deciding whether to award punitive damages, you may also consider evidence of harms suffered by persons who are not parties to this case for the limited purpose of any light it may shed on the degree of blameworthiness. another word for "blameworthiness," i would suggest to you, is reprehensibility. how reprehensible were the defendants in the conduct they engaged in? you may consider such evidence to the extent that the conduct that harmed the other persons was substantially similar to the specific conduct that may have harmed the plaintiff. well, we know, do not we, what their conduct -- what the consequences of their conduct were to millions of people. here it is. one hundred and thirty thousand people die each year in this country prematurely from copd caused by cigarette smoking. four hundred and eighty thousand people die each year prematurely from all of the diseases caused by cigarette smoking. since 1964 -- that was the year of the first surgeon general's report -- and this is wrong when it says 2004. that is typo. from 1964 up until today, 2014, the estimate from the surgeon general and other health authorities is that 20 million americans died prematurely caused by cigarette smoking. that is the level of 118 reprehensibility and blameworthiness that you all should take into account in deciding whether or not to award punitive damages. i'm not getting to the amount yet. we are just saying yes, no. that is the question. punitive damages are meant to punish for past conduct, which you have heard about, and to deter, to cause them to think twice before they do it again. it is not really just for these companies, because you are the conscience of the community when you have taken on the question of whether to award punitive damages. here, we are dealing with manufacturers who had the power to do good or the power to do harm. they chose. they chose. they chose to lie. they chose to conceal, and they knew the consequences that would fall from that. you ought to award punitive damages for that. thank you. closing argument by the plaintiff. mr. heimann: good afternoon. you know, it is okay to defend yourself vigorously when you are accused of having done something and you did not do it. when you are accused of having done something wrong and you did not do it. but if you have done something wrong, and particularly if you have done something wrong and injured somebody else, it is not okay. we get -- we were taught as children that when you do something wrong, the right thing to do is to stand up and admit it. mr. belasic: objection. there is no duty to admit in this case. the court: overruled. 107 mr. heimann: you now know, from the last two-plus hours, if you did not before, that as i said from the very beginning of this case, these companies refuse to accept any responsibility at all for what they did. notwithstanding the fact they have been found to have committed fraud, they have been found to have deliberately put on the market an unreasonably dangerous and defective product, they still refused to accept any responsibility whatsoever for their -- ms. gallagher: objection, your honor. that is improper. the court: overruled. mr. heimann: -- conduct. all right. enough drama. let us settle down. statute of limitations defense. i want to dispose of it to begin with. let me have -- oh, i can do this. all right. so his honor will give you an instruction -- the court: what do you have? do you have a mic? mr. heimann: i have a mic, and it is blasting -- the court: does the mic feed into our amp system? mr. isasi: your honor, the traveling mic -- the court: you may wander. use either that mic or the walking mic that we have here available. 108 mr. heimann: all right. i'll stand in place. so here are the questions that really will resolve this issue of whether or not there is a legitimate statute of limitations defense here. and there are just two. the first is, did mrs. burkhart have copd before may 5, 1990? and i think the evidence is very clear that in all probability she did. that was the testimony from dr. burns and also the testimony from -- dr. cosmo? thank you. cosmo. we do not know, however, how severe it was prior to that time. but given the nature of this disease and that it has to progress over time, although there is by no means any set -- as you heard from dr. burns, there is no means of any set period of time that it progresses in an individual, we know there are averages, and the statistics show that. but i think it is fair to conclude that in all probability she had some level of copd prior to that key date, may 1990. but that is only the first question. the second question is, did mrs. burkhart know, or by the use of reasonable care should she have known, before may of 1990, that she had copd? and on that question, i think the answer is equally clear. and the answer is no. she certainly testified without equivocation that she did not know. she did not even know what copd was until 109 she was diagnosed with it in 1993, i believe, or 1994. i cannot recall the exact date. and i do not believe, in all candor, there is been any evidence that you can creditably rely upon otherwise. so the question then is, should she have known by the use of reasonable care, prior to that date, that she had copd. it is not enough to know that you have a cough. it is not enough to know that you are short of breath. the question is, should she have known that she had copd, a debilitating, life-ending disease of the lungs? and what do we have on that evidence? well, the medical records -- and i'm not going to go through them in detail, but you will have them in the jury room to review -- show that in every indication from those records -- and you heard dr. burns explain why that is the case -- indicated that there was not any reason for her to believe, prior to the time that she saw dr. calhoon in 1993, that she had that kind of a disease. and in addition to that, you have the fact -- no one contradicts this -- that mr. burkhart, during the 1970s and the 1980s, as you would expect of an intelligent woman, went to see the doctor on a regular basis for checkups. now, we all know what that entails in the usual course. you go, sit down in the waiting room, and you fill out those forms where they ask you, do you have this? do 110 you have that? and one of the questions they always ask you, of course, is do you smoke, how much you have smoked, how long you have been smoking. another question is, what symptoms are you showing of various and sundry sorts? and one of them is normally, at least in my experience, and common sense, is shortness of breath, cough. those are the sorts of things that are on these forms that you fill out when you go to the doctor on an annual basis every year. now, do not you think that if she was having symptoms severe enough to cause her to be concerned about the situation, one, she would have reflected that on these forms that the doctors would have seen when they saw her; and two, the doctors, particularly given her smoking history, even if that was not on the usual form, which it always is, would have asked her specifically about her condition with respect to smoking and the potential harms that could flow from smoking. we know in addition to that, that as late as 1988, she was working in the yard, helping her husband build a house without any indication of extreme shortness of breath, of the kind that would cause somebody to be concerned about it. and then we have dr. cosmo, who, i'll be candid with you, i think is an honest man, and testified more or less 111 as he saw it. and he testified, in effect, that in his opinion, as i've already acknowledged, mrs. burkhart almost certainly had some level of copd prior to this 1990 date. but then he was asked a question, are you here to testify that she should have known before then that she had copd? and what did he say? no. he does not think that at all. he said patients are not aware they have copd. patients are not able to diagnose themselves. that is why they seek medical help. patients are not even aware of the term copd. we know that was the case of mr. burkhart. you know, by the way, emphysema, i suppose, is a common enough term. we probably know that from everyday life. but chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, i know i did not even hear about that until i got involved in these litigations. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. it does not matter what mr. heimann thought. the court: overruled. overruled. mr. heimann: and dr. cosmo told us that patients -- he volunteered this, by the way. he was not asked, you know, these specific questions. this was coming out. in his experience, patients can have copd for 20 or 30 years and not know they have it until they see a 112 doctor and are diagnosed. so that is the state of the record on this issue of whether or not mrs. burkhart should have known, with the exercise of reasonable care, that she had copd prior to may of 1990. let me turn to another topic. dr. cummings and dr. burns, both of these gentleman have been attacked in the closing arguments. i say attacked, because that is really what it amounts to. counsel who last spoke to you said they have an agenda, implying, if not explicitly stating, that they are testifying falsely before you because they have an agenda. because after 30 and 40 years of serving the public health of this country, both of them, they believe that cigarettes are a bane in this country because they kill half of the people who used them. they are a public health hazard of an extraordinary level. and both these gentleman have lived through that experience as public health officials. do you really believe that gives them a reason to lie when they testify? counsel for rjr actually said -- i'm quoting him. i wrote it down. i was shocked when he said it -- that their opinions result -- are the result of millions of dollars. that is what he said, that their opinions are the result of millions of dollars. meaning that they are giving 113 false opinions because they are getting paid. that is what he said. you think that is true? in the case of dr. cummings, virtually every opinion he expressed and every word he spoke was backed up by a document from inside the tobacco companies themselves. he did not make up those documents. as i said, these are two men who long before they came to earn significant money for the time they spend testifying in these cases were public servants in the interest of the public health of this country and of the citizens of this country. and that is how they came to the knowledge that enables them to come into court and testify about the matters that are in contest in these cases. and i might also say -- we did not go through this with dr. burns, but we did with dr. cummings, and you know it is true of dr. burns as well -- they never expected to be in the court, the state and federal courts of florida testifying in these engle trials. that was the furthest thing from their minds. they testified in the class-action trial, and they thought and expected that was it. well, as events turned out, that was not it. and so they get called into court to testify essentially, in large part, to the same effect that they testified in the engle trial, but they have to do it in individual cases because 114 that is the way the courts have required these cases to be tried. it was not our choice, i promise you, to do it this way. but when we are forced to do it this way, we have to call the experts who know what they are talking about. and these are two men who stand head and shoulders above virtually everybody else who could possibly speak intelligently to the issues that are in play and in contest in this litigation. to suggest that their opinions are the result of money is despicable. all right. let us talk. we have heard a lot about choice in the closing arguments here. let us talk about choice. but let us talk about the defendants' choices. their choice -- choice, control, and responsibility. let us talk about the defendants' choices, control, and responsibility. it was the -- it was the defendants who chose to create an environment where it was the social norm to smoke cigarettes. now, i want to come back to something that is been said time and time again by the defendants. they said, well, mrs. burkhart did not start smoking because of any specific advertisement she saw. maybe true. i do not know. she certainly would have seen lots and lots of advertisements 115 for cigarettes growing up. anybody would have who lived -- who grew up in the 1940s, 1950s. i remember them. the ftc and the fda -- and we submitted this evidence to you -- have repeatedly said that that advertising, those advertisings, did cause people to start smoking, to take up smoking and, in particular, teenagers, to take up smoking. and the fact that she did not smoke, if this is true, a brand that she happened to be seeing the advertisements for hardly speaks to whether or not advertising had an influence over her behavior and her starting smoking. but in addition to that, the culture, i know -- i do not want to repeat myself too much -- but the culture itself that existed in the 1950s of smoking was, in large part, what influenced people like mrs. burkhart to take up smoking because everybody was doing it. and why was that? they did it. that was why it was like that. the tobacco companies chose to create a product, the mass-marketed product that was highly addictive. that was their choice. you know, they could have actually made -- you heard from dr. cummings. they could have made those cigarettes so they were not addictive or were not very addictive. they did not choose that. they chose to make them addictive. they chose to engineer their cigarettes to sustain addiction. 116 and as i already mentioned this, they chose to create an environment where there was doubt and controversy about the health hazards of cigarettes instead of publicly admitting the hazards. that was their choice. control. the tobacco companies had the control over the design of their cigarettes. they had the control over the mass marketing of their cigarettes. they had the control of their internal studies about the addictive nature of cigarettes and the research that they conducted. they had control over the internal studies about the health dangers of cigarettes. and we saw that from the get-go in the early 1950s when they identified dozens of chemicals in smoke that they realized were carcinogenic, caused cancer. and they had control over the decision to create doubt and controversy over the health dangers of cigarettes. their choices. and here is what they knew about addiction and free choice. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. but they are doing it, are not they? mr. belasic: objection, your honor. violates judge young's ruling of december 27, 2013. the court: very good. overruled. please, this is closing argument. mr. heimann: so let us look at that issue. one of 117 their defenses or arguments, i would characterize it, is that we cannot prove legal causation because mrs. burkhart was capable of quitting even if she was addicted. and, therefore, they say that we cannot have -- we cannot show legal cause under the law. but we all know, everyone, at least in theory -- and i would say largely in practice -- is capable ultimately of breaking addiction, of quitting. and that applies not just to cigarettes. it applies to heroin, cocaine, any addictive drug. that is not the issue, though, in this case. the question is not whether or not a person is capable of breaking through addiction, could break through addiction. that is -- forgive my artwork. that is a red herring. a red herring, let me tell you, i know you all know what it means. but i always like to give the history of the derivation of this. so red herring, where does it come from? in england, the last century for the most part, the aristocrats used to hunt foxes. and they would go on these galloping hunts on horseback with the fox out in the lead, and they would have the dogs chasing the fox, and then they would chase after the dogs. and the dogs are pretty fast. so if a fox is not particularly good, the hounds get to the fox and really 118 ruins the hunt because it does not last long enough. so one of the things they used to do is they would take a dead herring that happens to be red in color -- that is where the red herring comes from -- and the servants of the aristocrats would get out in front of the hounds, in between the hounds and the fox, and they would run that red herring across the path where the fox had gone. and that would cause the hounds to lose the scent of the fox and go off in the wrong direction. that is where red herring comes from. and that is what this stuff about, well, she could have quit. that is a red herring. that is to throw you off of the true path of what really matters in this litigation, to give you -- take you in the wrong direction. that is not the test of legal cause, whether or not she was a person, like mrs. burkhart, is capable of quitting or might have quitted. the legal cause -- and i know i showed you this before. here's the key. addiction is a cause of disease if it -- as long as the addiction contributes substantially to producing the disease. and so the question is not whether she could have quit. the question is, why did she continue to smoke cigarettes? why did she continue to persist in smoking cigarettes? 119 and the answer to that, without question, is addiction to nicotine. and here -- i know i showed you this in my opening argument. the question here is was addiction a substantial part of the reason that mrs. burkhart persisted in smoking cigarettes. the alternative was, was addiction only a trivial or inconsequential part of the reason that she continued to smoke cigarettes? and i think the answer could not be clearer that given what you now know about, if you did not know it before, addiction based on the evidence that is been presented in this case, it is the addiction that is the fundamental reason that people like mrs. burkhart continue to smoke cigarettes, even knowing that it is likely to be harmful to their health. that is why they do it. and the fact that they might have quit, in theory could have quit, are capable of quitting, or as in mrs. burkhart's case, ultimately did quit, has nothing whatsoever to do with the legal question of legal cause. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. misstates the florida supreme court ruling. the court: overruled. mr. heimann: it may be relevant, by the way, to the question of comparative fault because you might very well find in terms of trying to figure out what degree of 120 fault mrs. burkhart should bear here that she should have tried harder earlier on, she should have tried more often. of course, anybody can try harder and anybody can try more often. so you may want to take that into account in assessing what degree of culpability in terms of fault mrs. burkhart shares with the defendants. but it does not have anything whatsoever to do with the issue of legal cause. you know, there is really a great deal of hypocrisy at work here in the defense that you have been hearing. in the real world, before we came to court, these companies denied day in and day out, week in and week out, year in and year out that smoking was harmful, sought in every way to create doubt about it, to create a controversy about it, said it did not happen. you saw them. we showed you them on tv shows. we showed you the documents where they continually did that for what? started in '54, and they did not admit it until the year 2000. but now they come into court -- or when they are hauled into court, i should say, they say, well, we do not blame the smoker. but they do. and they want you to blame mrs. burkhart as the smoker. why? because she did exactly what they wanted her to do, urged her to do, did everything in their power to 121 get her to do. and now, if that is not hypocrisy, i do not know what is. another argument, choice. choice. another red herring. all addicts choose to use their drug of addiction. in the sense that they are not held down and have a needle stuck in their arm and heroin injected. they do it themselves. in that sense, it is true. they choose. they are not unconscious. but the question in this case is why? why do addicts choose to continue using the addictive substance? why? addiction. that is why. and that is why the correct question is the one that i gave you a moment ago. did her addiction contribute substantially to her persistent use of cigarettes. you heard from -- i think both dr. cummings and dr. burns addressed this point how addiction constrains, limits, interferes with free choice. an addict does not have free choice. an addict's choice is hampered by addiction. in fact, we showed you this. this is from the guide to the most recent surgeon general's report from 2014 where this very issue is addressed. the reality is that smoking is not usually a choice. for most smokers, tobacco is an addiction, and nicotine is the primary drug in 122 tobacco that causes addiction. that is, in fact, the view of the surgeon generals and of the scientific and health community, not this nonsense that counsel shows you snippets from surgeon general reports that are dealing with secondhand smoke and happen to use a term that they can seize on to claim that the surgeon general is saying that smoking is a choice. that is just not true. that is not the surgeon general's view. it is not the health community's view. it is not the medical community's view. it is only their view and only in court. i posed this question to you before, and i'll do it again. do you really believe -- do you really believe, that mrs. burkhart, an intelligent, educated woman, would smoke cigarettes day in and day out, one pack a day, two pack a day, three pack a day, over 35 years if she was not addicted? if she was not addicted, she could have put them down at will at any time. in a sense, it is an insult to suggest the addiction was not what really was causing her to continue to smoke cigarettes. this is an insult to her intelligence. it is an insult to my intelligence. it is an insult to your intelligence. the defendants argue, well, if she had quit sooner, she might not have come down with copd. no 123 question about that. but on the other hand, if the defendants had not marketed to kids in the time when mrs. burkhart was a child growing up, and a teenager, they had not manipulated nicotine to make cigarettes as addictive as possible, if they had come clean and told the truth, well, maybe we would not be here then. why did they wait in until the year 2000 to finally admit what they had known all along about the health hazards of cigarettes and the addictive nature of cigarettes? so you heard in the closing arguments, particularly from counsel for rjr, representations, one after the other, about what he thinks the testimony was in this case. and he repeated the same things over and over and over again that he claimed the witnesses had testified to, not just mr. and mrs. burkhart, but some of the experts as well. some lawyers think -- and i've been doing this a long time so i've got experience when i talk about this. some lawyers think that if they misstate the evidence often enough -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. it is personal attack. that is not argument. 124 the court: overruled. it was done both directions. i just simply remind the jury that this is closing argument. counsels' statements are not evidence. mr. heimann: if they take testimony out of context over and over again, that somehow the jury will accept the lawyer's view and version of what the testimony was and the evidence was. i happen to disagree in large respect with how the evidence was described and characterized. but i'm not going to tell you what i think the evidence was. i told you i was not going to try and do that at the outset. that is your function. you decide what the witnesses testified to and the import of that testimony, not the lawyers. and i think i do not need to tell you that you ought to take with a grain of salt anything that one of the lawyers, including me, has to say about what the evidence was in the case because, obviously, talk about bias, we are as biased as we can be here. that does not mean that we are dishonest. i certainly hope we are not. but that bias has a tendency to spin, to allow you to look over things that really were said, and to mischaracterize things that were said. a couple of specifics in this regard, for example. counsel for rjr showed you a snippet -- i think it was from 125 the 2010 surgeon general report that was talking about relapse. nobody was asked to testify -- nobody who knows what they are talking about was asked to testify about this little sentence that he pointed to you and read from and then interpreted, lawyer interpreting what the surgeon general has to say. i, quite frankly -- when i read that, i'm not quite sure what it means, and i would not try -- pretend to try and tell you. if i wanted you to hear about that, i would have asked the expert witnesses who know what they are talking about about it. but he took it upon himself to tell you what it means from the surgeon general's report. and he claimed, at least as i understood what he was saying, that it meant that the surgeon general was saying addiction really is not the reason that people smoke cigarettes. at least, that is the import i took from what he said. well, if that is what he meant to say -- and i do believe that is what he meant to communicate to you -- it is wrong, dead wrong. let us take a look at what the surgeon general actually says about the subject. this is from that -- i need slide 83. so this is from -- i showed you this earlier. this is from the 2010 report, and it is repeating what was said in the '88 report. cigarettes and other forms of 126 tobacco are addicting. nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacological and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. 84, if i could, please, keith. this is what the surgeon general actually believes the relationship between addiction and sustained use, persistent use of cigarettes is. sustained use and long-term exposures to tobacco smoke are due to powerfully addicting effects of tobacco products. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to the many diseases described in the report. and i know i've already told you this. that includes, to be sure, copd. all right. we can take that down for the moment. counsel for rjr also in his argument, in addressing -- i think he was trying to address the issue of the award of punitive damages -- tried to make out as if that the cigarette companies had actually improved cigarettes from the standpoint of health hazard by such things as reduction of the tobacco or reduction of nicotine. i'm not quite sure what it was all about, 127 frankly. and filters. and he cited to several surgeon general reports that he claims support that notion. he cited to the '79 report, to the '81 report, to the '89 report, and to the 1990 report, which you already know from the evidence in this case that -- and this was dr. proctor -- i think it was dr. proctor primarily, but it may have been dr. burns as well -- that the conclusions to the extent there are statements in those reports that suggested it appeared that cigarettes were becoming less hazardous, those statements turned out to be dead wrong, dead wrong. and i'll ask you this. maybe i cannot ask you to answer it out loud, but answer it rhetorically. what do all of these surgeon general reports that he cites to have in common that is important? they all come before the internal documents of the tobacco companies were made available in the late 1990s. because once those documents became available and were reviewed and read by the public health authorities and the surgeon general, they shed enormous light on why the surgeon general and the public health authorities had been mistaken and reached conclusions that were wrong before they got ahold of that -- of the research and the studies that are inside those documents that were kept from, kept from the public health authorities by these companies all those years and 128 were only coughed up when they were forced to turn them over. let us just take a little bit of what these say. i'm going to -- i'm going to start with -- let us see. it is exhibit 237. we have talked about this before. it is the surgeon general's report from the year 2010. and it is talking about the earlier conclusions that had been reached by the public health authorities that counsel was citing to you in his closing argument. and among other things, the surgeon general report here says, unfortunately, with the accrual and evaluation of additional data, meaning data in addition to what had been available back in the day, the evidence today does not demonstrate that efforts to lower machine-measured tar and nicotine yields actually decreased the health risks of smoking. primarily because these changes did not reduce smokers' actual exposure to tobacco toxicants. indeed, to the extent that filters and other efforts to reduce machine-measured tar and nicotine reduced smokers' health concerns and thereby delayed quitting and/or increased cigarette use, they may have contributed to an increase, overall increase, in cigarette-caused mortality, meaning death. and further, i do not have it to put up in front you, although in a minute -- i'll put it up, some from the 129 same report. a variety of design features made it possible -- they are talking about design features that the tobacco companies employed in their cigarettes -- made it possible for cigarette smokers to compensate, that is, easily ingest several fold higher amounts of tar and nicotine than the yields obtained when using the machine-based ftc method. and it was the machine-based ftc method that the surgeon general was relying upon in the earlier reports when it came to the erroneous conclusions that it now realized when it got ahold of the tobacco company documents. let me go to 87, keith. so this is a little difficult for you all to read because it is in such small type. i apologize for that. but this is where they talk about the specific point about tobacco documents. tobacco industry documents, many of which are available at the legacy documents library at ucsf -- those are the very documents we are talking about that were obtained for the first time in the late 1990s -- clearly demonstrate that at least by the mid-1970s, the tobacco industry well understood the importance of creating health reassurance messages in order to alleviate health concerns and that one important method of doing so was through claims of low deliveries of tar. 130 for example, in 1977, british american tobacco marketing report concluded, all work in this area should be directed towards providing consumer reassurance about cigarettes and the smoking habit. this can be provided in different ways, for example, by claimed low deliveries, by the perception of low deliveries, and by the perception of mildness. and i believe you will find that that is exactly what mrs. burkhart was talking about when she was talking about the decisions that she made in terms of going to filter cigarettes and light cigarettes with. that is for you to judge in terms of what your understanding of the testimony was. at the same time, tobacco company documents also clearly demonstrate that the industry understood that smokers would not achieve the claimed deliveries because of smoker compensation. and dropping down to the next paragraph, in contrast to industry awareness, the various ways that cigarettes were physically modified and the nature and level of compensation in response to design changes were not well understood by parties outside of the tobacco industry. public itself. public health officials had little basis to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers could design 131 cigarettes to allow smokers to draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes than was represented by machine-measured yields of tar and nicotine. but the tobacco companies did. they knew about that. they studied that. they researched that. they designed their cigarettes to have what they called an elasticity so that smokers could get more tar, more nicotine than the government understood were being delivered by those products. i could go on. but i would just invite you in your deliberation, if you want to see more of this, this is exhibit 237. and i'm looking at pages -- page 16 in chapter 2 and page 17 in chapter 2 where all of this is spelled out. in addition, in the 2014 report, the most recent report from the surgeon general -- can we have slide 85, please? what the surgeon general concluded in the year 2014, his report was that not only had cigarettes not gotten safer over time, they had gotten more dangerous as a result of design changes that these companies made into their products. the century-long epidemic of cigarette smoking has caused an enormous avoidable public health tragedy. since the first surgeon general's report in 1964, 132 more than 20 million premature deaths can be attributed to cigarette smoking. if you would go to 86, please, keith. the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking cigarettes. and out of that same report, at page 8, from chapter 1 -- i do not think i have a slide on this. but, again, this is exhibit 1704, you see. this was the conclusion. the evidence is sufficient to conclude -- well, let me stop. under lung cancer, the evidence is sufficient to conclude that the risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the lung from cigarette smoking has increased since the 1960s. the evidence is sufficient to conclude that the increased risk of adenocarcinoma of the lung in smokers results from changes in the design and composition of cigarettes since the 1950s. changes in the design that they put into their cigarettes. and you heard from dr. cummings why. increase the addictiveness of the cigarettes. get it deeper into the lung. and the deeper into the lung that smoke goes, the more adenocarcinoma as opposed to small cell -- 133 squa-cell, something like that, other type of cancer that used to be the primary cancer from cigarettes. finally on -- just briefly on this tobacco working group. i laugh at this from time to time. that is the ten-year effort where the tobacco companies supposedly cooperated with the government in trying to find a way to create a safer cigarette. we showed you the documents in the course of the trial that showed that, in fact, to a large extent, the tobacco company's cooperation was a sham. and i know we gave you two documents. one was at the very outset, where i think it was lorillard's president -- i may be wrong about that. it is in evidence -- wrote back and said, yeah, i'll participate, but i do not agree for a second that the cigarettes that are currently made are not safe. and, therefore, we do not see any real point to this because we do not admit that cigarettes are not safe. but i'll come along and i'll sit in on your meetings, basically. and then you saw the document from about five or six or seven years later where it was the committee of counsel, lawyers, who are deciding whether or not the tobacco companies would continue to participate in this product. not researchers, the lawyers. and they wanted to pull out at the time, but they 134 decided they could not do that. why? because it would be bad public relations. but they then said, you know, you may remember this document. they said, well, look, we will continue but we want to make sure that we -- that we do things like tell -- i think it was gori who was the head of the project at the time for the government -- we want to tell gori that he is got to back off on things like smoking cessation clinics, if they were going to continue to participate. so the tobacco working group, while it may have had a very admirable goal and aim from the government's point of view, although totally unsuccessful in the end, was not endorsed in any serious way, according to the evidence that is in this case by the tobacco companies themselves. all right. i'm coming to my end here. you know, is it really too much to expect the manufacturer of a product that is sold in this country to be honest? i mean, is it really? is it really too much to expect and they will admit when their products are harmful or potentially harmful? to much to expect them to acknowledge when their products are dangerous? or as in this case, deadly. all of the tobacco companies that are in court here today earned enormous profits in the first half of the 135 20th century from the sale of cigarettes. i do not often talk in biblical terms, but i think it is justified here. in the 1950s, these companies came to a crossroads. they had two paths they could take when they knew for sure how deadly their products were. they could have taken the righteous path -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. heimann: they could have -- the court: it is argument. mr. heimann: -- been truthful and honest. they could have, if they wanted to continue selling cigarettes -- i do not know that would have been the best choice, but okay. they could have said to the american public, look, we are going to continue to sell these products, but you have to understand that the scientists are right, they cause cancer. you would better think twice if you are going to take up smoking or continue smoking. and they could have said, well, we are going to do our best to find out if we can identify and remove the harmful cancer-causing and other health-affecting substances. but we cannot do it now. we know we cannot do it now. we found that out. so we do not know whether we are 136 going to ever be able to do it or not. they could have done that. now, would that have had an impact of sales of cigarettes in this country? i sure hope so. i believe it would have. and i believe you can find that it is more likely than not that it would have. but they chose a different path. they chose -- there is just no other word for it -- evil. they chose the path of evil. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. but remember that is counsel's characterization. that is not in the evidence. mr. heimann: they chose to lie. they chose to do what they could to make their cigarettes even worse in terms of addiction. they chose to tell the public that they would take -- that they were going to find out what was in the cigarettes, if anything, that was harmful, and they were going to remove it. mrs. burkhart heard that. at least as i understood her testimony. and as i said before, when they made this choice, it was not as if they thought that cigarettes were just risky. because from their point of view, the harm they were going to do and continue to do was a certainty. they 137 knew it would happen. i need to get to slide 80. i've shown you this before. there we go. and here's the cost that we, the american people, paid. so, think about this. and this goes back to something i said in my earlier argument to you. think about it. what if they had chosen the righteous path, they had been honest, they admitted to the public how dangerous their products were, and that they cause cancer, they cause copd, they cause other diseases? there would be no doubt -- there would have been no doubt, no controversy, no psychological crutch for people like mrs. burkhart. the world would have changed. the world would have changed. and i think the evidence is sufficient for you to find that had that happened, mrs. burkhart would have quit smoking. she would have broken through that addiction, if they had just chosen the righteous path. thank you.