mr. wichmann: good morning, folks. first, i would like to thank you on behalf of our team and on behalf of john campbell for being so attentive. and i know that for some of you it was difficult, taking time away from your families and time away from work. but as you-all know, this is a very important case for john, and we really appreciate the attention that you have given to all the evidence. i would like to start -- 4082 baron, could we turn on the elmo, please? okay. there is a latin phrase, and it is called semper fidelis. it means always loyal, always faithful. it is shortened to semper fi, because it is the official motto of the u.s. marine corps. and john campbell has lived by that motto. he was faithful to his country when he graduated from kathleen high school here in lakeland. he went off to war. and he was faithful to judy. when judy got sick, he cared for her, bathed her, did anything he could for her up until the time that she died. and mr. millard is going to talk to you a little bit more about that when i'm done. but i think also you could say judy campbell lived by that motto. you see, judy started smoking the cigarette company's products when she was 15 or 16, and she remained faithful and loyal because of the nicotine that caused her to be addicted for 40 years. the cigarette companies with their suits and their scientists were not exactly faithful or loyal to judy, who was one of their best customers. because after all, what they wanted 4083 their customers to do was smoke, smoke, and smoke a product that they knew for 50 years was addictive and would cause her death. but they are not exactly loyal to one of their best customers, because they are going to come in here today and they are going to tell you, despite the fact that judy was one of our best customers, smoked our product for 40 years that we knew was addictive and we did not tell the american people that we knew would cause death and disease and did not tell the american people, it is all her fault. so they are going to blame it on their best customer. that is what is going to happen today. they are also -- the cigarette companies also are not exactly loyal or faithful to the american people. after all, during the 50 years that they conspired to conceal the health effects of their product, you heard from professor proctor, 20 million americans died, 435,000 a year. but they are going to come in and tell you all of those customers, it was always the customer's fault. the first issue that you-all have to decide in this case is -- i will get a little organized here -- whether or not judy campbell was a member 4084 of the engle class. can you make it a little bit bigger for us, please? and that is right there, question no. 1. this is the verdict form that you will be getting and you will be filling out when you retire and deliberate in this case. now, in order to be a member of the engle class, judy campbell has to have been addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that that was a legal cause of her copd. again, their best customer, they are going to come up and tell you, she was our best customer when we needed her to be, when we sold her cigarettes from age 15 until 1996 when she smoked a pack and a half to two packs a day, got sick, but she is not a class member. now, they are going to want to talk -- can we switch over, baron? they are going to want to talk about fault. they are going to want to say, why did judy start? well, folks, the first question i showed you was not why did judy start or what were the reasons she began. the first question i showed you was, was she addicted to cigarettes containing 4085 nicotine? there is going to be a section on the verdict form for you to assess the fault between the parties. i'm going to get to that in a moment. but the point i want to make now is in order to be a class member, we have to prove that she was addicted to cigarettes and that those cigarettes were a cause of her copd and death. that is the first and most important concept for you-all to deal with. now, you might ask yourselves -- there we go -- what is legal cause? now, i know you-all take your oath very seriously and you are all going to follow the law the way the judge instructed you. and in the package of instructions is addiction is a legal cause if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss, so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, the loss would not have occurred. i have highlighted down below "contributes substantially." and the question is, did her addiction play an important role? we all have heard from one expert witness. 4086 and believe me, these are two fortune 500 companies, and they have very skilled lawyers. we will talk about that in a minute. their lawyers are highly trained. this company, these two companies could have hired whatever expert witness available to come in and tell you that judy was not addicted and that her smoking cigarettes did not cause her death. could have done that. the only person you heard from on addiction was dr. kathleen brady, an addiction psychiatrist and a pharmacologist, internationally known, a betty ford addiction center winner, published over 300 articles on the brain, on addiction, on smoking and women, on smoking and adolescents. she stood up there and told you that judy campbell was severely addicted. i'll get to that in a second. again, the lawyers talked to her about judy's drinking. and she said, we do not know when she started, but she quit in 1981. did not have anything to do with her smoking or getting sick. and they talked about the stress with the family ledger and showed you pictures of her ledger and her filling out all the forms. dr. brady said, well, there is one constant, 4087 and the one constant is nicotine and the effects nicotine has on the brain. we talked about john. said, well, john is hard to live with. he went over to vietnam and got post-traumatic stress disorder. in his mind sometimes it is night, sometimes he is a teenager in southeast asia. there is explosions. yeah, i guess, you know, it might be hard to live with someone like that. john told you, she got him through that. she helped him. he got help. but one constant remained, and that was nicotine, a pack and a half to two packs a day, cigarettes and smoking. and that is, ladies and gentlemen, what legal cause means in this case. now, addiction to nicotine caused her to smoke, that caused the copd and that caused her death. let us go through who you have heard from. they could have hired any lung doctor that they wanted to. they did. they hired a guy from california. i was astonished. he came in over there and he looked at you-all and said, well, judy must have liked dr. lucille frank in port st. lucie so much that she traveled all the way from pensacola just to see her. 4088 now, who in their right mind would believe that? because first they told you in opening statement, part of the whole deal is that john could not support his family, was not making enough money and causing all kind of stress, so who is going to drive -- who would believe that judy would drive from one time zone in pensacola -- is that ten hours over to port st. lucie? did not make sense. but even their lung doctor said dr. martinez-salas is correct, smoking caused her emphysema -- which is copd -- and caused her death. did not dispute it. again, you heard from dr. martinez-salas. mr. millard will talk to you more about that in a few minutes. it is a local doctor in winter haven. he knew her when she was alive. he was the only doctor that had that opportunity. he told you about it. he told you about how he took care of her. he came in and he told you -- and there is no question, undisputed -- she smoked for -- baron, could you switch me over? dr. martinez-salas came in and told you, and we went through his medical records and there was argument all over about when it was that she 4089 started. it is consistent in the medical record, if you do the math, she started at age 15 or 16, maybe 10 years before the package warnings, and smoked them for 40 years, a pack and a half to two packs. some records said three packs, some records said a pack, but it was always consistent that it was 40 years from 15 or 16. so i'm not surprised that right here, jose-israel martinez-salas -- there is his signature up top -- where he certified on the official state of florida death certificate, cause of death, emphysema, which is copd. and he would have gone right down there in the lower right-hand corner and checked the box, did tobacco contribute to death? yes. there it is. you are going to get this original document, the florida death certificate. it is in evidence. you will get it and get to take it back and look at it. you also are going to have medical records. we talked about them, and i'm going to show you a few here in a minute. but they are also evidence that you can use to make your decision. but i would like to take a moment now and talk to you a little bit about nicotine and cigarettes and what 4090 the defendants knew. again, they want to come in and tell you today that all this is the fault of judy, one of their best customers, who started at age 15 or 16, maybe in high school, worked in a factory producing mailboxes. judy somehow was supposed to figure all this out on her own. and they kept it secret for 50 years. and you are going to see records back there. we have gone over them. if you-all want to write the numbers down, you can pull them out. but dr. -- professor proctor went through them with you. all of these are in evidence. they started in 1953. in the left-hand corner: it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. never told the american public that until 1999. that is 50 years. cigarette smoke should contain sufficient nicotine to supply the necessary requirements of a smoker with respect to this compound. that is back in 1959. they denied it. we will go through that. then on the right-hand corner, they wanted to -- they wanted you to believe that since judy 4091 grew up on a farm that grew tobacco leaves, why, it was just matter of rolling them up and lighting them, and she should have known everything that was in a cigarette. well, here we have one from 1963, brown & williamson, one of the reynolds' companies, saying that their nicotine levels are not obtained by accident. they have a research program in process to obtain by genetic means any level of nicotine desired. what they require. well, remember professor proctor explained to you how complicated engineering was of the modern cigarette; how they laid out sheets and they sprayed nicotine to get the exact proper level; how they put additives so that, when a smoker would smoke, it would be -- the smoke would be inhaleable; how they added menthol, all of that, so people would do what addicted smokers say, and that is that they like it. they liked the sensation of nicotine on the brain. well, this was something they knew back in 1963, '69. talked about pharmacological effects of smoking. here we go. 1972. they say -- look at that one in the middle on the lower level, please. 4092 without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. nicotine is the essential ingredient. happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique. it is the sine qua non. that is the essential ingredient that professor proctor told you about. we will go over -- there is even more. there is just -- here is a bunch talking about physical effects, 1973, 1977, 1982. most of those who have smoked for any significant time would like to stop. but the internal secret documents that they had in 1982 said, but many -- many but not most of those who would like to stop are unable to do so. but they knew the hold that nicotine has on a smoker. they kept it secret, and they would not tell public health officials, and they blocked public health officials for 50 years. and that is the conspiracy. and we are going to get into that in a second. but look down here. they are talking about -- here is one from the u.s. surgeon general that i'm going to read to you in a minute. 4093 cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the effect of tobacco addiction is similar to those that are -- those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. that is the u.s. surgeon general talking, folks. that is the chief medical officer in this country. that is the same person that the cigarette industry for 50 years during the conspiracy publicly attacked and said he does not know what he is talking about, he is wrong, dead wrong, wrong, wrong. it was the gentleman you saw the video of with all the microphones in front of him, ranting about the surgeon general trying to get out to the american people the health effects of a product that they were selling. the top -- and look at the one all the way on the right, the lower right dated 9/9/1980. that is an internal previously secret document in the industry archives that professor proctor told you about. judy had no idea about this. and it says: the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we 4094 cannot defend free choice if the person was addicted. now, there was a lot of talk about choice in this courtroom. i'm going to discuss it in a bit. you remember dr. brady. she came and she showed you mri scans and she showed you the latest technology. she explained to you that there is choice, but in an addicted smoker, in that person's brain, the brain gets rewired by nicotine. so choice is -- and she used the term "constrained." they would like you to think that you can only be addicted to cigarettes if you are like a zombie out there with no choice and under no control of your compulsions or emotions. that is not the way it works. it is constrained. we will talk about that here in a minute. before we do that, let me contrast for you what i have just kind of given you a bird's eye view of what the industry knew about cigarettes and how addictive that they were. and they want you to believe -- all that document -- all that documentation was secret in their archives. they want you to believe that judy, right there on the right with the baby, was supposed to have known 4095 all that. judy. here is one. i do not know if you-all recall, but big old greg strickland, judy's son, works here for the city of bartow, came up and got on the witness stand. and the lawyer said, well, you are asthmatic. you had asthma as a child. and he said, yeah. mom smoked around you. you had asthma, asthmatic as a child. he said, right. she was -- she was hooked. and he started crying. he told you about john taking care of his mom. they want you to believe that this woman right there is a bad mom, is a bad person because she smoked around her asthmatic son. well, you know, we look at things the way they are now. that is not the way that this society was in the 1960s and the 1970s or the 1980s. you-all will remember professor proctor got up and told you, historically, in the '60s, early '70s, fifty percent of doctors smoked. he put up -- he put up the ads. they still want you to think that -- i'm going to switch back to the -- they still want you to think, well, that is 4096 her fault, she was a bad person, she smoked around her kids. well, give me a moment here, folks, and let me show you what the cigarette company was telling the american people at the same time. (a video clip was played for the jury as follows:) a speaker: from cbs washington, in color, "face the nation," a spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with joseph cullman iii, chairman and chief executive officer of philip morris, incorporated, chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. a speaker: we have no program that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. a speaker: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? 4097 a speaker: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. and i concluded from that report that it is true, that babies born from women who smoke are smaller, but they are just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke. (the video clip concluded.) mr. wichmann: so judy is smoking around her kids. and they have -- that is a president of the company, of philip morris, on tv, as if a pregnant woman smoking was nothing. but they want to come in here and tell you that it is her fault, she was a bad mom, she was a bad person. well, they were fostering this whole environment, and they were telling americans, there is nothing wrong with it, just like he said. she was doing what fifty percent of the doctors were doing, because dr. proctor told you that they had a third-party strategy. they were funding the american medical association. they were passing out leaflets and pamphlets at doctor conferences to get the doctors to smoke. and i showed -- and you saw the demonstrative of how prevalent smoking was at the time. well, so i think it is unfair and it is not being faithful to your consumer to come around 4098 later and blame judy for getting addicted, which is exactly what they wanted her to do. we brought down dr. kathleen brady. i talked to you about her already. she told you that the definition of addiction is a chronic, relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful consequences. what did that mean as to judy? what that meant as to judy is that she started at age 15 or 16, 10 years before the warnings were on the packs. and you are going to see how they marketed their product at that time to children, to adolescents. they targeted teenagers. there was also a woman you are going to see in a minute. we will talk a little bit more about that. dr. proctor told you they targeted women for a number of reasons. they told women smoking was a diet aid, make you lose weight. they put it glamorous in the movies. you saw videos of all that. they sponsored women's tennis tournaments so they could get women to smoke. you are going to see in a minute what the end result of that was, because it worked. in this whole marketing and advertising campaign that professor proctor told you they spent $250,000,000,000 on. i will 4099 show you in a minute how that worked. i think i discussed this with you a moment ago, but let us just go through it. dr. martinez-salas, i showed you what he put on the death certificate. and there is no question, the judge read you the instruction that smoking cigarettes causes copd, because there is thousands of chemical compounds including -- and dr. proctor talked to you about that -- nitrosamines, cyanides, 70 carcinogens alone in that smoke. forty-five percent of all long-term smokers will die of a smoking-related disease. again, these are the figures that professor proctor gave you that he researched and has written articles on, and they do not dispute. 435,000 americans die a year from smoking-related diseases, 20 million deaths during the time of the conspiracy. if i could, there has been some talk about the u.s. surgeon general. you-all are going to get this report. this is the 2010 report. you-all are going to get it back there. i'm just going to -- it is in evidence. i just want to read to you some of the sections from it. this is what the surgeon general says. 4100 and you can highlight that for me, please, baron. yeah. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report. go down to the next paragraph. tobacco addiction remains a substantial problem in the united states and worldwide. of those individuals who have ever tried smoking, about one third become daily smokers. of those smokers who try to quit, less than five percent are successful at any one time in 2002. now, they are going to bring you in these reader's digest articles. bear in mind, 30 of them over 40 years. reader's digest. that is what they want you to believe. dr. brady, who in addition to being a medical doctor, an addiction psychiatrist, is also a ph.d. in pharmacology. and we will get to that in a second, because i'm going to talk to you about this nicotine patch that the cigarette companies say john is not being honest with you about. but we are going to go 4101 through that. but dr. brady explained that in the '80s there were no medicines like we have today, chantix, to help an addicted smoker like judy to quit. it was not until 1992 when the nicotine patch first came on the market, and it was not for a couple years after that that chantix, wellbutrin, and the other medicines were common. you have to look at this in terms of what was available to judy at the time. now, in the same attorney general report, you are going to see, if you thumb through it, where the attorney general says, copd is a leading cause of death in the united states, and as of 2005, approximately 1 in 20 deaths in the united states had copd as an underlying cause, with an estimated 75 percent of those deaths attributable to smoking. now, i can see it is possible that somebody could get copd who never smoked. but you heard from dr. martinez-salas. you have the florida death certificate. you even have the california lung doctor. there is no dispute in this case that smoking is what caused her copd. now, the same attorney general's report -- 4102 or, i'm sorry -- surgeon general's report for 2010 says, importantly, the evidence indicates that in the u.s., copd could almost completely be prevented by the elimination of smoking. so it is not surprising, it is not surprising that when dr. martinez-salas started treating this lady in 2006 and looked at her medical records, treated her until she died in 2007, it is not surprisingly the first thing in his mind that he put down on the death certificate as the cause of copd was tobacco use. that is how prevalent, that is the interrelationship between cigarette smoking and this kind of lung disease. now, dr. -- here it is. dsm-iv, diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. like how dr. martinez-salas told you, only a pulmonary function test can diagnose copd and emphysema, dr. brady got on the witness stand and said, you know, i wish there was a test that you could diagnose addiction with. there is not. and this is the book that she follows. again, she is the only addiction expert you have heard in the case, and she was unequivocal that judy was highly addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. she applied the criteria in the book 4103 and she came to her conclusions. now, in that same book -- can you highlight the top, please? -- you will find the following: because nicotine sources are readily and legally available, spending a great deal of time attempting to procure them -- to procure nicotine would be rare. continued use despite knowledge is particularly important to an individual who continues to smoke, despite having tobacco-induced general medical conditions such as bronchitis or copd. that -- that, folks, is why one -- one of the reasons why she qualified. can we put this elmo up, please? there is another page. i may have to read you from the book-- mr philipson: i think that is the same page. mr. wichmann: right here at the top. let us see if i'm getting -- mr. cofer: is this evidence? mr. wichmann: yes. you used it with dr. brady. right there at the top. although more than eighty percent of individuals who express -- who smoke 4104 express a desire to stop smoking and 35 percent try to stop each year, less than five percent are successful in unaided attempts to quit. that is today, not back in the '80s, not back in the '90s, back in the '70s. that is today. they are going to bring you in evidence. they are going to say, well, 60 million people have quit. everybody in the world has quit. she could not quit, so it is her fault. well, it is not quite the same. quit and quit attempts versus stopping. that is what the dsm is talking about here. stopping, quitting once and for all. what i found interesting in this case is that you-all heard from two people about judy's stopping once and for all. you heard from john campbell and you heard from greg strickland. john campbell told you that judy was in the hospital. she was begging him for cigarettes. she had withdrawals. she had to be sedated. begging him for cigarettes. greg strickland said, i went to the hospital and my mom was sedated. so i think that being sedated in the hospital, begging your husband for cigarettes, i 4105 mean, that was the only way in 1996 that she could have and eventually did successfully quit. now, you are going to get into evidence, in addition to the -- in addition to the death certificate, you will get this little packet here. and you are going to get to flip through it. and these are judy campbell's private, her personal journal and her personal notes. you can look through it. and i'm going to read a little bit to you in a second. you saw some of it during dr. brady's testimony. dr. brady made a big deal. well, judy was trying to do all this in secret. dr. brady said, well, as an addiction psychiatrist and a woman -- well, what is that got to do with it? answer: nothing. she drew a battle plan, determination to quit, how to quit. she wrote all this down. she documented her six days, her struggles with nicotine. she talks here, little self-help notes. you-all can take it back and you-all can look at it and you-all can decide, is this a woman who is writing this down because she likes to smoke, that it is a lifestyle choice? or is this a woman who 4106 is writing it down because she is addicted to nicotine? dr. brady told you when someone starts at age 15 or 16, the frontal part of your brain is not fully developed, the part of the brain that deals with choice when you grow up. and nicotine rewires that and it makes it harder for people who started at 15 or 16 to quit. dr. brady told you she is also a woman. she also had a history of depression. dr. brady told you this. they do not want to talk about it. because dr. brady said she has studied women and nicotine addiction, and that women who have a history of depression, it is easier for them to get addicted to the drug nicotine and it is harder for them to quit. now, she also told you, well, it is the difference between blue eyes and brown eyes, and not everybody is the same. dr. brady also told you she is done studies on genetics and nicotine addiction. she said this does not happen across the board, but the studies show that for genetic reasons, in families where mom and dad smoke, children are at a greater risk of becoming addicted to nicotine, and it is harder for them to 4107 quit. both judy's mom and dad smoked. you heard them. they read depositions the other day from the family that had not seen judy in years and years and years. and they said, yeah, almost everybody in the family smoked. well, that is another strike she had against her. i'm not saying that every family where mom and dad smokes -- because there is always -- i mean, it goes to the risk. it is not a hundred percent across the board. dr. brady explained to you, this is the scientific reason why the woman was addicted. that is the only testimony you have heard from, from experts in this case. let me just briefly read to you -- and i hope that when you go back, you take a look at the woman's journal. she writes in here: i'm going to start this journal because i want to document and i want the help to quit smoking. she writes in here, i'm going to give it an all-out effort. i'm going to use the power of prayer. it is in her journal. i'm going to pray. i'm going to keep a journal. she calls it an ordeal. she talks here about the afternoon before she tried to quit. i read 4108 everything i could find on stopping smoking and taken a lot of notes. i have set my date for saturday, october 31st, 1987. now, in 1987, there were no nicotine patches, there was no chantix, there was no drugs to help you. she is trying to do this all on her own. 10/30/87. she said, this is my last day of smoking. tomorrow is the day i'm going to take on the title of nonsmoker. she says, because john was trying to smoke -- was trying to quit smoking at the time, and she was still smoking, and all of the sudden she noticed bad breath that she had and how it would affect her husband. you ladies and gentlemen, you look at the diary and you read through it. i mean, is this someone who now realizes she has bad breath, but it is because she likes it, she likes smoking, it is a lifestyle choice? she goes on to write, in a way, i dread it, but at the same time i'm kind of looking forward to the challenge. with god's help i will make it. does that sound like someone who did not want to quit, who had no motivation, which is what they want you to believe? then here it is. she says, well, today is 4109 the day. she says, i want a cig, but so far it does not seem to be overbearing. this is just the first day. i know god is helping, because i feel that he is. i need something to do with my hands. dr. brady told you, this is common for addictive smokers who put the cigarettes down, because of the ritual and the body is conditioned to using your hands with smoking, so she is already -- she is already having that experience. and the next morning she says, made it through my first day. first day. she goes on to write: god is helping a lot. come on. the woman is not addicted? she is crying out to her god for help to quit this addiction. she says, with his help, i will make it another day. the next day she says, now i have been a nonsmoker for two full days. greg came and testified -- remember, he told you he was a momma's boy. cried on the stand. big old guy. she said, greg was very pleased when he found out i was trying to quit. then she writes down what dr. brady told you addicted smokers experience when they put the drug 4110 nicotine down. she says, i had tension in my face for most of the day yesterday. had craving -- this was after only one day -- for a cig was pretty strong yesterday too. i think the big job for the next few days will be staying busy and keeping control of my willpower. she is telling you, nicotine is taking control of her. it is taking control. it is rewired the brain, just the way the doctor told you. she is trying to keep control of her willpower. dr. brady also talked to you about cues and talked to you about going to the grocery store and seeing cigarettes for sale, how that activates the brain and activates a desire in an addicted smoker to smoke. the next day judy writes in the afternoon, i'm still surviving. surviving. be glad when i do not have these tension headaches. dr. brady told you that is a common sign of withdrawal for someone who is addicted to nicotine, to experience a tension headache. it says, but i want a cig so bad. sure hope the rest of my life is not spent wanting a cigarette. that would be a bad way to live all the time. 4111 judy wrote, i'm sure god will have something better than that in my future. does that sound like someone who smokes because they like it? does it sound like someone who smokes because it is fun? she writes, made it six days. maybe next time. they are going to stand up and tell you, she did not try to quit; she was not motivated to quit. well, you-all take the journal back and read it over. and there is more to it with her little sheets where she writes down what her motivation is and when she is going to do this and when she is going to do that. now, let us talk a little bit about 1992 and the big issue of the habitrol nicotine patch. dr. brady came in, the addiction psychiatrist, who teaches pharmacology. pharmacology has to do with smoking cessation drugs. not the lung doctor. the addiction doctor, the specialist in this. she reviewed it all and said, you know, in 1992, that was the first time that the nicotine patch was available. dr. martinez looked at this record and said, that lady was committed. she tried. she was my 4112 patient. i know her. she tried. mr. cofer: objection. misstates the evidence. dr. martinez did not speak about addiction. the court: i caution the jury to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. what the attorneys say is not evidence. it is simply their summation of what they believe the evidence showed. mr. wichmann: if you will read the first paragraph there. she has agreed to stop smoking and we will try her on the habitrol. those are the brand new nicotine patches. she is committed at this time to stop. she will take -- and she goes on to say how much. and said, by then, she should be off all nicotine and cigarettes. you do not see the word "prescription" anywhere in there. take it back and look at it. you just do not see it. and dr. brady said, i know, i teach this. and when these smoking cessation drugs first came out, the cigarette -- the pharmacology companies gave them to the family doctors to pass out to their patients. now, first they tell you on one hand, well, 4113 you know, in opening statement, john campbell was broke, had no money. had all kind of money problems. that caused stress. that is why she smoked. forget about the nicotine. well, it does not make sense that the doctor does not write the word "prescription," and this is a family, a working family that is trying hard to make it, and all of the sudden they are going to have the money? it does not make sense. so dr. brady said, well, it was common at the time that the patches would be given. now, one thing i found very interesting, again, you-all need to bear in mind, please, mr. campbell, high school education, went to vietnam and served his country and came back, and he is got ptsd. bear that in mind. these lawyers, they are the best. the cigarette company could hire whoever they wanted to hire. the lawyers had mr. campbell four days in deposition. and here is his transcript that they brought up and they sat in front of him when he was on the witness stand. and they said, well, mr. campbell, we have talked to you about quit attempts four times. and, you know, i do not know if you saw the look on 4114 his face, but he was looking right straight at you. and i do not know if the hearing aids were working or not, but he goes: quit attempts? yeah. you never mentioned the habitrol patch. you never did any of that. and so john looked at you and said, well, they never asked me in four days. they never asked him, did you ever see judy wearing a nicotine patch? now i ask you, these highly skilled lawyers for the cigarette companies, they had that medical record. and that is an important medical record. they had it for the four days of john's deposition. do you think it was an accident that they forgot to ask the question? well -- and let me just make this clear. in a deposition, the judge has instructed you, it is just like here in court. the lawyers ask the question, the witness answers. here in court, you-all get to ask a question and then the witness answers. this is not like oprah where you go on tv and somebody stands in front of the camera and then they have got to tell their story for 45 minutes. i mean, you did not see a single witness stand 4115 up there and say, hi, my name is ms. smith, and here is -- here is everything i have to say on the matter, and just talk and talk and talk and talk and talk for four days. and then they get to get up and leave, and then some lawyer stands up and says, well, you know, they just gave us a speech here, but they forgot to mention this and they forgot to mention that and they forgot to mention this, that, and this. that is not the way it works. they have to ask the question to get the answer. and nowhere here in four days of depositions did they ever ask john campbell, did you ever see judy wear the nicotine patch? john told you, he looked at you straight in the eye -- and you-all have to decide whether you believe him or not -- he said she tried it. it was not giving her enough nicotine, so she smoked while she was using it. dr. brady said, you know, looking at this, i'm not surprised because that is not the proper dosage. the drug was brand new. the doctors really did not know how much to give. dr. brady said, i'm not surprised she was 4116 smoking. it was not being administered correctly. okay? so she tried. the doctor wrote, she is committed to stop. now, if you believe them, that john is making all this up, i mean, i do not know -- i do not know what else i can say. but here is the four transcripts. they never asked the question, so they did not get the answer. now, speaking of john, mr. millard is going to talk to you about mr. campbell, but i thought this might be an important time for me to point this out to you. in the medical record, you are going to see -- here it is -- winter haven hospital, family history. significant for a very supportive, caring husband who is her main caregiver. semper fi. but you-all have to decide, was that man sitting on the witness stand and looking you in the eye and saying i saw her with the nicotine patch and she tried it, was he being honest with you or not? that is going to be your decision. now, it is hard for me -- it is hard to believe that this woman smoked for any reason other than her addiction. and i will show you this document. 4117 and i do not want to go through a lot of these medical records. but if you look at the bottom, she is a 54-year-old lady. a lifelong smoker of probably greater than 40 years. up top -- this is dr. martinez-salas -- said severe copd, secondary to active smoking. i mean, that is -- that is the undisputed evidence in this case. now, the judge read you instructions, and i would like to talk a little bit with you about that. first, i want to talk to you about this instruction. this is the greater weight of the evidence. that is the standard that you-all are to use to decide the issues in this case. and if you think of the scales of justice, the greater weight of the evidence means are they tilted just a little way? which is more likely true versus which is more likely not. it is not a criminal case where you have to decide based on beyond and to the exclusion of any reasonable doubt. you-all can have a doubt. whichever side comes to you with 51 or 50, the one with 51 wins. now, how many addiction experts did they bring in to say this lady was not addicted to 4118 cigarettes? it was stress. this lady was not addicted to alcohol -- or this lady was not addicted to cigarettes, it was alcohol. they did not bring anybody. there is -- there is no testimony about it. there was a big deal over choice. and i will make this thing work here. i think that did it right there. i think you need to highlight, please, the section above it, please, baron. yeah. highlight above. the sentence above. yes. this is the law. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of disease or a medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. baron. okay. let me read through this again. please highlight the sentence before "an addiction to cigarettes may be." in order -- he does not have it highlighted, but if you read right there. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of a disease, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. you-all can think back there, well, there is 4119 some choice, and it is the choice of a 15 or a 16-year-old. put that in context. it is the choice made 10 years before the package warnings. put that in context. or you can think, well, maybe she should have chosen -- she should have chose to try harder or earlier to quit. or maybe you can think since she drank alcohol up until 1981 -- that is when she stopped -- that maybe her drinking alcohol had something to do with her smoking. or maybe john's drinking alcohol or maybe's john's service or maybe these other things. so my point is that under the law, nicotine need not be the only cause. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of a disease or medical condition even though it operates in combination with the acts of another. that is the law you are sworn to follow. so you-all can think, maybe at some time point in her life she is drinking too much so she smoked too much. but there is one constant. she quit alcohol in '81. we do not know when she started. we know when she started smoking, at age 15 or 16. we know she smoked for 40 years, a pack and a 4120 half, two packs, some records say three, some records say one. it is a constant all the way up until 1996. that is always there. alcohol is not. as long as it acts in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some cause of such addiction to cigarettes contributes substantially to producing a disease or medical condition. now, it is hard to imagine this woman -- and you-all saw her journal -- that she was smoking cigarettes for any reason other than what the cigarette company internal secret documents said, and that is to get the addiction -- to sustain the need that her brain had for that addictive substance. now, i'm going to kind of move it along here. there was great discussion in this case, i think -- baron, do we have the elmo here? -- about this questionnaire. and i'm sure they will talk to you about it. judy said why she began smoking. just trying something that was forbidden and liked it. advertising had nothing to do with it. you have got to bear in mind she is 15. a lot of times 15-year-olds, with advertising, it is a subliminal thing. they do not know. kids go out 4121 and buy nikes. they will tell you, well, it was not a particular ad. because it is all around, it is everywhere, it is pervasive. people call photocopies xerox. i'm going to take a xerox copy of this. and they call it a xerox copy, even though xerox is the name of the company that makes the photocopy machine. because it is so ingrained, it is subliminal. it is in your mind. but what is interesting, and i do not think they are going to talk to you about with regards to this entry -- i will give you a moment. a juror: sorry. mr. wichmann: no. that is okay. thank you for paying attention. and i know i'm going on probably longer than i wanted to. but if you look at what she wrote here that i have highlighted, judy wrote, the problem is not being able to lay them down once you are hooked. so let us talk a little bit about this $250,000,000,000 advertising campaign. mr philipson: what page number do you have? mr. wichmann: fifteen. $250,000,000,000 that the industry spent during the time of their conspiracy on 4122 advertising. and here it is, just a montage of the kind of ads that were out there to make it look for teenagers that smoking was hip and smoking was fun. now, it gets even more interesting. if you could go to 35, please, with the redaction. when you look at the internal, previously-secret industry documents that you will have -- you will take them back there and you can read them over. starting in 1928, there is an r.j. reynolds letter. regular school is over. summer school is starting. most high schools, prep schools, colleges and universities have finished, and summer schools are now getting underway. dr. proctor told you, yeah, that letter was from the company to their salespeople to tell them to get out there, sell those cigarettes. high school age kids. look at the next one. this is 1973. if our company is to survive and prosper, we must -- this was in the middle -- we must get our share of the youth market. the fragile developing self-image of the young person needs all the support and 4123 enhancement it can get. here is a presentation at reynolds that was made to their board of directors in 1974, previously secret until the industry documents saw the light of day. the 14-to-24 age group represents 21 percent of the population. this is reynolds writing, talking to the board of directors. now, they are going to tell you, well, these are some wrong-headed statements that somebody made over in the file room. well, these are the top executives, the most educated suits in the company. the board of directors. all right? what are they writing? people, american teenagers, age 14 to 24, represent tomorrow's cigarette business. ouch. they will account for a key share. it gets even more interesting, if you look at 36, please. take a look at this in 1975. it is another company, philip morris. they are talking about, the brand must increase its share. this is on the left-hand side on the top. penetration amongst the 14-to-24 age group, which represents tomorrow's cigarette business. 4124 over here, they are talking about, 1980, smoking amongst the 14 to 17-year-old age group. in the lower left-hand corner, you see that the decline in their numbers means the industry can no longer rely on an ever-increasing pool of teenage smokers to replace adult smokers. while the news is bad for the industry, it is not as bad for philip morris in '81, because they had products that kids were buying. look over in 1984. dr. proctor talked to you about this document. it is entitled young adults' importance as replacement smokers. it says, younger adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers. less than one third of smokers -- 31 percent -- start after age 18. that is right down there. i asked dr. proctor, what in the world is that? well, you-all heard the statistics. twenty million dead, 435,000 customers dying a year. so what are they doing? they are looking for replacement smokers for their smokers that either quit or their smokers that died. and where are they looking for them? twelve, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18. and those are their internal 4125 documents. last but not least, if you could put up -- well, let me see if i can get this thing to work here. no. 1433, please. this document is also in evidence. and they are going to tell you these are wrong-headed statements. they are old documents. they are back in the archives. they do not mean much. this one is 1990. and look who it is written to. it is written to the principal of the willow ridge school. they say that the tobacco industry is concerned about the charge being made that smoking is responsible for many serious illnesses. you see that at the bottom. okay. if we can have the full paragraph, please, baron, at the very bottom. and what does r.j. reynolds write to the principal? despite all the research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact is that scientists do not know the cause or causes of the chronic diseases reported to be associated with smoking. wrong. you-all heard from dr. proctor -- i will show you in a minute. they knew in 1953 4126 about the diseases that their product caused. that is wrong. it is just wrong. they go on to say, believe it or not, we would appreciate your passing this information along to your students. now, when we raise our kids, we raise our kids to tell the truth. if you do not tell the truth, you get punished. you do not lie. that is not how we do things. here you have companies selling a product that they knew was manufactured to get people addicted and to keep people addicted, that they knew would cause disease. here they are. they are writing letters in 1990, to the principals at schools, telling them something that is not true and telling them to pass that information along to your students. now, why in the world would they be doing that if they were not interested in having american kids start smoking so they could be replacement smokers? i will run briefly through these. if you could, to no. 1, baron. i have talked to you -- mr philipson: can i see it? can you show it to me, mr. wichmann? mr. wichmann: -- all about whether or not 4127 judy was addicted. and the evidence in this case is way beyond the greater weight. there has been no evidence that she is not been addicted. so the judge read to you these instructions. one, smoking causes copd. we went over that. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. we went over that. the next finding that is the law, if you-all find judy was addicted, is that they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. you-all do not have to decide -- if you find judy was addicted to cigarettes, you-all do not have to wrestle with the idea -- mr. cofer: objection. misstates the law and the requirement. the court: i think it is part of the -- it is part of the prerequisite. you did not state the second part of it, i think is what -- mr. wichmann: and that the addiction caused her copd and death. mr. cofer: objection. mr. weaver: still objection. mr. cofer: and a legal cause. mr. wichmann: let me try again. if you-all find that judy was addicted to the nicotine in 4128 cigarettes and that smoking caused her copd and death and that she satisfied the legal causation requirement that we talked about earlier, then these are the findings that the judge has read to you. and they are -- and you-all do not have to struggle with, was that particular cigarette or cigarettes that she smoked for 40 years defective? the jury already decided that in a separate miami case. they heard evidence for a year. they came to that conclusion. so the issue for you is the one that i showed you in the verdict form, which is, was she addicted, with all the legal language after that. if she is -- if she does satisfy class -- engle class membership, which we are asking you to apply, then the law is that the cigarette companies concealed and omitted material information not otherwise known, knowing that the material was false and misleading or failing to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarette smoking or both. also, they agreed to conceal -- this is the conspiracy -- or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive 4129 nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely to their detriment. they wanted people to believe their misinformation. we are going to go over that here in a second. they were -- they sold cigarettes that were defective and they were negligent. now, just a little bit of the history here. if you would go to 16 for us, please. you-all heard from professor proctor, who wrote a book on this from stanford university. came and told you it was back in december 1953 that the cigarette companies' executives got together. they were all competitors at the time, just like mcdonald's, just like burger king, just like wendy's. instead of competing, the information was coming out that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer, so they all met in the plaza hotel towards the end of the year. what did they do? did they hire personal -- a public relations firm to go to the american public or to go to the surgeon general to tell americans there is a connection here, let us see if we cannot work through this? they made a choice. they made a choice, not judy. they made a choice. were they 4130 going to disclose what they knew -- were they going to disclose what they knew to the american public or not? let us see what they did. eighteen, please. they put out this frank statement in the new york times and it was signed by all the head executives and we went through all this. they will tell you judy -- no evidence judy ever saw this. no evidence -- no evidence that she did. but dr. proctor explained to you that all the major newspapers at the time picked it up. it was all over the airwaves. and they said, there is no proof cigarette smoking is one of the causes, and we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. false. how do we know that? we can look, please, at 17. in the archives that were previously secret professor proctor found this. hill & knowlton was the public relations company that wrote this in december of '53: it is fortunate for us, being the cigarette companies, that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our cigarette 4131 was -- if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. so they knew and dr. proctor told you that is the first evidence right there that they knew that they had a product that was causing cancer and they were going to mislead the american people. thirty-nine, please. here we go again. i'm going to run through these, because i -- i have been up here for a long time and i know you-all heard professor proctor for a while, but this was what they did with the information that they had. these are from previously secret internal documents, 1957, on the top left-hand corner talks about the tirc, which was their public relations company that they -- that they funded, the tobacco industry research committee, to talk about it being a successful defensive operation. and in the middle, we must provide answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. that is 1964. they already had psychologists looking at this. they already had scientists looking at this. how could they, with the emerging information coming out about the relationship 4132 between smoking and health, how could they put up a shield for that? this is what they did. they got a psychologist that understood nicotine and how nicotine worked on the brain. said we got to give them a psychological crutch so they are going to have a self-rationale to continue to smoke. so they went and they said, on the far upper right-hand corner, our basic position is that the controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the use of cigarettes. so they knew back in 1968 that their campaign of doubt would later come back to haunt them. and this is what pretty much sums it up, the 1968 document: the most important type of story is that which casts doubt on the cause-and-effect theory of disease and smoking. that is what they knew. that is what they had. they were not standing up and saying, our product has all these cancer- and disease-causing properties and can be addictive. let us see if we cannot help folks like judy, who started ten years before the package warnings. no. they were telling the american people, let us put out a story 4133 and cast doubt on whether there is a connection. look at the 1972 internal records. always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health controversy without actually denying it. so that is playing with words, folks. it is a half truth. it is playing with words. nineteen, please. so while they were putting this creating doubt out there, this is what their own records show. 1953, we already went over that one. 1961: carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. that was a secret document until 1999. obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. this is what they were telling themselves internally in secret in 1962. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. this is what they knew when they were telling the american public. there is no proof. there is doubt. our products do not cause harm. see what they knew? what did they do? look at 40 please, baron. 4134 early on the president of reynolds, paul hahn, 1953, when the first reports were coming out, he took issue with what he called lose talk. lose talk, lose talk. twenty million americans, dead, 435,000 a year. lose talk, he is called the subject of smoking in relation to cancer. we are not going to play these again, but mr. cullman, high executive -- i know you-all think it is funny. these are suits. this guy here on the right, see him in front of all those microphones in 1979? i'm not going to play it again, but he is the one that took after joseph califano and the surgeon general that -- the day before the surgeon general's report was going to be released, attacking the surgeon general, saying he had no proof. it was a scare tactic. it was a scare campaign. this was what they were doing. and you do not think that people heard it? there was no internet back then. but guess what, look at those microphones, calling a press conference. and how would they know what the surgeon general's report had before it was even released? i asked professor proctor that. he said, well, i have done the research. they had 4135 connections in congress. they had connections through the government. they knew stuff before it was even out there. that was their reaction, to attack. calls claims that cigarettes are addictive irresponsible and scare tactics in 1988. all right. last but not least, in 1994 -- 1994, two years after judy tried to quit with the patch, two years before she could. and we will show it to you again. they had the executives of the cigarette companies appear in front of congress and raise their right hand and say, we do not know what causes lung cancer. now, let me show you the effect of all this, and we will wrap it up. if we could go to 21, please. dr. proctor went over this with you. and if you look at the blue line, that is the consumption of cigarettes starting in 1900. no one was smoking. and as the modern cigarette was developed and as advertising came into play, consumption rose. and you will see the right -- the red line. that is disease. that is lung cancer death rates for men. you can see as people smoked, lung cancer death rates went straight up. 4136 you can see the "v." we talked about the v. that was when the first surgeon general's report came out. people got concerned. the industry hired spokespeople to represent it and a campaign of doubt, and then consumption went back up again. look over there in the right-hand line. i think it looks green to me. that is the women rising death rates. dr. proctor explained to you, women started smoking a bit later than men, because men started overseas when they were in the war, the first world war. he talked about the latency rate, the time between when you smoke and when diseases start to occur, lung cancer, copd. but you see, women bought into it also. you see the rise up there? 1960, 1970s, 1980s and 1990 women were getting sick and sick and sick. and that is judy campbell's generation right there. now, i want to talk with you briefly about this reliance issue. i'm so well organized here, i cannot find that verdict form. do we have it? bear with me one second. mr. cofer: mr. wichmann? mr. wichmann: i know it is been a long time that i have been standing up here. i'm going to 4137 try to wrap it up. this is the verdict form that you-all are going to get to go and fill out. and just to recap, on the first page here: was she addicted? the answer is yes. and mr. millard is going to talk to you about the second question. we are going to want you to answer that no. the third question is: were cigarettes manufactured by each defendant -- mr. philipson: mr. wichmann, you need to slide it up a little bit and maybe look at the screen. mr. wichmann: the second one is no. mr. millard is going to cover that here in a minute. the third question we have already gone over. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by a defendant a legal cause? went over that. we want you to say yes. and then we are going to talk on the subject about did she reasonably rely to her detriment on anything that they did? and that is question 5 -- question 4 and question 5. and there is dates in there. and those dates are before may 5, 1982, and after may 5, 1982. did she rely on their 4138 false statements or did she rely on their conspiracy that we have been talking about? well, one thing we know for sure is that in -- after may 5, 1982, she tried to quit smoking by using low tar, filtered cigarettes. and what she found was -- and john campbell told you this -- the more she started to smoke the filtered low tar cigarettes, the less nicotine her body got, and the more her brain craved. so she actually ended up smoking more. and we showed you documents that the industry knew that they could market these as health cigarettes, and that the result would be, because people would close the vent holes with their fingers, that they would inhale deeper, hold it in deeper and smoke more, because addicted -- addicted smokers had to get that compensation. they had to compensate for the nicotine levels in their brain. we know she started doing that in the late 1980s. and we know, john campbell said they saw an advertisement, a print advertisement about low tar cigarettes. mr. weaver: objection. facts not in evidence. the court: i will caution the jury to rely 4139 on your memories of what you believe the evidence is and that the attorneys are simply making arguments. mr. wichmann: the other thing that she relied on is -- i played the videotaped deposition of the r.j. reynolds corporate representative, mr. setchell. he said they had internal records. they are in evidence. you had a package to look at while he was testifying. he said in 1994, brown & williamson and american tobacco and reynolds -- and, you know, you see two defendants there now, but really there is four, because reynolds is responsible for those other two companies. the set of those three reynolds companies, they had judy campbell listed in their adult tobacco database as a smoker who preferred marlboro but who also smoked their brands of cigarettes. and he said we sent a questionnaire, we sent her the surveys asking about her smoking behavior. we sent her promotional information, and we sent her coupons, only a couple of which she redeemed, he said. mr. weaver: objection. facts not in evidence. 4140 the court: sustained. mr. weaver: move to strike. the court: i will sustain. i would ask the jury to disregard that statement and rely on your own memories of the evidence. mr. wichmann: so my question is, if she was not relying, if she did not get the industry message towards the end of the conspiracy in 1994 -- okay? -- two years before she quit, how would she know to contact reynolds to ask to be on their mailing list? and how would she know to ask for promotional information from reynolds? and why would she do that if she was not smoking reynolds' cigarettes? and why in the world would they have her in their database if she were not an addicted smoker? these are the reasons why we think you should answer yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, and yes to all of those. now, once you are past all of those questions that we went over, you are going to be asked to apportion and determine what the fault is amongst all the parties. i'm here to tell you, the evidence is that judy started smoking at age 15 or 16, 10 years or so before the warnings were on the 4141 packs. so you-all are going to find that that is a teenage decision. if you want to find her responsible for making that decision, that is within your province. i would just ask that you bear in mind her age and the circumstances surrounding her beginning. but if you-all want to apportion some fault on her for that, that is within your province as jurors. now, they are going to tell you she did not try hard enough. she did not want to quit. she did not do enough. we think given testimony on the effect nicotine has on a woman's brain, this woman's brain, that she tried pretty darn hard. but if you-all think that there is choice, you-all think she did not try hard enough, that does not go to whether or not she was addicted. that goes right here, when you-all apportion the fault, and you can put some fault on judy for that if that is the way you feel. that is within your -- within your province. we would like to make a suggestion, and it is only -- only a suggestion. we will live with whatever you-all decide to do, because you-all are the jurors. we think that a proper apportionment of fault 4142 is forty percent to reynolds and the three companies. that is really three in one. it is reynolds, american tobacco, and brown & williamson that caused judy -- for the most part, the evidence has been that she smoked mostly marlboro, but she did smoke their product. you heard greg, her son, say, my earliest recollections were from 1966 to 1974 she smoked raleighs, and i remember because she would go to the -- to the publix, and she would buy cigarettes. i saw the raleighs on the carton. when she went to switch to the low tar cigarette, it was a reynolds doral brand that she switched to. john also said she would on occasion smoke kool and on occasion smoke salem. we think forty percent on reynolds, we think fifty percent on philip morris, and we think ten percent on judy. you-all need to make that decision, and whatever you-all decide, we will live with it. now, on this last page, i have the good fortune of letting mr. millard talk to you about that, so i would ask you-all to please wait a moment here. it might be after lunch and mr. millard will cover that. but i want to leave you-all with this last piece of evidence that 4143 you-all heard. and that is 31. mr. philipson: are you ready for it to play, mr. wichmann? mr. wichmann: yeah. can you play it, please? mr. philipson: sure. oh, give me one second. mr. wichmann: give us one moment. (a video clip was played for the jury as follows:) a speaker: rise. and those of you who will be testifying, as well with you, to rise. if you would raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? (affirmative response). a speaker: please consider yourself to be under oath. mr. waxman: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first -- i would like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. 4144 just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? a speaker: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. waxman: mr. johnston? a speaker: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. mr. waxman: again, we will take that as no. again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. a speaker: i do not believe that nicotine in our products is addictive. a speaker: i believe nicotine is not addictive. a speaker: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. a speaker: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. a speaker: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. a speaker: mr. campbell -- 4145 (the video clip concluded.) mr. wichmann: i think you-all saw that and you remember that. this is what they were telling the american people in 1994. and there is another question on the verdict form that has to do with punitive damages to punish the companies, and we are going to ask you to check "yes" to that question. mr. millard is going to talk to you a little bit about that when he gets up, as well, most probably, perhaps, after lunch. thank you. mr. millard: thank you. i know we are tired, we are hungry. i'm going to try to move through this pretty quickly for you. i'm going to hit a few key issues that is important that we talk about before you are sent back to deliberate. in my openings i talked to you a little bit about statute of limitations which is an issue in this case. and i'm going to address those issues for you. and then i'm going to talk a little bit about damages and how to go about doing that and some thoughts we have on that. so bear with me. i'll try to get through this pretty quickly. first, i want you to remember that i told you 4147 in opening -- and you have seen it through the trial -- there is a couple things that are agreed upon in this case and that is that mrs. campbell developed her copd from smoking and that her copd was the cause of her death. it is not in dispute. on the statute of limitations, i talked to you in opening and you heard quite a bit about it that it is a burden on the defense -- this is a position the defense has taken in this case. the other issues are our burden. we have the burden of proof in the case. and we talked about the greater weight of the evidence. you saw that a little bit ago. the statute of limitations, it is the defense burden, so the greater weight of the evidence is borne out by them. they must present evidence sufficient to meet that criteria for you. let me set forth the questions that you-all need to ask. i was scribbling on this, so i'm sorry. this is the only copy i have. the statute of limitations is set forth right here in question 2. and question 2 is going to ask you to decide -- it says one question that you will either answer yes or no, but it is actually broken down into a couple different parts, so i'm going to go through them real quickly. 4148 the first part is did judy campbell have copd? did she have it before may 5, 1990? so you must consider that. if you find that she did, that the evidence rose to the level, the greater weight of the evidence convinced you that she had it, then you must go on and think about a couple more things. the next thing you are going to think about is did she know about it, or was there a reason for her to know about it. should she reasonably have known, again, before may 5, 1990, that she had copd? again, defense burden. they have to put forth the evidence that rises to the level necessary. and, again, we do not guess, we do not speculate, we do not assume. there needs to be evidence upon which you can make your decision that the burden met -- was met. there is the greater weight of the evidence. the third part of this is even if she did know or should have known, she must also know that it was copd and that the copd was caused by her smoking cigarettes. we suggest the answer to this is no. she did not know. and i want to go through the different parts real briefly here. 4149 the evidence in this case -- you have seen evidence come in basically through dr. martinez-salas. you remember him. he came up here. he was the treating physician. he is the, probably, smartest guy in the room when it comes to judy campbell, her injuries, her illnesses, her diseases. he had hands on. he talked to her. he asked her questions. he treated her. you heard him talk about that. he came forward and he talked about the issues of her copd, when it developed, when it was diagnosed. from the other side the defense brought forth dr. schroeder. you heard him take the stand he came in and told you he is a paid expert. he never met judy, never talked to her, never had an opportunity to ask her any questions. what he did is he said he had to take all the records that were available at the time, primarily those of dr. martinez-salas through his clinic, gessler clinic or winter haven hospital where she was treated and a handful of other records. we saw dr. lucille frank, dr. ford, starting in 1990, september of 1990, after the date, after the may 5 date. he talked about that he is paid by tobacco. this is what he does. he only represents tobacco 4150 companies, not plaintiffs in these cases. he is done it 50 times. he comes forward and does the same thing in these cases. he works for the tobacco companies, not the injured smoker. you are going to have to evaluate, who do you believe. you are going to -- they are both highly educated men. they are both professionals in the same field. they both talked about these diseases. they both talked about these concepts. your job is to evaluate what they said, evaluate the evidence they used, evaluate the bases for their opinions and make a decision. what do we believe, as you go through the verdict form? i'm going to point out a couple things, though, before we move on. you will also remember that dr. martinez-salas, he remembered judy campbell. it was not as if he just read a record and was talking about that. he knew her. he remembered her. he talked about her. he talked about the legacy of her smile. you remember that? he was -- he was fond of her. he got to know her as a person, not just a patient. and he came in here with no dog in the fight. he had nothing to gain or lose by coming here. he came just to tell you 4151 what happened. he met this woman. she had a condition he cared for. he treated her. he was there for her. he met the family, he talked with them. he monitored her care all the way through to the very end, beginning in 1995, when he first read the first pft that was available in this case. you remember that testimony. dr. ford ordered a pft while judy was in the hospital. dr. martinez-salas was the physician, the pulmonologist reviewed it and wrote a report. he then met her in 1996 when she was in the hospital. and from that point forward, that was his patient. she saw him on a regular basis as her primary care physician, as well as her pulmonologist. you also remember that dr. schroeder said he has no criticisms of dr. martinez-salas. he agrees with what he did. he agrees with his treatment. he agrees with his care. he even agreed with the death certificate. he said, i have seen that; i have reviewed that; i know dr. martinez wrote that and put that together and signed it. i agree with the cause of death as copd and agree that it was caused by smoking, that smoking was a contributing factor to the cause of 4152 death. no dispute there as well. question 1 -- take that back. we saw there was one question but different parts. the first part of the question is whether judy had copd or not. you saw a lot of evidence coming in different records, and you saw dr. schroeder primarily trying to say that these records had some kind of inference that something was going on earlier. at no point in time, again, do we have anything that would tell us in a medical record that she had copd before may 5, 1990, not one. dr. schroeder admits that there is zero medical evidence in the record dated before may 5, 1990. i want to look at one record -- we will look at a couple of records, maybe four of them. i will not do a bunch of them. you have seen these before. in 1995, judy was seeing dr. ford. dr. ford had a chest x-ray at that time. and on august 17, 1995, the lungs were slightly emphysematous. i hope i got that right. i was practicing it. so '95 we have slightly -- a finding of slight emphysematous changes in the lungs. not severe, not overly severe, slightly. 4153 think about that. think about the testimony you heard from dr. schroeder and why he is trying to opine that she had this disease before may 5, 1990. i want to show you another one. this is a record dated a month later. september 8, 1995, dr. ford as well. we talked when we had dr. martinez on the stand that the first time there was a diagnosis was in 1995, an official diagnosis. in his opinion, it had to come from having a pulmonary function test. remember that? he talked about that. he said, x-rays do not cut it; you have to do the pulmonary function test. these were done. and after they were done, dr. ford says in his record -- and this is the only time we have this in any record, where he said that judy came in, 54-year-old white female, to go over the results of her lab work. we do not know what the lab work was, but we know that she went over the pfts, that at that time he advised her -- this is when she knew that the pfts were consistent with copd and it also shows the x-rays, showed emphysema. that was the x-ray we just looked at. so at this time we know that she knew or she 4154 should have known at this time that she had copd. no record exists like that before may 5, 1990, there is just no records. i'll show you one more real quickly here. here is a pft. and this is the 1995 pft. and counsel with dr. schroeder on the stand went over all the different numbers and what the fevs stand for and percentage ratios. i'm not going to touch that. you heard all that. but the point of this is that on august 23, '95, dr. ford had her in, a note that she weighed at this time 175 pounds. but of significance, at the bottom, is the spirometry, which we learned was part of the pft studies. and they were described to you as reveals a moderate obstructive change. this is not a severe condition in 1995. dr. martinez is the one who read this report. so the question that you will have to answer, the first part of it is, did she have copd? not could have had it, might have had it. and quite honestly, i'm standing before you having heard all the evidence, i cannot tell you. i do not know. maybe. but the question is we cannot rely on maybe. the question is, does the evidence rise to the level where you can say, as a group, that the 4155 greater weight of evidence supports her having it or does not support her having it? we contend it does not support her having it. there is certainly possibilities there. the thing we do know is that if it did exist, it was quiet. it was developing in her lungs, nobody knew it. she did not know it. no doctor knew it. we have no records. you recall that dr. martinez sat on the stand. and here is what he said to you. he said the standard of care in pulmonary medicine in the diagnosis of copd, the standard of care for pulmonologists is that you need pulmonary function tests. this is how we diagnose. he went on to say that it is inappropriate to diagnose copd from an x-ray. he said there is -- certainly, x-rays are very important, and, typically, they tell us. and we have seen it in the 1990 x-ray. it says there are changes consistent with, or these are suspicions of. so we looked at those as a pulmonologist and we say, this is important. i'm not saying it is not important, but it is not diagnostic, not to the point when you say this is copd. it is the point when you say we need to follow up and figure out what is going on; let us take a look. so that is what dr. martinez told 4156 you. dr. schroeder, on the other hand, disagrees. weigh the evidence, make the decision. dr. martinez-salas said radiologists are not the ones making the diagnosis. they read the films, take the films, read them, and they provide their findings of what they see. the pulmonologists take that, review it, make their decisions. on the other hand, i believe dr. schroeder said he would rely. in fact, i believe his testimony was that he would look at the 1990 consistent with copd and make that a diagnosis. who do you believe? weigh out the evidence. now, relying on radiologists would be uncommon, according to dr. martinez. he would not rely on a radiologist to make the diagnosis. but perhaps a rheumatologist, such as dr. frank may do that. and we saw in her record in 1992 she had copd in there. from the 1991 x-ray, you recall, it did not say just consistent with. at that point it just said copd. she may have just taken that and relied on it. she is not a pulmonologist. so that is understandable. dr. martinez said people many times misdiagnose and get these records wrong on these issues. weigh it out and look at the 4157 evidence. so what we know is that no single record exists before may 5th, 1990, except for the fact that she had a diagnosis. dr. martinez sat up here and told you that she did not have a diagnosis until 1995. dr. ford talked to her about it in 1995. she knew about it at that time. and using the x-rays are not appropriate for a diagnosis. but even if they were, there is nothing dating back earlier than the date of question right here. we do know that dr. frank also sought to find early records. she asked if there were any available. and if they were there, i would presume she would have had them. she did not find any, though. we do not know why. the records were destroyed. dr. schroeder said sometimes they are lost or misplaced, or perhaps another explanation is there were none. nobody went in to look into this issue, that he was concerned about this issue. no x-rays were done. no treatment was had. we pointed out with dr. schroeder, in 1993, that she went into the gessler clinic for a new patient visit. do you recall that? we looked at 4158 this record. and i pointed out the fact that in this record there is no mention whatsoever of breathing problems, dyspnea, copd, nothing, not one reference anywhere in this record. this is a new patient coming to the clinic. this is what they write about. they talk about the fibrositis, the arthritis. she was having pain, and that is why she was seeing dr. frank. i'll note here that she weighed 165 pounds at this time. so it is your task -- sometimes it feels daunting looking at all the evidence and trying to put it together and trying to figure out what happened. again, you know what the law is. did the evidence presented by the defense rise to the level that you can say, as a group, that the greater weight of the evidence supports the fact that she did have the copd before may 5, 1990? again, i do not know what the answer is to that. you will have to decide and look at all the evidence. the next part of the question is, if you find that she did have the copd you must then go on and say, if so, did she know about it or should she reasonably have known about it before may 5, 1990? how would she know? this is the instruction. 4159 how did she know? was there any evidence? not one piece of evidence that could suggest she had knowledge of copd, if she had it before may 5, 1990. not one record suggests that. no witness was able to suggest that. again, we cannot guess and we cannot speculate. you cannot assume. you must find some evidence to support this theory. there is zero evidence to suggest that she has -- that she knew about copd if she had it, and, certainly, there is no evidence to suggest that she believed smoking was causing copd if she had it before this period of time. dr. schroeder, when i asked him, said the following, that he had never seen any evidence that mrs. campbell had attributed her coughing. he talked about a little bit of coughing, i think, from her journal, her dyspnea, which is in that 1996 physical endurance therapy document. it had an onset date of 1988. do you recall that up in the corner? he used that as one of the bases, that he had never seen any evidence that mrs. campbell had attributed her coughing, her dyspnea or shortness of breath to emphysema or copd prior to may 5, 1990, no evidence. the 4160 defense expert says there is no evidence. our expert says there is no evidence, no witness brought in any evidence. so i would suggest that your response to this part of this question would be no. she did not know. the other part of it, should she have known? what was there that would lead her to believe that she had copd? okay? it is interesting. you will find that dr. schroeder admitted that there is zero records anybody treated her for these conditions prior to may 5, 1990. zero records to suggest she was advised of copd prior to may 5, 1990. zero records that any doctor diagnosed her before may 5, 1990. we did learn, though, that many times patients are misdiagnosed, and they are -- they have a condition, and the condition is given an incorrect diagnosis. both doctors talked about that. as we saw in the records -- and dr. schroeder admitted -- that throughout her course of treatment, from the time we have records, there is numerous references to acute bronchitis. and then he defined acute bronchitis for us. acute bronchitis is that which comes and goes. it is not 4161 chronic. it does not last. it is not permanent. it is not copd. that is what the defense expert tells us. what are the symptoms? coughing, lethargy, fatigue, worn out. we get colds in the winter. they come, they go. mr. campbell sat up here and told us the same thing. frequently, she would have that. she would get sick during the winter, and she would get some medications, maybe, maybe not, and she would get better and it would go away. asthma, references of asthma. dr. schroeder told us that there is references in there, but he believes it is wrong. dr. martinez said it is wrong. both doctors agree. there was no asthma. however, certain doctors put asthma into the records. they got it wrong. they said especially with women, dr. schroeder says, they sometimes get that wrong. and then he explained to us why, but i do not think the explanation matters. so the question is, is if the doctors were getting it wrong, calling it wrong things, assuming she did have copd, and none of the doctors got it right. how in the world can we expect judy campbell got it right? she has no 4162 medical training. she went to tenth grade. she did go back and get her ged. but she did not go to college and study any medical learning. she did not go to medical school. she did not go to nursing school. she had none of these skills which would lead her to be able self diagnose herself, especially in light of her doctors getting it wrong. again, i would suggest you check no to this box. there is no evidence. real quickly, i want to touch on the fact that i talked to dr. schroeder about the form where it was indicated that she had dyspnea -- remember, that is shortness of breath -- and that there was an onset date of 1988. i asked him, if you had that information alone, would you diagnose copd? he said i would not. i asked him, would you need more information? he said, i would. i said, like what? like what brought it on, what kind of endurance was involved in it, how long it would last, how often it happened, or if it was even related to smoking. he said he had none of that 4163 information. he had one little comment with no basis for it, and he is relying on that to suggest that somehow she either had it and knew about it before may 5, 1990. i'm here to tell you, i do not think the evidence stands up. we do know, though, that john campbell took the stand and he talked about her physical condition at the time of question, the late eighties into the early nineties. you remember that? he talked about going to the amusement parks. she would pet the deer. you remember that? she liked the deer. she went to silver springs, she went to the epcot center, went to disney world, walking those parks. we have all been to those parks. we know it can be exhausting. she was able to do that. she -- not one time did she suffer from shortness of breath beyond just usual tiredness that we all would experience. not one time all the way through the late eighties into the nineties. did not happen. remember, we saw the pictures and we heard john talk about it. again i would suggest that there is no evidence that can support a finding that she had copd or especially that she knew 4164 about it, if she did, before may 5, 1990. john talked about the smoker's cough. do you remember that? he said she had it. it would come and it would go. it was no big deal. they did not think much about it. dr. schroeder said he did not think much about it. he said if it was just a smoker's cough, it is not diagnostic. he said it would not be clinically significant without more. you need more. just like the other report we talked about. when did it happen? how often did it happen? what was bringing it on? how long would it last? these kind of things. we do not have it. it is not there. it does not rise to the greater weight of the evidence. we suggest you check no on this box. all right. i will move off that. let us talk about damages. in my humble opinion, this is the most difficult part of your task. there is no formula, there is no set criteria, there is nothing anybody can hand you and say here is the number to put on this, here is how it should be done. you as a group have to talk about what you have seen, what you have heard, look at the evidence, and 4165 come up with a determination of what value to place on this case. before you do that, i want you to know that if we could turn the clock back, if we could bring judy back, john would drop all this in a moment, in a heartbeat. he misses his wife. you saw it. you saw him talk about her. he loved this lady. this was his girl. he talked about her. you know, what we have here is they were married for 24 years. she was his companion. she was his soulmate. she took care of him. he took care of her. they were good for each other. the way i see this, this is a love story that ended in a tragedy. we heard him talk about the fact that they both had tough upbringings. he had even a worse situation after high school, going to war and coming back with some troubles. he is seen a lot of things over there nobody wanted anybody to see, especially a 19-year-old son. he had to go through that. came back a broken man. he had a hole ripped through his heart and soul. and guess what. when he saw her, that started healing. when he saw her, their eyes met. he talked about that that little bar that night. it was instantaneous. they started dating, and they 4166 had a period of time when they were not dating and john had gone off to georgia. when he came bak it was right back as if he had never left. they were in love with each other. and it stayed that way from that moment, married in 1983 and lived on until her untimely passing until she was taken from him. their plans were -- and you heard him talk about it -- their plans were they were growing old together; that she was the one that could make him okay. he is got issues with all the things he is had to live with, that he talked about she could put a hand on him and hug him and look at him and she softened him. she filled that hole. she made him whole. she brought him back. she put him back together. he depended on her. she protected him. she made him feel safe, secure. and without her he is lost again. he is feeling it. he talked about he is never stopped loving her. he says he is still got the wedding pictures all over the walls in the house. remember that? he has not let this go. you saw the emotion. he is still feeling it. it is been six years. he is still feeling it. guess what? he is got many more years to 4167 live. you will see the mortality time tables that will come in. those are tables that give you a general idea as to when people are expected to live. okay. and i do not want him looking at that. that is not something anybody wants to look at. but it gives him about 16, 17 more years without her. think about the time that he has got. a couple ways we look at this. one, he is entitled to recover for a period of suffering from her injury, his pain and suffering. not hers. we do not award for the suffering that she went through. but his what he had to endure. he told you on the stand that he loved her. he cared for her. he did everything he could to try to help her. he stood by her. when she could not get outside any longer, he built that big beautiful wooden deck. do you recall that? she would go out there with her oxygen hose and sit on the deck and get some sun. he built that so she could have that. he did everything he could to make her okay and to keep her safe, to keep her happy. but he felt helpless. he told us this. he felt helpless. as she continued to get sicker and sicker, he had to watch this. nothing he 4168 could do. he could plead to the doctors. he took her to the doctors. but he could not do anything to stop the pain of his girl, the one he loved. he struggled with that. all right? probably from 1996 to 2007 when she passed. so we have an 11-year period of time of suffering. add another 17 onto that. we have got almost 30 years of suffering. you will see on the verdict form, when it goes to damages. first of all there has been a stipulation to the funeral expenses. and i just want to let you know that that is part of the verdict form, the damages that are available in this case. the amount is not in dispute. so if you find that he is entitled to damages, the amount of the damages is set forth right here for the funeral, newspaper, death certificate, dignity discount, cemetery, $9,874. there is a place for that on the verdict form. i have written that in right here. what is the total amount, is number 8. of damages sustained by john campbell for funeral expenses. the amount is right there. we will give you the number so you can go back with those. what is the amount? number 7 is the question 4169 i want to talk about now. the total amount of damages sustained by john campbell as a result of judy campbell's death and for the loss of judy campbell's companionship. his bride, his girl, his companion -- and the protection she provided him -- she cared for him, she took care of him, she kept him safe and secure; and especially for john, significant. he needed that. she was there for him. and his pain and suffering. and this is pain and suffering through the sickness and now and into the future. he is entitled to damage for that. i'm not going to spend a lot more time on this, but i want to just briefly remind you of the testimony you heard from dr. martinez and from john campbell himself of the struggle that judy went with. she never gave up. she kept that smile. we saw that smile over and over and over again. she continued to battle, but she suffered greatly beginning in the hospitalization in 1996 all the way through the time of her death. went from two liters of oxygen, which is a normal amount, up to six liters, which dr. martinez said is significant. it is at really the top amount you 4170 could really provide somebody. she struggled to breathe. she was slowly being suffocated to death year after year after year. because of the medications and the disease she was suffering from, her weight continued to increase from 165 pounds to 240 pounds toward the end. could not clean herself, could not bathe herself, could not cook for herself, could not take care of herself, john did that. he cleaned her, he bathed her, he fed her, he dressed her, he cared for her. he did not run from that. many men run from situations. many people run from situations when they get hard. he did not run away. he ran to her. he ran to her side. he stayed there. he was there to the very end holding her hand. that was his girl. remember he talked about that he liked her legs. all right? he liked her legs. that was his beauty queen. and she made him whole, and now she is gone and he is without her growing old alone. all right. the last point i want to touch on is how you are to come about putting a number on this case, the hardest thing you are going to have to do. but i've got a couple things i just want 4171 to share with you that might make it easier. i calculated 30, 33 years going back of the total time he suffered from 1996 to the end of his expected lifetime. brings us back to about 1980. it helps sometimes to look back. think about how much time has gone on in the past, you can help evaluate the time into the future. 1980. and i hate to bring up some of these examples, because his honor, as we know, he is keen on dates of presidencies. but i have noted a couple things. and i hope i do not get corrected on these. 1980, governor ronald reagan defeats jimmy carter to become the 40th president of the united states. remember that? learned about that? that is been a long time. think about that. president reagan has now passed. he is not with us any longer. a long time. think about it. twenty-seven years back. remember the space shuttle challenger exploding? a tragedy in midair right after takeoff? a long time ago. how about 20 years back, 1993. world trade center bombing. do you recall that? a lot of things have happened since then. that is a long time has passed. 4172 how about 1996, o.j. simpson trial. remember that? a long time ago. presidential election between bill clinton and al gore. remember ross perot, the election? many, many things have happened since then. thirteen years, george w. bush ran for his first term. remember the hanging chads controversy? it seems like forever ago. a lot of time has passed. a lot of time. i do not know if that helps you. it helps me sometimes put it in perspective. but it is one way to look at this. look at it any way you want. you as a group have to figure out how to put a value on this case by a year by year of damage award, coming up with the single number, looking at it as a whole, talking about it amongst yourselves, figuring out what is the appropriate amount. we do not want you to award anything for sympathy. we are not looking for sympathy. he is looking for justice. he gets sympathy every day when he talks about his wife being gone. every birthday, every christmas when she is not around. he gets plenty of sympathy. he is not looking for that. he is looking for justice. 4173 the number we as a group have put together that we believe is appropriate and fair is a range. take it, leave it, higher, lower, do whatever you want with it. this is our thought. somewhere between $9 and $14 million would be the appropriate award in this case. you would add to that -- you do not have to add, just have it on the form, is the funeral expenses. i want to touch real briefly on the last part. bill touched on it but i just want to make sure you are familiar with the last question no. 9, whether punitive damages are warranted in this case. you are going to have jury instructions to read. they are already read to you. it is instruction no. 15, which tells you how to go about doing this. remember, the burden is higher when you get to punitive damages. you will read about that. but the bases for it are was the conduct so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregarded to human life. i'm not going to read the rest. they are all in here. but think about that for just a moment. we have heard all the testimony about the tobacco companies and knowledge they had, knowledge they withheld. would you consider that reckless? 4174 would you consider that disregard for the well being, health and safety of humans, to the public at large, the campbell's? think about it. we suggest you check yes on both of these. we believe it is. i want to thank you again. we very much appreciate the time that you have put in here and your attentiveness. i want to ask that you give the same courtesy and attentiveness to defense counsel. thank you. mr. wichmann: five minutes. i promise. well, you know, they took some shots at me personally. i'm okay with that. i'm tired. it is been a long trial. i have tried to do my best. i mean, it is what it is. i can take it, but please not john campbell. i do not want to go back over this whole business about the nicotine patches, but he stood up there and said to you, i'm trying my best to tell the truth, and that is all he is been doing throughout the whole proceeding. they also took some shots at dr. martinez, the historian. well, if the history was different, do you think two of the major cigarette companies in america, do you think they would have 4294 gone out and hired their own historian to come in and say, no, this gentleman from stanford, little meek, mild fellow there, the professor was dead wrong? they did not. they did not because they cannot, because the history is the history. now, ladies and gentlemen, they also said, look at judy, look at judy, look at judy. look at judy, do not look at anybody else. well, the final instruction 16 that you got from the court on the issue of punitive damages, the law is, when considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm defendants' conduct caused judy campbell. okay. but there is another paragraph that they did not read to you. the other paragraph which is the law says, you may also consider harms, similar remember, harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility, the other wrongness of the defendants' acts as proven in this case. that is marketing to children, to kids, to teenagers. that is marketing to women. that is 20 million smoking-related deaths over the course of their conspiracy. that is 435,000 americans who have died from smoking-related -- who die from 4295 smoking-related diseases every year. mr. cofer: object to that as misstating the law. the court: i'll just, again, caution the jury to rely on the instructions the court has given you as to the law, and -- mr. wichmann: final instruction 16, fine. now, last but not least, they want to tell you, well, judy was -- i wrote this down -- intelligent. she is informed. take a look at the last page of the journal, the page where she writes, made it six days; maybe next time. ladies and gentlemen, here is what she wrote. i think the big job for the next few days will be staying busy and keeping control of my willpower. that is what she wrote. with god's help, i'll do it. the next day, made it six days; maybe next time. my point is, you can have willpower and you can be intelligent and informed, but when you are addicted, severely addicted as dr. brady testified in this case, the effects nicotine has rewiring your brain make it hard, hard, hard to quit. this poor woman -- no one has disputed the fact that 4296 when she was in the hospital and sedated begging her husband for cigarettes and going through withdrawal symptoms, that is how she was able to quit. you-all look at the journal, read it over, make up your own mind whether this is a woman who did all of this as a matter of lifestyle free choice or whether this was a woman who was addicted to nicotine. i promised five minutes, and i hope i've kept with my promise. thank you all.