mr. cofer: counsel, mr. campbell, members of the jury, good afternoon. you remember back in jury selection we talked about there being two sides to every story. remember that? i want to thank you for waiting and giving us an opportunity to tell our side. you remember in opening statement i told you that we thought this case really comes down to three pretty simple, straightforward questions: why did judy campbell smoke? why did she wait so 4183 long to quit? and what, if anything, did the defendants do to cause mrs. campbell to smoke and get sick? do you remember what i told you? i told you the evidence will be that she smoked because she liked to smoke, because her family smoked. i told you that the evidence would be that she always had the ability to quit whenever she made up her mind to quit and she was ready to quit. i told you that the evidence would be that nothing the defendants did or did not do, said or did not say caused mrs. campbell to either become a smoker or keep smoking. and you may remember that i began my opening statement by telling you that there were certain things that we did not disagree about. there are issues that are not in dispute. i told you i was going to take those off the table so we could focus on the real facts in the case. because that is what you need to decide the lawsuit, the facts of the case. so i want to begin my closing argument the same way. i want to focus on the facts that are not in dispute. so let us start with the first question. why 4184 did judy campbell smoke? well, dr. brady told you that no one becomes a smoker because of an addiction to nicotine. people start smoking for other reasons. i do not think mr. wichmann or mr. millard mentioned it during their closing arguments, but, of course, we all know that judy campbell grew up on a tobacco farm in north carolina in the 1940s and 1950s. smoking and tobacco was just a part of life where she grew up back then. you heard that her mom and dad smoked. you heard that four of her five brothers and sisters smoked. you heard that she had a brother named hugh and a sister named madrid -- mr. campbell corrected me on that pronunciation, madrid -- and also a sister named imogene. and what you learned from the facts were that all three of them smoked until they got copd, and they ultimately died of lung cancer. and none of the three ever made the choice to quit smoking. smoking was just a way of life in coats, north carolina, where judy campbell grew up. it is no surprise that judy campbell decided to become a smoker, too. now, plaintiff wants you to believe that the tobacco companies, that these defendants enticed 4185 judy campbell into becoming a smoker with their advertisements. but we do not need to speculate as to why she became a smoker, because she told us. you have seen this questionnaire. and i want you to think about this for a second, because in closing argument, what mr. wichmann told you is maybe she did not know why she started smoking. maybe she was subliminally influenced by advertising. he said she started young. maybe she did not realize it. well, i want you to think about the circumstances of when this questionnaire was filled out. judy was not 15 years old when she filled out this questionnaire. it was 2001. she was 60 years old. you remember, it was in the context of sending to the lawyer who represented the engle class in miami, and they sent a questionnaire to her to get some information about her. and you have heard plenty of leading questions throughout this trial. well, this is one of the most suggestive questions you could ever see. what caused you to begin smoking? was it advertising? movie heroes who smoked? sports heroes? all of those? 4186 you can see they are begging judy to give the right answer, right? for their case? but what did judy say? what did 60-year-old judy say? just trying something that was forbidden and liked it. advertising, movie heroes, sports heroes did not have anything to do with it. and i showed you this last line. every time i put this up -- i showed you in the opening statement, i showed you when i went through this during the trial, and i show it to you now. the last line was: the problem is not being able to lay them down once you are hooked. and we are going to talk about that. but in terms of why she began smoking, you remember when dr. proctor took the stand, i asked him, i said, dr. proctor, how much time do you think you spent talking about advertising on direct examination? and he said, well, about an hour and a half, two hours. i said, did mr. wichmann ever show you the questionnaire that judy filled out? and he said, you know, i'm not really interested in what judy knew. i'm not here to 4187 talk about judy. i'm here to talk about the tobacco companies. well, you have to decide this case based on judy and what judy knew and why judy made the decision she made, because it is john campbell who is asking for money based on judy's smoking. now, let me say one more thing about this. so mr. wichmann suggested that the defendants somehow subliminally influenced her with their ads. well, i will tell you, if philip morris was trying to do that, they did a pretty poor job, because mr. campbell told you that she did not start smoking a philip morris product until 1984 or 1985. he told you that is when she switched to marlboro when she was what? forty-three, 44 years old? so boy, it would sure be hard to link up any philip morris ads with her decision to begin smoking decades before. now, let us look at that. it says, just trying something that was forbidden and liked it. even though mrs. campbell grew up on a tobacco farm, you heard from her brother and sister that smoking was forbidden when they were kids. their parents would not let them smoke or 4188 drink. and you remember what josie nash said when we were reading her testimony? they said, did barney ever smoke when he was a child? and she said, i think so, because i think i told on him once. that just goes to show, of course your brothers and sisters tattle on you if you are doing something you are not supposed to do. that is all of our experience. and barney williams also testified that his father would have tore her up -- would have tore her up if he found out judy was smoking when she was young. both barney and josie testified the first time they ever saw her smoke was after she got married, was after she married les strickland. and not a single witness in this case saw judy campbell smoke before then. now, plaintiff tried so hard to persuade you that judy was a regular smoker when she was living on her parents' farm. that just was not the evidence. the evidence was she became a smoker after she married les strickland. and make no mistake about it, she was young. 4189 she married les strickland when she was 16 years old. but she was making adult decisions. she was living an adult lifestyle. she was a married woman who was starting a family. so that is why, according to the evidence, judy campbell became a smoker. why did she continue to smoke? she told you. she liked it. every time someone told mrs. campbell she should quit smoking, she said, i like to smoke. she told that to her brother-in- law, ed haponski, jean's husband -- we will talk about that -- she told that to her roommate gail martin, and she told that to john campbell, her husband. mr. campbell testified that judy liked to smoke, that smoking relaxed her, it calmed her down, it soothed her. he testified she enjoyed a cigarette with a cup of coffee; that she enjoyed the feel of a cigarette in her hand. and you know what else he said? he said it was something they liked to do together. he said they liked to smoke together. i want you -- i want you to think about something else he said. mr. campbell told you that from the time they were married in 1983 until 4190 she quit smoking in 1996, he bought her cigarettes for her. he is the one that went to the store and bought the cigarettes for her. even after, in 1993, when he said on the stand that she was having problems breathing all day long, he continued to buy cigarettes for her until she quit in 1996. now, you know, we all know, we all have guilty pleasures. each and every one of us does. whether it is eating too much pizza, whether it is laying out on florida's beautiful beaches getting too much sun, even though the doctors tell us not to, and, you know, our parents tell us not to. as adults, it is our right to choose to balance -- to balance the risk and benefits of the things we enjoy. that is what life is all about. no one can make those choices for us. the evidence was that judy campbell liked to smoke, she understood -- she understood that smoking was dangerous, and she made that decision with her eyes wide open. now, in this lawsuit, mr. campbell wants you to second guess his wife's decisions. he wants you to second guess her choices. he wants you to blame the tobacco companies for the way she chose 4191 to live her life. but members of the jury, there was not a single shred of evidence that anything any tobacco companies did caused her to start smoking. there was not a single shred of evidence that mrs. campbell was fooled in any way about the risks of smoking or relied on anything any tobacco company ever said or did not say. and mr. wichmann did say something in opening statement that i agree with, and i suggest you think about it. and he said that ultimately, your job as the jury is to weigh the evidence in the case against the lawyer's theories. so let us talk about the next question. why did mrs. campbell wait so long to quit? well, there is no question, none whatsoever, that she had the ability to quit, because she did quit. in march of 1996, she put her cigarettes down and never smoked another cigarette the rest of her life. she was able to quit and stay quit even though her husband smoked for another decade. you heard dr. brady talk about triggers and cues and how difficult it can be, when you have triggers and cues, to change your behavior. she was able to do it. unfortunately, she waited 4192 until her copd got so bad it put her in the hospital before she made the decision to finally quit. now, mr. wichmann pointed out, we did not call an addiction witness. after dr. brady, there was no reason to. dr. brady is a terrifically qualified witness. you remember, i stood up when mr. wichmann was qualifying her as an expert. i said, the defense stipulates that she is a renowned national expert in addiction medicine and pharmacology. dr. brady told you what you needed to know. and what she told you was that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. she told you that 1.3 million americans quit smoking each and every year. she told you already, 50 to 60 million americans have quit. she told you that 90 percent of those quit on their own without any kind of assistance. and in her view, the vast majority of them were addicted and the vast majority of them had brain changes. basically, what dr. brady told you was that people quit smoking when they make up their mind that they would rather not smoke as opposed to continue to smoke. 4193 she told you that addiction does not prevent a person from trying to quit. she told you addiction does not prevent a person from successfully quitting. and she told you that judy campbell was a good example of those facts. where was the evidence, members of the jury, that judy campbell was any different than the millions of americans, addicted americans, who put their cigarettes down and quit? there simply was none. and there is also no information -- i mean, there is no question that mrs. campbell had the information she needed to make an informed choice whether to smoke or not smoke. dr. proctor told you that people have known for a very long time that smoking can be bad for you. now, a hundred years ago, dr. proctor told you, people referred to cigarettes as coffin nails and to cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends. he told you that in 1899 the state of florida actually banned the sale of cigarettes. and one of the reasons was because cigarettes were bad for you. now, let me show you something. i want to make a comment. i showed you this during dr. proctor's examination. these are the florida 4194 health notes. this was -- these were published in 1906 and 1907, more than a hundred years ago. and it says, today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. during his open -- during his closing argument, mr. wichmann said, quote, defendants kept it secret that smoking was addictive. well, apparently we did not keep it secret from the state of florida, because 112 years ago, or 100 and however many years ago they were publishing, today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. five years later, the florida health notes refer to cigarettes as coffin nails. i will not play the song for you, but you heard in 1947 that the no. 1 song on the hit parade was smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette. it is been recorded by a bunch of artists over the years -- country western, swing artist, all kinds. and basically it tells smokers that you can smoke yourself to death and that you become nicotine slaves. so when judy was six years old, 1947. throughout the 1940s and 1950s, again, before 4195 judy campbell ever began smoking, popular magazines like reader's digest and life and time reporting on the dangers of smoking. here is an article from reader's digest in 1952. cancer by the carton. and, of course, they are referring to a carton of cigarettes. you heard all about life magazine and the wynder-graham-croninger study. smoking gets in the news. doctors report tobacco tar induces mouse cancer, note rise in cigarette use and human lung cancer. i showed you -- i will not take the time to do it today, but i showed you that edward r. murrow show where they actually had dr. wynder and dr. croninger on the show. remember, they were showing the experiments. they were talking about it. and dr. proctor told you that show was a big deal. it was like 60 minutes. it was an hour-long show. it was the big news show. here is how -- you know, even editorial cartoons. this is 1954, life magazine. turn-of-the-century term "coffin nail" comes back. and you see a person in a coffin smoking cigarettes and nails to the side. and we know for a fact that these studies and 4196 these articles and smoking and lung cancer were getting lots and lots of attention back in the '50s because there was a national poll. in 1954, june of 1954, a national poll by the gallup company: have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs? ninety percent said yes. 1954. again, before judy campbell ever started to smoke. we have the time line i showed you before. remember, 1964 was a big year. that was when the surgeon general published its landmark report announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was a proven cause of lung cancer. dr. proctor told you this got massive publicity. it was a big deal. it was front page news. it was on covers of newspapers. it was in magazines. it was on television. people were talking about it. they were talking about it big time. you remember, there were three news channels back then -- cbs, nbc and abc. and here is how harry reasoner covered it as a lead story on cbs. (a video clip was played in open court as follows:) 4197 a speaker: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. a speaker: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this in summary is what the committees says. cigarette smoking is a major cause of the lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, 4198 the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. the surgeon general's committee presented its report at news conference in washington. a speaker: out of its exhaustive deliberations, the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the united states to warrant remedial action. this overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease categories. more specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report -- and i quote -- in view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate. a speaker: cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. in a case like that, you give the old friend every possible 4199 chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then you give them a chance to reform. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (the video clip concluded.) mr. cofer: you heard mr. wichmann, both in opening statement and in closing argument, tell you that the defendants denied that smoking was addictive. well, let us look at what the surgeon general said in 1964 in the report. what the surgeon general said was smoking was not addictive. smoking was a habit. and the reason why is the definition at the time required that the substance be intoxicating. and cigarettes are not intoxicating. but, having said that, the surgeon general said, thus, correctly designating the chronic use of tobacco as habituation rather than addiction carries with it no implication that the habit may 4200 be broken easily. the bottom line is people have known for a very, very, very long time that if you start smoking, it can be hard to quit. for some people it is harder than others. it does not matter whether you call it an addiction or dependence or a habit, it is behavior that is important. and people have understood behavior. now, 30 years later, mr. wichmann showed you 30 years later the congressional hearings where they had the cigarette company executives raise their hand, and they asked them, do you think smoking is addictive? and you just watched that just before we went to lunch. and congressmen wyden said okay. let us make this short. let us go through. i want to ask you. he asked the first person. he says i believe it is not addictive. they went to the second person. and do you remember what he said? what he tried to say? he said, congressman, i do not believe they are addictive. they do not meet the classic definition. they are not intoxicating. and the congressman cut him off. the congressman cut him off. he was trying to explain 4201 what his view was. you know, i do not know about you guys, but, you know, my experience is that lots of times congressmen are more interested in hearing themselves talk than hearing the witnesses talk. that is why i like a court of law, because everybody gets to talk, as long as the judge says it is okay. everybody gets to tell their side of the story. so i tell you that just for context, because i'm sure when you are hearing these guys say it is not addictive, you are saying, are they crazy? but that is why they were saying what they were saying. we will talk more about that. but i think it is important to add some context when you are evaluating statements and snippets that the plaintiffs are putting before you. so as a result of the '64 surgeon general's report, congress got involved. they held hearings. they passed something called the federal cigarette labeling act that required warnings to go on every pack of cigarettes, starting in 1966. you heard dr. proctor tell you, congress told the companies exactly what the warnings would say, how big it would be, what the 4202 type was, where on the pack it would be. here was the first warning. caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. and john campbell says he remembers that warning. he said he remembers when that warning went on the pack. and if you think about it, of course he would. it was a big deal. it is not like today where there is warnings on everything. there is a warning that coffee is hot. i'm not saying those are bad things, but we are now saturated with a warning society. but back then, you had a warning slapped on a consumer product after the '64 report. it was a very big deal. four years later, congress changed the warning. they amended the law and said, now it will say, warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. they strengthened the warning. this warning was on the pack for the next 15 years. this is the warning that was on the pack when john and judy campbell met. and john told you that judy was aware of the warning. in fact, he told you that when they were dating, john used to say to 4203 judy, do not you know that cigarettes are hazardous to your health and them things are going to kill you? do you remember what judy would say? well, you are smoking too. why are you bothering me? practice what you preach. after they were married, the roles reversed. judy would tell john, those things are going to kill you. and john would reply, yeah. if they kill me, they will kill you too, because we are both doing it. you heard mr. tepikian play the part of ed haponski, the brother-in-law. you remember, ed was married to imogene. and ed stopped smoking in 1970 when he saw the surgeon general's report, and he remembered he had a hernia operation, so he quit. and like, you know, people who stop doing things that are bad for them, we like to tell everybody else that they should stop too. so he was telling jean and judy they should quit. and he said that he would tell them, you are killing yourselves. and whenever they would smoke a cigarette, he said, you are putting another nail in 4204 your coffin. and jean would say, yep, another nail. and he remembers one time -- he remembers one time where he took a pack and he showed the warning to both judy and jean. and do you remember what they did? do you remember? they laughed. they laughed at him and they said -- remember what they said? you have got to die of something. there is no question that for decades, literally for decades before judy quit smoking, both john campbell and judy campbell understood that smoking was risky and could kill them. in 1985, 22 years before judy campbell died of emphysema, the warnings changed to specifically say, surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease and emphysema, and quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health. and that is important, and it is really important because it is undisputed that if a person quits smoking before they get copd or emphysema, they will not get it, at least not from smoking. you heard dr. schroeder tell you that if a person quits smoking when their copd is only mild, 4205 it will not progress any worse. you saw the pfts on the -- on monday where even after all those years of smoking and as bad as mrs. campbell's copd got, when she stopped, her pfts stopped getting worse. so it is an important piece of information. 1985. it causes emphysema. quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health. so let us talk about quitting smoking. and one thing i want to make sure that i clear up -- and we will talk about this in the context of the jury instructions too. in order to be a member of the engle class, plaintiff has to prove two things: that mrs. campbell was addicted and that her addiction was a legal cause of her copd. so you have to prove both addiction and that but for her addiction, she would have quit smoking and would not have died from copd. we will talk about legal cause, but that is what it means. so that raises a question, why did she wait so long to quit? we know she had the ability to quit, because she did. why did she wait until her copd got so bad before she quit? 4206 well, dr. brady told you that the single most important factor in quitting smoking is motivation and persistence. dr. brady told you she believes anyone can change their behavior when they are sufficiently committed to doing it. and the best example i can think of for this case is how judy gave up alcohol. you remember there was a time in her life when she was a heavy drinker. and you have all heard that evidence. we do not need to go through it. but then her mother was killed by a drunk driver, and so judy made the decision to quit drinking. and so what she did is she put her alcohol down and she never drank again. and mr. campbell told you that she was fidgety and she was irritable when she quit drinking. those are withdrawal symptoms. that is exactly what they were. he said that she craved alcohol for several months after she quit. do you remember what she told her husband? she says it is one of the hardest things that she ever did. but, again, she quit and she never drank again, even though she had the same triggers, because mr. campbell continued to drink for another decade. what dr. brady told you was that judy 4207 campbell quit drinking when she was sufficiently motivated to quit drinking. and she also told you -- and these were dr. brady's words -- that mrs. campbell quit smoking when she was sufficiently motivated to quit smoking. members of the jury, any time mrs. campbell wanted to, she could have employed the very same skills that she used to quit drinking to quit smoking. but she chose to continue to smoke for another 10 years. during closing, mr. wichmann said that judy was only able to quit when she was in the hospital. it took her being in the hospital for her to be able to quit. so let us look at something else we saw with dr. brady. do you remember, we used this smart move to stop smoking guide. it is written by a colleague of hers at the university of south carolina. it is used by the american cancer society to help people stop smoking. and here is the quiz that they have you take. do you have what it takes to stop smoking? there is no magic cure that can help you stop. i asked dr. brady, do you agree with that? she goes, absolutely. 4208 take this short quiz to find out if you have what it takes. question 1. do you want to stop smoking? and dr. brady said, you absolutely have to want to stop smoking. are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? these are the triggers we are talking about. you heard that there are certain situations we associate with smoking or drinking or whatever. are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? three. are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? well, some people have withdrawal symptoms. not everybody, but some do. and what dr. brady told you, just like what the american cancer society told you, or tells you, if you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking. dr. brady told you she knows no one who can truly answer yes to these three questions who cannot stop smoking. so with that, i have a question for you. you know, i think it would be really important to know 4209 what judy campbell's answers to these questions would have been at various points in time. did she truly want to stop smoking? was she willing to make some changes in her routine? was she willing to put up with some uneasy moments? the reason why is that one of the last things that mr. campbell admitted on cross-examination was that his wife could have quit smoking earlier, but she did not want to give it up. that is what mr. campbell told you. she could have quit smoking earlier, but she did not want to give it up. and the bottom line is, you have to want to quit and you have to try to quit. and you do not need an expert to tell you that. you do not need a lawyer to tell you that. that is common sense. we all know that. so let us talk about the efforts that judy did make to quit smoking. the evidence was she never asked a doctor for help in quitting. we will talk about the '92 patch, believe me, in a little while. she never threw away her ashtrays or her cigarettes or her lighters. that is important, because if you are really going to quit, why do you 4210 need that stuff anymore? you know, i'm going to quit, but i'm just going to keep this stuff around in case i do not quit? she never asked her husband for help quitting. and similarly, and importantly, mr. campbell never asked his wife to quit. he told you why. i asked him that question. he told you why. do you remember what he said? he said he believes that, quote, when you are an adult, you do whatever it is that you want, because you are responsible for yourself. that is not lawyer argument. that came from mr. campbell on the witness stand. in fact, mr. campbell told you on direct examination, i made up my mind i was not going to quit until i was ready to quit. members of the jury, the fact is that was john and judy campbell's mindset when they were together. they did exactly what they wanted to do when they wanted to do that. and that is okay. you know, as long as you are not hurting somebody else, that is okay. we have got a lot of freedom to choose how we want to live our lives. and let me address one thing that mr. 4211 wichmann said in his closing argument. no one, no one is suggesting that mrs. campbell was a bad person or a bad mother. no one is making that suggestion. what we are suggesting is that she was a strong person who knew how she wanted to live her life, and she lived her life making her own choices. so mr. campbell testified in his deposition he could think of three times in mrs. campbell's entire life that she quit smoking. he told you that quit for three or four days in 1985. we know that she quit for six days in 1987. he told us that in the deposition, and we have the journal. and we know she quit for good in 1996. so let us talk about those quits. and while it is true that ninety percent of people quit on their own without any kind of help, it certainly is true we have more stop-smoking aids now than we used to. back in '84 you had nicorette gum. so there were nicotine replacement therapies on the market before judy campbell's first quit attempt. it was prescription only. but i just tell you that, because you heard it from dr. brady, and i'm just kind of putting it in the context of kind of her attempts. 4212 so what mr. campbell told you was that in 1985 his wife quit smoking for three or four days. she tried to quit by going cold turkey. you remember, she also bought an artificial cigarette so she would have something to hold in her hand. mr. campbell tells you, he does not know why she tried to quit. and he told you he does not know why she went back to smoking. he did not try to quit with her. she did not ask him to quit with her. all he knows is that three or four days after she stopped smoking, he came home and he noticed that she was smoking again. and he said to her, well, i guess that did not go very far, did it? they never talked about it after that. and as far as we know, that was the first time judy campbell tried to quit. two years later, in 1987, they were both talking about cutting back on smoking, because you remember, they said cigarettes were getting expensive. so they were going to try to cut back to about a pack a day. and mr. campbell actually quit for seven days, and we know from her journal that mrs. campbell quit for six days. and you are going to have that journal. 4213 and like mr. wichmann, i suggest you read that journal. it is not that often you get a review of somebody's realtime thoughts. and not in the context of a lawsuit, somebody's realtime thoughts as they are doing something. mrs. campbell talked about why she decided to quit and what she understood the benefits of quitting to be. so first she said, this is the second day for johnny and his attempt to stop. it has made me really do a lot of serious thinking about quitting myself. so she decided she was going to quit too, and she decided she was going to surprise him. she picked a quit date of october 31st, 1987. remember, i talked with dr. brady. it was a coincidence, because it was halloween. remember, she got married on halloween to les strickland. and it was actually dr. brady that said, yeah, her first quit attempt was -- or the '87 quit attempt was on halloween too. now, in opening statement, mr. wichmann told you that in 1987 judy campbell tried to quit smoking and john campbell was there helping her and supporting her. 4214 and i told you no, the evidence would be that mr. campbell did not even know she was trying to quit in 1987. now, the judge has told you what the lawyers say is not evidence. evidence comes from the witness stand, from the documents. but let us look and see what the evidence was. this is from judy campbell's journal. i think i'll keep it a secret as long as i can. well, today is the day. so far i'm doing real good, i think. i hope i can keep it a secret for a few days. johnny still has not guessed that i have quit smoking. i wonder how long it will take for him to figure it out? you may remember when he was testifying -- i cross-examined him on that -- he waffled. you know, it was not clear whether he did know or did not know, whether he found out. so i confronted him with his deposition testimony where he said, i did not know she was trying to quit when i was trying to quit, just like she tried to quit and i did not try to quit in 1985. why do i tell you that? because dr. brady told you that people are more likely to quit if 4215 they get the support and encouragement of their family and their friends. that is common sense too. you know, if the people we love and care about and care about us, help us, then you are more likely to quit. and frankly, there is no credible evidence that mr. campbell ever did that. mrs. campbell also talked about the good things that would come from quitting smoking. she wrote that quitting smoking -- she could look forward to a longer life and more energy and breathing better and no hacking cough. she also wrote that after two days of quitting, i'm coughing less now. you remember that dr. schroeder told you why that was significant. he told you that with emphysema, it is caused by chronic irritants from cigarette smoke. and if you continue to suck those chronic irritants in, it causes you to cough and have symptoms. but when you stop smoking, even for a couple of days, you are not dosing yourself with those irritants; you are not irritating your passages. so she wrote, i'm coughing less now after two days. again, she associated that with her smoking. 4216 the last entry in her journal. made it six days. maybe next time. and the evidence was, members of the jury, that judy campbell did not try to quit smoking again until march 1996, when she went in the hospital. all right, sir. let us talk about the 1992 patch for just a few minutes. here's the medical record. this is dr. frank. we have been all through this record. this is the one that talks about copd too. we will talk about this. and it says, she has agreed to stop smoking, and we will try her on habitrol patches. you probably cannot see it, but it says, she will take 21 milligrams for 28 days and 14 milligrams for 14 days and then 7 milligrams for 14 days. now, in opening statement, mr. wichmann told you that mrs. campbell used the nicotine patch in 1992. and i told you this is the first time in the history of this lawsuit anyone has ever suggested that mrs. campbell used the nicotine patch. i told you that mr. campbell gave his deposition for four days over a two-year period and never once mentioned it. on 4217 cross-examination, dr. brady confirmed that was true. dr. schroeder confirmed that was true too. obviously, i was not going to bore you by reading all, you know, four days of the depositions. but you had both dr. brady and schroeder tell you that was true. and you remember, i piled all those depositions up with the errata sheets in front of mr. campbell, and i confronted him with his deposition where he testified unequivocally that mrs. campbell made three and only three attempts to quit smoking. i read him the questions and answers. question: so there was a 1985 quit and a 1987 quit, and then we have the 1996 quit, correct? answer: correct. any other quits you can recall? answer: no. now, you learn from dr. brady that in 1992, the patch was only available by prescription. has plaintiff shown you any records that mrs. campbell filled a prescription? of course not, because there are none. so when dr. brady took the stand, mr. wichmann showed this record and asked dr. brady 4218 whether detail people from pharmaceutical companies give out free samples to doctors. and, of course, they do. and then they speculated that maybe that is how mrs. campbell got the nicotine patches. now, on cross-examination, dr. brady conceded there is no evidence in the record, none whatsoever, that she ever used a patch. none of her children testified about it. none of the witnesses testified about it. there is no evidence in the medical records she testified about it. there is no prescription records she testified about it. then mr. campbell took the stand. and, of course he is been here the entire trial listening to opening statement, listening to all the evidence. and when he took the stand, he said not only did his wife use the patch, he was with her that day in dr. frank's office and he watched dr. frank put the patch on her arm. and he said, when they went home, he would put the patch on her arm. and i asked him, why did not you tell us that in your deposition or in any of the errata sheets? and he said, i forgot. 4219 is that something you would forget? it is a new drug, it is a new medication, you say that you literally saw the doctor put it on her arm. so i said, okay. well, so then you were in the office with your wife and dr. frank in 1992 when your wife -- when dr. frank told your wife that she had copd, she had changes with copd, and that the x-ray that was just taken that day showed severe emphysematous changes in both lungs? remember, i asked him that. he said, i do not remember anything about that. told you he did not remember the records from 1990, when his wife was -- was diagnosed with copd. he did not know in 1991 his wife had a chest x-ray. he did not know in 1992 his wife had a chest x-ray. but he remembers the nicotine patches? well, let me tell you something. it is really not a big deal whether she ever used the patch, because if she did, what it means is that in 40 years, instead of trying to quit three times, she tried to quit four times. and it really does not change anything. but i will tell you something. the only evidence we have that that ever happened was here at trial. and so candidly, you need to 4220 decide in this case whether mr. campbell is being straight with you. because if you decide he is not, that is a very big deal. so let us talk about the next topic. what, if anything, defendants did to cause mrs. campbell to smoke and get sick? i told you in opening statement that if you look back at the millions of pages written by the thousands of employees of philip morris and other tobacco companies, you would see they said some dumb things. you certainly now know that it is true. and i said, you would see statements where they said it is not proven that smoking causes lung cancer, and it is not proven that smoking was addictive. and i told you in opening statement the evidence would be that the companies hung their hats on too many technical distinctions and they hung on to those for way too long. but i want you to think about how plaintiff showed you those documents. what plaintiff did was they literally took out of context snippets from a series of documents written 40 and 50 and 60 years ago, and they put them in front of dr. proctor, and they said, tell us their 4221 historical significance. no one made any effort to tie any of those documents to mrs. campbell. and those documents did not tell the whole story. let me just give you a few examples. you remember they showed you a 1961 philip morris research memo that showed the partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens. and, of course, carcinogens are cancer-causing agents. even today, in his closing argument, mr. wichmann said this was a secret philip morris document and it was kept secret until 1999. and he tried to suggest to you that philip morris knew something that the surgeon general did not know and that public health did not know. it was not until cross-examination that you learned that this list came from the published literature. anyone who wanted to look, including the surgeon general, had access to this information. this was not something philip morris knew that the public health and surgeon general did not know. and, in fact, it was not until cross-examination that you learned that philip morris actually gave the list to the 4222 surgeon general seven months before the surgeon general's report. and i showed you, remember? i showed dr. proctor, i said these were polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. they are carcinogens, right? here is benzo[a]pyrene, right? here is ammonia. here is arsenic. all this was given to the surgeon general seven months before the surgeon general's report, right? he said, right. but i pointed out what they said in the letter. none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in amounts reported in smoke. and then i talked with dr. proctor about dose response. do you remember that? and dr. proctor said that there is carcinogens all around us. there is cancer-causing agents in the air we breathe, in the water we drink, in the foods that we eat. but carcinogens do not cause problems until you ingest them in large enough amounts. remember, i talked about radiation. i talked about there is no question that radiation causes all kinds of cancers. we know that, of course. 4223 but we also know that small amounts of radiation are used in x-rays, and they are used actually to treat cancer. so the bottom line is, when dr. proctor and mr. wichmann tried to suggest that philip morris knew something that the surgeon general did not know and we kept it from them, it is not true. here is two documents that show that is not true. dr. proctor and mr. wichmann also tried to suggest that philip morris and reynolds knew smoking -- people smoked for nicotine and tried to keep that information from the public. in fact, in his closing argument today, he said the defendants kept it secret that people smoked for nicotine. well, frankly, that is just silly. first of all, you saw in the 1906 health notes, it said smoking is the worst form of addiction. dr. proctor admitted it is been known since the 1900s that smokers smoked for the pharmacological effects of nicotine. and i showed you these documents. this is a speech that was given by bill dunn, a researcher at philip morris, in 1972. and it refers to a conference they had. we talked about it. present 4224 at this speech were people from the national cancer institute, from the surgeon general's office, and from the department of agricultural, where dr. dunn is saying, the majority of the conferees would go even further and accept the proposition that nicotine is the active constituent of cigarette smoke. without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. so here is a philip morris researcher in 1972 giving a public speech where the surgeon general's representatives are there, the national cancer institute is there, saying people smoke for nicotine. after the speech, he was interviewed in the newspaper and said, the other two propositions from the group stated the main ingredient in cigarette smoke which produces the physical response is nicotine, and that the sought-after responses result in psychological efficiency. so he gave a speech, then gave an interview where he said, hey, it is nicotine, and then he wrote a book, or published a book. and they talk about here the neuropsychopharmacology of nicotine. nicotine is a reinforcing agent, so on, etc. 4225 the bottom line is if philip morris was trying to hide that it believed that nicotine was the important reason people smoke, it did it in kind of an odd way of doing it, do not you think? a speech, an interview, and a book? and what you did not learn until cross -- you did not see any of this until cross. but dr. proctor has this book in his own library. the surgeon general has published it in several reports. but again, it was not until i brought it up on cross-examination that you learned about it. one last example. they showed you this document written by george weissman, senior vice-president, and joe cullman, ceo, after the '64 surgeon general's report. however, at some point, reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. that sounds really bad, does not it? i watched your faces when you saw that document, and i know you thought that sounds really bad. but what you did not learn until cross-examination, george weissman did not make up the term 4226 "psychological crutch." it is discussed in the '64 surgeon general's report that the memo is addressing. it is under beneficial effects of tobacco. here is what the surgeon general said. the drive to use tobacco, being fundamentally psychogenic in origin, has the same basis as other drug habits and in a large fraction of the american population appears to satisfy the total need of the individual for a psychological crutch. then to bring it to full circle, they did not show you this either. here -- i showed you on cross-examination. here was the last sentence or paragraph in mr. weissman's memo. in closing, the main essence of the report and the publicity to me is that it has still left smoking on an individual basis, the individual's own choice of the psychological benefit versus the alleged hazard. anything that impinges on the right of the individual to make this choice is contrary to our most basic traditions. i'm not going to go through all the documents and respond tit for tat. a, we do not have time; b, you are not interested; and c, that is really not the issue in the case. 4227 but my point is, there are two sides to every story. and it is important to have the context. you remember, i told you -- we talked in jury selection. i said for those of us who are parents, how many have a couple kids that are close to age with each other? i said, so, you know, did you ever have the experience where your son came up and said, look what my sister did. she is two years older, blah, blah, blah. daddy, go punish her. and then you go and you say to your little girl, what happened? the son looks at you like, oh, my god. why do you need to even ask? i told you what happened. there is two sides to every story, and it is important to get the context. let me talk about one more thing. you have seen lots of statements where the company said it is not proven; it has not been proven; it may or may not; it is not psychological -- or it is not scientifically proven. what you did not learn until cross-examination was why the companies took that position. the companies' position was statistics cannot prove 4228 causation. it is evidence, but it is not proof. and the reason why they said that was because 85 to ninety percent of cigarette smokers do not get lung cancer; that nonsmokers get lung cancer too; therefore, smoking is not a necessary and sufficient cause of lung cancer. and the companies said, something else must be going on, because, you know, people are smoking and not getting lung cancer. dr. proctor also told you that even today, in 2013, we do not know the specific constituent or combination of constituents that cause lung cancer. do we know smoking causes it? of course we do. are those arguments technical and do they hang onto them too long? yes, they did. are the arguments particularly credible? no, they are not. in hindsight, would the companies have been better off in 1964, when the surgeon general said smoking causes cancer, to either say, we agree, or nothing at all? of course they should have. and they did not. so sitting in this courtroom, you can say, what a bunch of nitwits. what were those guys thinking? and you are certainly entitled to that view. 4229 but let me tell you something. unless plaintiff proves that mrs. campbell heard those statements and she was fooled by those statements and she relied on those statements, then they have nothing to do with this lawsuit, because it is john campbell's lawsuit, and the issue is why did judy campbell smoke and why did not she quit? so let us look at the evidence. in opening statement, mr. wichmann has suggested defendants somehow misled mrs. campbell into becoming a smoker. well, you have seen the questionnaire. we have talked about that. we do not need to talk about that again. we heard about the 1950s. it is something called the frank statement. well, what you heard from mr. campbell is that he did not know what the frank statement was. he never heard judy campbell talk about it. judy was 12 years old when the frank statement was published. there was no evidence it was published in the newspaper in the little town where she lived. she was not a smoker then anyhow. you heard about the tobacco institute and the council for tobacco research and the tirc. but, 4230 again, mr. campbell told you he would never heard of any of those organizations. he never discussed them with his wife. there is simply no evidence that any of those organizations or anything they said or did had any influence on mrs. campbell. and again, you know, i got back to what mr. wichmann had to say. ultimately your job is to compare the lawyers' theories with the evidence in the case. you know, i told you in opening statement that the case is about judy campbell and why she smoked. i suggested that as you listen to the evidence, you should ask yourself, what does this have to do with mrs. campbell? and if the answer is nothing, then why are you hearing about it? so with that said, let us talk just very briefly about dr. proctor. dr. proctor candidly admitted he has an ax to grind with the tobacco companies. he told you three of four grandparents died of smoking-related disease. he was very up front. he said he would like to put the tobacco companies out of the cigarette business. and he is getting rich in the process. to even agree to take a case, he takes a 4231 $5,000 signing fee whether he does anything or not. he charges $4,800 a day to fly here, to testify for each day, and to fly back. he admitted that since 2009, he is testified in over 30 trials in florida alone and has been paid over a million dollars. his testimony is the same at every trial. he told you he knows nothing about judy campbell. remember when i started to try asking him about judy campbell, he said, i do not know anything about her. the only thing i know about judy campbell is what mr. wichmann told me in a 15-minute conversation before my deposition. he concedes he knows nothing about the facts of judy campbell's life or what influenced her, why she made the decision she made. so those are the facts. so the question is, how do those facts help us decide this case? are you guys doing okay? do you need a break? we have been going about an hour. everybody okay? okay. the first question you will be asked to decide on the verdict form is this one. it is the class membership question. was judy campbell addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was this addiction 4232 a legal cause of judy campbell's chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? i will show you the legal cause definition in a minute, but i wanted to point one thing out. it says was this addiction a legal cause. and mr. wichmann or mr. millard pointed out, it does not have to be the only cause. there can be other causes, but it must be a legal cause. so the plaintiff has to prove both of those. they have to prove that she was, in fact, addicted, and that her addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause. let us talk about addiction first. there is nothing in the jury instructions that defines addiction. that is something you have to decide for yourself. you remember that the definition of addiction has changed over time. dr. brady told you that the definition of addiction is different now than it was when she was trained. you have already seen that until 1988, the surgeon general said smoking was not addictive because it was not intoxicating. in 1988, the surgeon general adopted a different definition and now says cigarette smoking is intoxicating. dr. brady told you what her definition is. 4233 she says it is a nida, a national institute of drug abuse, definition, and she said addiction is a chronic, relapsing brain disease. so if that is the definition, does it apply to mrs. campbell? the evidence was that during the 40 years that mrs. campbell smoked, she made two attempts to quit smoking before she quit for good. she quit for three days in 1985 and six days in 1987. is that evidence that she suffered from a chronic relapsing brain disease? because that is what the evidence is. does that persuade you she suffered from chronic relapsing brain disease? here is plaintiff's argument in a nut shell. she did not quit until she got sick, therefore, she is addicted. smoking can be addictive, she did not quit, therefore, she is addicted. where is the evidence of that? where is the evidence of that? dr. brady talked about brain changes. but she admitted she does not know if mrs. campbell had any significant brain changes. so you can adopt that definition and apply it however you want to, or you can just disregard that definition completely and you can just 4234 decide, hey, you know what? if she smoked for, you know, for 35 or 40 years, a pack and a half, two packs a day, she was addicted. you can do whatever definition you want. and i will tell you, frankly, i'm not sure it really makes a lot of difference. and let me tell you why. because plaintiff has to prove more than she was addicted. he has to prove that an addiction was a legal cause. and the evidence is that it was not. now, if you remember in jury selection and in opening statement, i talked to you about the difference between a cause in fact and a legal cause. and you remember, i gave you the analogy of the guy that steps out in the street and gets hit by a truck. so i step out in the street and i get smushed by a truck. what was the cause in fact? i got smushed by a truck. right? but what was the legal cause? you need to know more. you need to know why i got hit by the truck. did i ignore the warning light? did i have ear buds in, was not paying attention? was the truck driver speeding or, you know, messing with his or her radio. you need to know why. so let us look at the legal cause of 4235 instruction. and let me just tell you, it is a mouthful. and let me just tell you, you can ignore everything below the highlighted portion, because all that says is there can be more than one legal cause. i have already told you that. there can be more legal cause. let us look at the definition. an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or medical condition if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition so it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such disease or medical condition would not have been suffered. in other words, plaintiff has to prove that if mrs. campbell had not been addicted, she would have quit smoking and she would not have gotten sick. that is what the "but for" means, that if she was not addicted, she would have quit and she would not have gotten sick. there was no evidence of that whatsoever. none. dr. brady told you that all smokers, 4236 including addicted smokers, have the ability to quit smoking. the evidence was that 60 million americans have quit, ninety percent on their own. and dr. brady told you the vast majority of those people were addicted. dr. brady told you the vast majority of those had changes to their brain. the bottom line is, addicted smokers quit each and every day. now, let me be clear. i'm not saying it is easy for everybody to quit smoking. for some people it is hard, and they have to try more than once. may have to try several times. for some people it is easy. but it is undisputed that even addicted smokers can and do quit. and the bottom line is, addicted smokers quit when they make up their minds it is more important for them not to smoke than it is to smoke. so where is the evidence? where is the evidence that mrs. campbell was any different from the 60 million americans who have quit? where was the evidence? there was none. dr. brady told you mrs. campbell always had the ability to quit whenever she was sufficiently motivated to quit. mr. campbell told you that too. mr. campbell 4237 told you she could have quit smoking earlier, but she did not want to give it up. those were his words. she did not want to give it up. and addiction to nicotine did not prevent mrs. campbell from quitting smoking earlier. and there is no evidence that it did. and we know she had the ability to quit, because she did quit. members of the jury, the evidence is compelling that addiction to nicotine was not a legal cause of mrs. campbell's copd. an addiction to nicotine did not prevent her from smoking earlier. not a single witness in this case took the stand and told you that nicotine was a cause of mrs. campbell's copd. this is plaintiff's burden. plaintiff failed to meet their burden. if you agree that is the evidence, then you check no, you knock on the door, and you tell deputy nance that you have reached your verdict. let us go to the second question. and mr. millard made it clear this one is our burden of proof. this is the statute of limitations. we have the burden of proving this. if you disagree with me and you believe that mrs. campbell was a member of the class, then you consider question 2. 4238 and question 2 asks: did judy campbell have copd before may 5th, 1990? now, let me point out that does not say, was judy campbell diagnosed with copd? we heard a lot about diagnosis, but that is not what the question asks and that is not the standard. it says, did judy campbell have copd before may 5th, 1990, and, if so, did judy campbell know or should she have reasonably known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking? i have a chart that lays out the medical evidence. to kind of orient you, here is may 5th, 1990. this is the cutoff. on here are all these medical records that we have been talking about. on this side is the evidence i say what she knew. and we will talk about the medical record and we will talk about the journal. okay. let us go to the first question. did judy campbell have copd before may 5th, 1990? well, that is easy, because it is undisputed. dr. martinez-salas, the very first witness who took the stand, the doctor they described as not having a dog in the fight or dog in the race or a pony in the show, who took care of mrs. campbell for 11 years, told you that she did. 4239 dr. martinez-salas -- check your notes -- told you that she did. he told you that, if he had been her doctor on may 5th, 1990, he would have diagnosed her with copd. dr. martinez-salas told you he had -- she had copd long before may 5th, 1990. i was amazed when mr. millard did not admit this. i was flabbergasted. his own witness, martinez-salas, told you that she had it. dr. schroeder said he agreed. the only two lung doctors in the case said, of course she had copd before may 5th, 1990. here is the earliest record. this is september 26th, 1990. this is just a few months later, right? what does it say? we went through basically the same testimony with both martinez-salas and schroeder. sorry to put you through going through it twice. but you heard it from the first witness. i wanted you to hear it from the last witness, because i did not want you to forget after a week what you heard. the lung fields are hyperinflated. remember, both martinez-salas and schroeder told you what that means. and there is a paucity -- misspelled, should be a "c"; it is spelled correctly in the 4240 other records -- of lung markings in the upper lung fields. he talked to you about what that means too. you get air trapped and your lungs get too big and hyperinflated. they push down the diaphragm. these findings are consistent with copd. conclusion -- "conclusion" means diagnosis, means impression, means whatever you think it means, but it means conclusion. you know, this is when you look at the evidence and here is what you decide. questionable right lower lobe infiltrate. they were concerned about lung cancer, because they saw a nodule on her lung, right lower lobe, and they thought, she is a long-time smoker; she may have lung cancer. the good news is, she did not have lung cancer. the bad news is she had copd. the good news is that she had it and it was not as bad as we get later. this finding may be due to fibrosis and crowding of pulmonary vessels -- we know what crowding of pulmonary vessels means -- secondary to copd. old films would be helpful for further evaluation. both martinez-salas and schroeder both told you that, in doctor speak, "secondary to" means 4241 caused by. so this is just a few months after may 5th, 1990. you already have x-ray evidence that she had copd. now, what else do those two doctors tell you? that a chest x-ray, it is a very insensitive tool for diagnosing copd. it does not pick it up in the early stages. you do not see hyperinflation and crowding of pulmonary vessels and paucity of lung markings until the copd is advanced. so we know it is been there for a long time. both martinez-salas and schroeder told you that. they told you copd is a progressive disease that takes decades to develop. they showed you the chart, how it goes from no copd to mild to moderate to severe to very severe. so members of the jury, i respectfully suggest you check your notes. there is no question, there is absolutely no question that they hit the first part of the test, that she had it before may 5th, 1990. and here is just the other medical records. chest x-ray conclusion in '91, copd; '92, chest x-ray shows severe emphysematous changes. worked on that. office note of copd diagnosis. by the time we get to the pfts, you have two of 4242 them. dr. schroeder told you the real value of the pfts is it tells you how bad it is, because you can stage it and, depending upon the staging, you treat it differently. so that is the real value of the pft. okay. so let us look at the second part of the test. okay. i will put it up in a second. let us talk about -- well, i will come back to it. second part of the test. did judy campbell have copd before may 5th, 1990? and if so, did judy campbell know or should she have reasonably known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that her copd was caused by smoking? well, let me tell you, we will never know what judy campbell knew. we will never know what she actually knew, because she did not testify. and, unfortunately, we do not have all her medical records. but it is not just what she knew; it is, you know, should she have known? would a reasonable person in her shoes have known? so let us just look at the evidence. in 1985 -- you have seen this -- the warning changed to say, smoking causes emphysema. we do know that in 1985 judy campbell quit smoking for 4243 three or four days. we do not know why. mr. campbell says he does not know why, but we do know there is a warning on the pack that says it causes emphysema. we know in 1986 or 1987 that judy's good friend peggy, a long-time cigarette smoker, died of copd. remember mr. campbell told you. they were -- you know, they received an announcement for the funeral. in 1987, judy campbell quit smoking for six days. mr. campbell testified that judy had a smoker's cough before 1987 they both knew was caused by smoking. and in 1987, judy wrote in her journal that, when she quit smoking, she was looking forward to breathing better, being more active, and having no hacking cough. in fact, she wrote, after two days of quitting, i'm coughing less. there is absolutely no question that, by 1987, judy associated her breathing problems and her cough with smoking. and i think we can infer that was one of the reasons she wanted to quit, because i showed you the list in the journal: things to look forward to when i quit smoking. now, dr. brady -- and i told you dr. brady is the bomb. she is a fabulous expert. and she told 4244 you that she believes that judy campbell was addicted under dsm-iv. remember, there was seven criteria. she said she hit all seven. and here was the seventh one. now, remember they never showed you this on direct examination. this is what she was relying on to diagnose her. i'm the one that showed it to you on cross-examination. and i think you are going to see why. so the seventh criteria, which dr. brady said judy campbell met, says, the substance use is continued despite knowledge -- despite knowledge, members of the jury -- of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance. you do not meet this criterion unless you know that you are having problems caused by the use of the substance. and dr. brady said judy campbell met this criterion in 1987 based on her journal. and let us go through it. she said, based on judy's description in her 1987 journal, that she had a hacking cough and breathing problems that she associated it with smoking, that were exacerbated by her smoking. their own expert -- their own expert told you 4245 that part of the reason she believes that mrs. campbell was addicted is because she was still smoking and she knew she was having problems smoking and she knew that in 1987 and she knew what those problems were. their own expert told you that. and then, finally, we do have judy's own words. and, you know what, i will admit it is not nearly as detailed as her journal was, but dr. martinez-salas sent her to a respiratory therapist and they asked her, you know, what is the problem. chief complaint, dyspnea. she probably did not use that word. she probably said, i'm short of breath, or, i have trouble breathing. and, of course, the respiratory therapist wrote dyspnea, because that is a medical term and everybody knows what that means. on exertion -- dyspnea on exertion, onset date 1988. and it was signed by judy campbell. so this is not just some record, you know, that someone is going through it and they are making notes and maybe they get it right or maybe they do not. this was a record that they actually had judy campbell sign. i think we can infer they went through it with her, because it is going to be 4246 for respiratory therapy. they want to get the patient's buy-in on it. so we have that information. we have the journal. we have dr. brady's testimony under dsm-iv, seven. we have got judy's own words. we have her husband saying that she had a smoker's cough in 1987 they both believed was caused by smoking. so we will never know -- we will never know whether a doctor told judy campbell before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd caused by smoking. we will never know that. but that is not the test. and here is what we do know. we know beyond a doubt that she already had copd caused by smoking. schroeder told you that. martinez-salas told you that. these records tell you that. common sense tells you that. and we know she had been experiencing symptoms of her copd for years before that date and that she associated those symptoms with her smoking and that she was hoping those symptoms would get better when she quit smoking. dr. schroeder told you that when people get short of breath with activity, that is one of the classic symptoms people have that cause them to 4247 come to the doctor and get diagnosed with copd. members of the jury, i suggest there is no doubt that if judy campbell would have gone to the doctor in january of 1990 or in 1989 or in 1988 or in 1987, she would have been diagnosed with copd. and if you believe that a reasonable person in judy campbell's shoes, with her symptoms and her smoking history and her knowledge of the risk of smoking, should have gone to the doctor and got that checked out, if you believe that is what a reasonable person would have done between '87 and '88 and '89, then you should check yes, because the question is, did judy campbell have copd before may 5th? yes. and if so, did she know -- we do not know -- or should she have reasonably known before may 5th she had copd that was caused by smoking? if you believe a reasonable person would have gone to the doctor with the information she had, the symptoms she had, and checked it out -- mr. millard: i will object. misstates the legal standard. the court: well -- mr. millard: it is whether she knew she had copd, not whether she went to the doctor. 4248 the court: i'm going to just ask the jury to rely on the jury instructions on the law they have been given. and this is -- a certain latitude is allowed for closing argument, and i'll ask the jurors to rely on their own memory of the evidence. mr. cofer: thank you, your honor. bottom line is, had she gone to the doctor, would she have been diagnosed? would a person with the symptoms and the smoking history and the knowledge she had have gone to the doctor? would a reasonable person have done that? if you think the answer is yes, then you check yes, you knock on the door, and you tell deputy nance that you have your verdict. question 3, the answer is no. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of judy campbell's death? i will not go through it again, but for all the reasons we discussed legal cause, the answer is no, if you get that far. okay. i'm going to take the next two together. these are questions 4 or 5 -- 4 and 5. the first says, did judy campbell reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission by 4249 one or both of the defendants of material information not otherwise known or available, or one or more of the defendants' failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking? and it is before may 5th, '82, after may 5th, '82. the next question, did judy campbell reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission by one or both of the defendants or any of the other companies involved in the conspiracy? so it is the same question. the first question is, did she rely to her detriment on concealment or omission? the second is, did she reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission as a result of conspiracy? members of the jury, there is no evidence that mrs. campbell relied on anything philip morris or r.j. reynolds ever said or did not say. where is the evidence? there is none. mr. campbell admitted they were both aware of the warnings. he admitted they both understood that smoking could kill them. he told you, we were just hoping it would not happen to us. you saw the questionnaire where she said she 4250 did not start smoking because of advertising. she smoked because it was forbidden and she liked it. you have already heard, and you heard mr. campbell tell you, that mrs. campbell never saw the frank statement, she never heard of ctr, she never heard of tirc, she never heard of the tobacco institute. you have heard that they have known -- basically mr. campbell has known since he was a teenager, when his mother told him before he ever started smoking, and he communicated that to his wife through jokes. dr. proctor admitted that his testimony has nothing to do with judy campbell, and he does not know anything about judy campbell's smoking history. members of the jury, there is absolutely no evidence that anything the companies ever did or did not do, say or did not say, caused her to begin or continue smoking. there is no evidence of that. and i will -- and my suggestion is that the answer is no to all those questions. but let me talk to you just for a minute, since it is broken out by time both before and after may 5th, '82. let us talk specifically about 4251 may -- after may 5th, 1982. the evidence is clear that mrs. campbell could not have reasonably relied -- she could not have reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement made by philip morris or reynolds after may 5th, '82. she was a 41-year-old woman. it is undisputed she was well aware of the risks of smoking. the warnings had been on the packs since 1966. cigarette ads had been off tv since -- for 11 years, since 1971. back in the '70s, the decade before, she joked with her husband that smoking could kill us. ed haponski showed her the warning and said, see the warning; laughed; you have got to die from something. there is absolutely no evidence, members of the jury, and i suggest to you based on the evidence there is no way there could be any evidence that she could have relied, reasonably relied, to her detriment on anything the companies said or did not say after may 5th, 1982. remember, with respect to the second part of this question, that is not asking about judy williams, the teenager in north carolina. it is asking about judy campbell, the mother of three and the adult that was living in florida. 4252 let me say one more thing about this question. and we are going to talk about this on the next question on the verdict form. you heard mr. wichmann say that judy campbell admits that she is partially at fault for causing her own injuries. and we are going to talk about that on the next one. but if you answer yes to either question 4 or 5, then comparative fault may not apply. even if you decide that judy campbell was ninety percent responsible for her own injuries, if you check "yes" to either question 4 or question 5, then -- mr. wichmann: your honor, i object. mr. cofer: -- comparative fault may not apply. let us have a side bar. mr. wichmann: can we have a side bar on this, sir? the court: yes, sir. mr. cofer: excuse me. [#deleted sidebar#] [#deleted recess#] mr. cofer: we are in the home stretch. we are almost done. thanks for being so patient. you know what? i've probably talked about this enough. the bottom line is there is no evidence either before and after may 5, 1982, that mrs. campbell relied on anything the companies did or did not do, said or did not say. and i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that if you get this far, you check no to each of those questions. and that takes us to the next question, comparative fault. what this says is, please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of judy campbell's death that you charge to r.j. reynolds, philip morris or judy campbell. and you heard, i think it was, mr. millard talk about this. let me tell you something so there is absolutely no confusion. you never get to comparative fault, you never get to this question unless you decide that mrs. campbell was a class member. you never get here. you have to decide that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of her copd or you never get this far. 4264 you never get this far if you decide she is barred by the statute of limitations. i just want to make that clear that you do not get this far. and you will see that on the jury instructions. this is a completely separate question than class membership. this is, if you decide she is a member of the class, if you decide certain other things, then you have an opportunity to decide how much each party is responsible. so let us talk about that for a second. mr. wichmann told you the plaintiff admits that mrs. campbell was at least partially at fault or was partially at fault for causing her copd. i want you to think for just a moment about what that means. it can only mean that mrs. campbell both understood that her smoking was causing her to get sick and that she had the ability to quit in time to avoid getting sick. because if she did not understand her smoking was causing her to get sick and if she did not have the ability to quit, how could she have any fault? how could she have any fault? the very fact that they admit -- that they admit that she is partially at fault, they are admitting that she understood her smoking was making her sick and she could have quit in 4265 time to avoid it. and if you get this far, i suggest you take them at their word and allocate one hundred percent responsibility to judy campbell. and let me tell you why i'm saying that, because only mrs. campbell had the ability to control her decisions whether to smoke or whether to quit. no one else, no other party in this courtroom had the ability to do that. okay. that gets us to damages. if you get this far, the first question is, what is the total amount of damages sustained by john campbell as a result of judy campbell's death, the loss of judy campbell's companionship and protection and for john campbell's pain and suffering, and the second is funeral expenses. as mr. millard told you, we stipulate to the amount of funeral expenses. you will have that number. it is just under $10,000. and if you do decide that john campbell is entitled to recover money, then you should obviously award funeral expenses, because that was what they paid, and we stipulate to that amount if you get that far. i'm not saying he is entitled to recover anything, but if you get that far, we agree on the amount of 4266 funeral expenses. the first question, though, what is the total amount of damages sustained? well, if you get this far, i cannot help you with this. and, you know, i saw that mr. millard suggested somewhere between $9 and $14 million. and i'll be honest with you, i do not know what to even say about that. all i can say is that you sat through this trial and you heard mr. campbell describe his relationship with mrs. campbell. they were married a long time, and she is gone. and you will have to decide, if you get that far, what you think an appropriate amount is. now, that takes us to punitive damages. under the circumstances of this case, state whether punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds and philip morris. let me say a few things. first of all, the question asks you whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted. i want to talk about what clear and convincing evidence means. it is in the jury instructions. but you never get to this question unless you check yes to 4 or 5. you only get to this 4267 question -- it is in the instructions. you can follow it through. they will tell you -- you know, it is like a chinese menu -- where to go. but you only get to this question if you answer yes to questions 4 or 5. if you answer no, you never get to punitive damages. let me tell you what you are being asked to decide. you are being asked to decide -- you are not being asked to decide an amount of punitive damages. you are being asked to decide whether punitive damages are appropriate under the evidence and the legal standard. the issue here must be decided by clear and convincing evidence. and i do not want you to think -- spend one minute thinking about amount, because if you decide the answer is yes, there would be another phase to the trial, plaintiff will put on evidence, reynolds will put on evidence, philip morris will put on evidence, and then you will have an opportunity to determine what the amount is. so do not even think about amount. the issue is whether. so what is it you have to consider? when you look at the instructions, you will see that clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a much 4268 higher standard of proof than the greater weight of the evidence. with respect to punitive damages, you will see that the evidence must be precise -- this is exact wording from the jury instructions -- precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. it is a much higher standard. you must be really, really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate. let me tell you something else. you have to decide, if you get there, that punitive damages are warranted based on the conduct that harmed judy campbell. this is john campbell's case. this is about judy campbell. it is not a class action anymore. other people have the right to bring their own lawsuits. they have the right to have their own juries evaluate their evidence. so this case is about judy campbell and conduct that harmed her. mr. wichmann: your honor, let me object. the instruction 16 -- the court: oh, as to -- mr. wichmann: page 27. the court: as to the explanation that was 4269 given a minute or two ago? mr. wichmann: yes, right. the court: overruled. mr. cofer: thank you. okay. i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that nothing the defendants did or did not do harmed mrs. campbell. we sold cigarettes. we sell cigarettes. that alone cannot be a basis for liability. we cannot be held liable simply for selling cigarettes. the engle findings are not a basis for liability. where is the evidence that we did something that was to judy campbell that warrants punitive damages? the evidence was that mrs. campbell always had the information that she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking. the evidence was at all times that judy campbell had the ability to quit smoking. and let me just say with respect to my client, mr. campbell told you that judy campbell never smoked a product made by philip morris until 1984 or '85, when she was 42 or 43 years old, long after the warnings had been on the pack, long after she understood the risks of smoking. i respectfully suggest that plaintiff has not met 4270 the burden of showing punitive damages, and you should check no for both reynolds and philip morris. this is my chance to say thank you. you guys have been here two and a half weeks. you have been indulgent. you have waited patiently while the lawyers could not get their act together and you had to sit in your room. we apologize for all that. i told you in jury selection -- and i really believe it, and it is true -- we do have the greatest system of justice the world has ever known. even when you read about things that are a little bit haywire, believe me, there are countries all over the world that would beg to have the rights that we have and the system we have. and we only have it because we have people like you who are willing to take three weeks out of your lives to come in and help parties resolve disputes that they cannot resolve on their own. i told you in jury selection, all we wanted was a fair shot. we just wanted an opportunity to tell our side of the story. and i know that you guys have listened to both sides. i know you have done that. i appreciate it very much. so it is an 4271 important case to mr. campbell. it is an important case to philip morris and r.j. reynolds. and on behalf of everyone, thank you very, very much for your service. mr. weaver: counsel, mr. campbell, members of the jury, good afternoon. like anything in life, when we aspire to something, when, for example, we say we want to be intelligent, we want to get smarter, we want to learn a skill -- i want to learn how to play the piano -- or you want to learn something that is foreign to you -- i want to learn how to speak spanish -- in each of those situations there are standards that you have to follow, there are goals that you have to meet, there are obligations that you have to fulfill. and in this context what i would like to focus on at the outset is just reminding you that the burden of proof in this 4272 case is on mr. campbell, mr. wichmann, and mr. millard. it is their responsibility to come to you, not with snippets, not with sound bites, but with facts and evidence, such that you-all can take that facts -- those facts and evidence back into the jury room and help you decide the answers to the questions that you have before you on the jury form. now, when you think about addiction causation or whether or not mrs. campbell was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, one way to look at that, one way to read the instruction, one way to think about that issue would be whether or not mrs. campbell had the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking, or whether nicotine addiction had such control over her that no matter how hard she tried, she chose to continue to smoke. it is as simple as that. could she quit or could she not? it is really as simple as that. the evidence established -- when you know about judy campbell, when you hear what she went through in her life, that she was not someone to let circumstances overwhelm her, she was not someone who did not stand up for herself. you heard a little bit about it in terms of the 4273 evidence, but her first marriage did not go well at all. you did not see the actual documents, but they are in evidence, and you will have them back in the jury room, rjr exhibits no. 89 and 90. when mrs. campbell, at the time mrs. strickland, needed to do something, she filed for divorce. when she did not think she was being treated fairly by her ex-wife [sic], she filed a motion for contempt. she quit drinking in 1981. you heard the evidence from the witness stand that it was one of the hardest things, if not the hardest thing, that she ever had to do. bless you. and she quit smoking in 1996. and she did not go back. she did not relapse. she did not -- she was not drawn back into the product for 11 years. so when you look generally at the issue of class membership, question no. 1, the evidence has been that nicotine did not control judy campbell. judy campbell made her decisions, because i told you about this in opening. she did what she wanted when she wanted to and when she needed to. judy campbell controlled her own destiny. she made her decisions. and like mr. cofer told you, it is not appropriate for you-all to sit here and 4274 second guess her in a court of law. plaintiff has not proven that an addiction to nicotine in cigarettes was the legal cause of mrs. campbell's copd and her death. she is not a class member. you should answer question no. 1 no. in his opening statement, mr. wichmann talked to you about what we refer to as the engle findings, the statements that were issued by the miami jury. and, cliff, if we could go to no. 3, please. these were the engle findings that i showed dr. proctor when he was on the stand. i've blown them up a little bit more so you can see them, because i was punishing dr. proctor unintentionally by not blowing them up. i apologized for that. but those are the engle findings. and i walked dr. proctor through those. and i said, doctor, you say this about the tobacco companies. you say that about the tobacco companies. does not this summarize what your testimony is? and he said yeah. well, what were you shown in opening statement? 4275 3a, please. do you remember this? this is plaintiff's slide from opening statement saying that if you decide mrs. campbell is a class member, then and only then do these findings come into play. well, that got me thinking. that got me thinking about why dr. proctor was here, because mr. wichmann told you in his opening statement that those findings were something that had already been decided, and if circumstances resulted in you getting to that point, you would apply them. but dr. proctor spent three days -- three days answering questions about the engle findings. he admitted that he did not know anything about judy campbell. he admitted that he did not read anything about her. he admitted that he did not do any research about her. he certainly did not go to coats, north carolina. and the only other -- the only time he had ever been to polk county was when he came in to testify before the seven, now six, of you. so why was he here? i'll tell you why he was here. he was here because mr. wichmann and dr. proctor want you to be angry at the 4276 defendants. they want you to be angry at philip morris and at r.j. reynolds. they want you to decide something on emotion as opposed to the facts and the evidence. that is why dr. proctor spent three days of your time re-proving the engle findings. it was plaintiff's job to show you how the companies' conduct was connected to mrs. campbell. number 4, please. you remember i showed you this in opening statement. that question mark represents the burden of proof that the plaintiffs bear in this case. it was their responsibility to fill in that question mark, to make that connection. they have not done it. they have not showed you any wrongful conduct that links to judy campbell. mr. wichmann -- and we will go through these documents. but mr. wichmann points out that many company documents were not made public until 1996. well, they were made public after mrs. campbell quit smoking. so what did those documents have anything to do with judy campbell quitting smoking? they had nothing to do. there was nothing in those documents. and we will talk about that more a 4277 little later. now, i mentioned a sound bite society. whether you turn on cnn or msnbc or nbc, we live in a sound bite society now. we live in clips and quips and snippets. but in a court of law, the sound bite society ends at that door to this chamber, because these lawsuits have to be decided on the facts and the evidence. youth marketing was a very big topic for mr. wichmann and dr. proctor, but neither of them provided you with any evidence that mrs. campbell saw any advertisements. and the only thing that you have seen, in her own handwriting, as mr. cofer pointed out to you, that advertising made no difference. now, santa claus, sports heroes, and movie stars were certainly not unique to r.j. reynolds or philip morris or any company, for that matter. you saw a motor oil ad that was based on glamor and health and beauty, things like that. the ads in that age were nothing unusual, were nothing unique to any tobacco defendant. but let us get in a little bit more to the snippets, the sound bite society, that the plaintiffs want you to try and decide this case 4278 on. if we can go to no. 6, cliff. you remember this document, dr. teague's research planning memorandum? some thoughts on new brands of cigarettes for the youth market. you were shown a clip, a snippet from this document. but what you were not shown is on page 1 of the document, claude teague, a bench chemist, writes, we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start smoking. dr. proctor did not show you that. mr. wichmann did not show you that. they just showed you what they thought you needed to know. if we can go to no. 7, please. you remember this 1984 memo entitled, young adult smokers: strategies and opportunities. this was the 89-page document that i held up and showed dr. proctor, 89 pages. and what dr. proctor showed you was he went to the back of the document to an appendix, found a statistic that was published by the united states government department of health, education and welfare, blew it up, and said this whole document is about that little table published by the u.s. government. but on cross-examination, it was dr. proctor 4279 who was forced to admit that if you go through this document, "young adult smoker" is defined as the age range 18 to 24 over 200 times. ask yourself why dr. proctor went to the back of the document and did not tell you anything about the 206 entries before that table published by the government more adequately defining the age range. finally, there is another few documents i just want to touch on briefly. number 8, please. you will remember these documents. we start in the upper left-hand corner, the cigarette advertising code of 1964. cigarette advertising shall not appear directed primarily to persons under 21 years of age. 1967, my client r.j. reynolds backs out of its sponsorship of the beverly hillbillies because the audience data showed that there were too many people in the age range under 45 years old. 1972, william esty. r.j. reynolds says no to american graffiti. it is not the type of product or film that it wants to be a part of. 1974, the hilton head presentation. sure, there was a reference in there to people under 18. but in the strategy section of that document, you 4280 saw, and dr. proctor admitted, that it was a strategy aimed at 18-to-24-year-olds. 1980, younger adult smokers, terminology. r.j. reynolds' stated policy that it is not the policy of the company to try and get youth involved in the adult custom of smoking. 1990, the memo to all field sales employees, including those in florida, saying it was inappropriate for someone to suggest that we should be increasing sales emphasis -- or emphases near high schools or colleges, things like that. why did you only get half of the story? it is because dr. proctor does this for a living. dr. proctor has, as mr. cofer pointed out, an axe to grind with the industry. with regard to mr. setchell, joel setchell, the man with the sort of frowning goatee, mr. setchell was the one that made it clear every time he answered the question, the only way you can get into the r.j. reynolds consumer database is if you request to be included, if you certify that you are over 21, that you are age-verified to participate, and that you are a smoker. there have been missteps by r.j. reynolds. no doubt about it. but the plaintiff's obligation 4281 here is to show a connection between any wrongful conduct that it claims that r.j. reynolds was involved in and judy campbell. and they have not done that. the last thing that i want to mention -- if we can see no. 11, cliff -- is this in mr. wichmann's opening statement. you remember he was talking about the aftereffect of the mouse skin paintings in life magazine. and the statement was made, the companies got wind of it. they asked their scientists, is there any truth to it? their scientist told them, yeah, there is something to this. what was he talking about when he said that? we learned about it with respect to my client, r.j. reynolds, when dr. proctor was on the stand. dr. proctor talked about a 1953 document that was called a survey of cancer research written by claude teague. and claude teague was the gentleman who all -- all we know about him in this case is that he was a bench chemist. he was a young man. he had been working at reynolds for a couple of years, and he had an assignment or he was given a task. and you know what he did? he went to his office, he got a pad of paper and a 4282 pen, he walked to the library, and he did research on what was in the public domain. he would -- he did research on what articles were already published, what articles were available to the surgeon general, what articles that were available to anybody that walked into a library. and that is what he put in that memo. you did not hear about that from dr. proctor on direct exam, only on cross-examination. but none of that is good enough for dr. proctor. he wants our companies out of business. he wants to come into courtrooms like this all over florida and say, you know what you need to do -- while he is earning his $20,000 a trial -- you know what you need to do? you need to come back with a high plaintiff's verdict, so that is an extra tax on the companies. how objective and unbiased would you expect someone with that perspective on this type of litigation to be? on another subject, the tobacco industry research committee and the ctr, they were disparaged by dr. proctor for worthless research, for concealing scientific information, for misleading the public, when you have things like 4283 the green monster published in the early sixties that the surgeon general said, you know what? this is a great basic reference source. we are going to cite to this in the 1964, the historic 1964 surgeon general's report. but dr. proctor came into this courtroom from across the united states in 2013, and he said, you know what? all of this research does not really give us any information. it is not really important research to the issues of smoking and health. mr. wichmann and dr. proctor talked to you on direct examination about that theory in history called presentism. presentism is when you take today's standards and you look backwards in time and you make qualitative judgments about what was good or what was bad. how is what dr. proctor did in this courtroom in 2013 not presentism? he did not present you with any information that said at the time the green monster or any of the other addendums to the green monster were being published, nobody came forward and said, these were not good; these were not worthwhile. only dr. proctor did that in may of 2013. and in any event, what did that have to do 4284 with judy campbell? what did any of that have to do with mrs. campbell? there has been no evidence in this case that she was sitting around with mr. campbell waiting for the latest pronouncement. none. you learned in terms of the design changes that were made, the reduction of tar and nicotine, the things that were consistent with what dr. wynder wanted, what the public health community wanted. you learned that the tobacco companies have done a good job at trying to reduce the harms associated with smoking. but there can be no safe cigarette. no one has come here and said that this is a safe product. judy campbell made an informed choice. she knew that she would be tore up if she was caught smoking. she joked with her brother-in-law and sister. she was intelligent and informed. she worked in her family's tobacco fields, whether it was raining or not, said barney williams. and dr. proctor told us a little bit about green tobacco sickness, nicotine poisoning and how anybody that worked in the fields was very conscious of that and had to avoid it. and when it came to the public companies of 4285 statements -- i'm sorry, the statements of public companies, we have the polls that have gone un-rebutted in this case. let us see no. 18, please. 1959, roper survey. who would you be most apt to believe? 1968, most reliable sources, five percent tobacco companies. 1970, all very low approval rating. so it is not surprising that nothing that philip morris or reynolds said or did changed mrs. campbell's awareness of the hazards of smoking. wichmann talked for the first time, really, about mr. setchell and how it was somehow wrong for r.j. reynolds to respond to a consumer inquiry when that consumer has said, i would like to receive coupons or information, or, i'll be happy to take a survey every now and then. but like the selling of cigarettes is legal and you cannot impose liability because of that, advertising at the time and the way it was done was legal and communicating with a consumer, when that consumer has requested communication from you, is legal and not the basis for liability. they have not shown you anything that was a 4286 false statement in terms of what was sent from reynolds in a coupon. and when mr. wichmann tried to tell you that there was evidence that mrs. campbell had redeemed coupons, that is just not true. there is no evidence of that in this case, absolutely none. the last thing i would like to talk about, ladies and gentlemen, is an issue that relates to just reynolds. i agree completely with the thorough job that mr. cofer did in terms of going through the jury form and how the questions should be answered. but if you get past questions 1 and 2 -- i do not think the evidence supports that you do -- but if you get to question no. 3, with respect to my client, r.j. reynolds, there is a very important additional reason that question no. 3 should be answered no. and let us look at number 3 just for one second. question no. 3, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of judy campbell's death? you recall in my opening statement i pointed out to you that there would be two opportunities with respect to this question: one relating to philip morris, one relating to r.j. reynolds. this question relies on more than 4287 just saying she smoked a reynolds brand. you have to be able to be comfortable with instruction no. 9 that says, the smoking of a defendant's cigarette is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss or damage so that it can reasonably be said that but for smoking a defendant's cigarettes, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred. substantially contributing factor. you may recall that when dr. martinez-salas was on the stand, i asked him whether or not he knew anything about brands. he said he did not. i asked him specifically whether or not he could say that the smoking of reynolds brands, brands like raleigh, winston, salem, kool, and doral, were a substantial contributing factor? were they something that contributed substantially, a substantial contributing factor in the development of mrs. campbell's copd and ultimate death? and you remember what he said. he said no. he said he is not here to say that. he said he does not have any facts on which to base that opinion. 4288 members of the jury, plaintiff does not and cannot meet its burden against reynolds simply by saying that all cigarettes contribute. there is no cumulative effect. the plaintiff has to prove as to each defendant that each defendant's product was a but for cause. but for the smoking of reynolds' brands, she would not have gotten copd. dr. martinez told you under the american thoracic standard -- no. 25, please -- he told you that the standard is that patients with copd have usually been smoking at least 20 cigarettes per day for 20 or more years. remember, i asked him, is that another way of saying 20 tobacco years? and he said, yes. so what does that mean? let us look specifically at what was said about brand use. can we have no. 28, please? number 28, please. mr. strickland testified that he remembered mrs. campbell smoking raleigh cigarettes. now, he said 1966 to 1973. but when i asked him on cross exam about how old he was, he was four years old in 1966. he told me that he did not start to learn how to read until about 1969 or 1970, when he was 4289 in first and second grade. so that narrows the window from about '69 to '73, four years. but even during that four-year period he could not say how many raleigh cigarettes mrs. campbell smoked. he did not pay attention to it. twenty-nine, please. mr. campbell testified with respect to winston cigarettes that mrs. campbell tried them for a different taste every now. then she did not like the taste of them. it was very rare when she smoked those brands. number 30, please. kool and salem, you heard very seldom, very minimal, one pack would last an entire year. now, that is not a pack year. a pack year is one pack per day for a year, 365, 366 if it is a leap year. that is a pack year. one pack would last about one year. and finally no. 31, doral. one carton in the mid 1980s. dr. brady confirmed that mr. campbell said that it was very rare, minimal. and mr. campbell himself on the stand said he cannot pay them any attention with respect to ads. now, let us talk about the doral ads for a minute. you recall that mr. campbell, during his 4290 direct examination, said, oh, some guys at work told me about doral. and then the next thing that he said was, i did not see it on tv; i did not have a chance to watch tv. and you may recall one of the first things i did when i got up in my cross-examination of mr. campbell was i confirmed what the date was today. it was may 17th, 2013. and i did that for a reason, because three years earlier on may 6th, 2010, when we had the opportunity to take mr. campbell's deposition, it was then when he said, oh, no, i heard it on tv. i saw a commercial; it was 1985 or 1986. now, i found it -- can we have the elmo, please? i found it very interesting that mr. campbell would take the time to go through his depositions and work so diligently on his errata sheets for may 6th, for may 18th, may 17th, and may 18th, his three errata sheets. he put a lot of time in those. he knew this was important to him. and rightfully so, this is important to us. but it was not until three years after he first told us when he saw doral on tv that he had the opportunity to sit through the testimony of dr. proctor who said that there were no cigarette 4291 commercials on tv after 1971. it was then when he said, oh, i heard it from some guys at work, or, i saw a print ad. there is no evidence of guys at work, ladies and gentlemen. there is no evidence of print ads. there is no evidence that he saw a doral ad. and with all the documents, with all the archives that mr. wichmann and dr. proctor talked about so frequently throughout there trial, with all those documents, if there was a doral ad that said, smoke our product because it will help you quit smoking our product, do not you think they would have shown that to you? if it was in the archives somewhere, why did not they show it to you? whether it is doral, whether it is winston, where it is raleigh, when you add up those years, tops, you get to maybe six or seven years. you do not get anywhere close to the 20 years that dr. martinez-salas, the smartest man in the room when it comes to judy campbell, the one that does not have a dog in the fight, you do not get to the 20 years. so even if you do get past the first two questions, which i do not think you can, when you 4292 get to question no. 3 with respect to my client, they have not proven that any reynolds brand use was a substantial contributing factor to her copd and death. i told you and showed you with the chains that there was a disconnect in my opening in this case. the plaintiffs want you to be mad at us. we think since the findings are something that were taken care of a long time ago, that this case should be about what mrs. campbell was exposed to and what connection any of this evidence had to her. that disconnect is still here. now, you know that the issue is not as simple as whether or not the companies did dumb things or wrote dumb things. the issue is whether or not the plaintiffs have met their burden of proof. plaintiff has not satisfied that burden, ladies and gentlemen. and that is because judy campbell had choices. she had the intellect and the knowledge to exercise those choices. she controlled her own life, her future and her decisions. and as a result, judy campbell is one hundred percent responsible for those decisions. mr. campbell and mr. wichmann have not given you cause to second guess those decisions. like 4293 mr. cofer, i want to thank you for your time. i want to thank you for the time that you will give us when you are back in the jury room. that is all i have.