4 mr. hammer: thank you, judge. may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. this is our opportunity to sum up the case. i know we have been here for a long time. we truly appreciate the attention you have given us. we put on a lot of evidence. you heard from dr. proctor, you heard from dr. seidman, you heard from dr. mannino, you heard from dr. patel, you heard from dr. herrera. you heard from ed, you heard from bryan. and we put together the case for you because we did not know what you needed to hear to come to a decision. and you may have heard some repetitive stuff, and we apologize for that, and it may have taken a lot longer than you all anticipated, and we apologize for that. but we do not know what you need to hear. and we think we brought you forth enough evidence to convince you by a greater weight of the evidence that certainly ed belongs as a class member. so i thank you for your patience, and we are going to try to rip through what we covered in the last few weeks in the next couple hours. i'm going to talk to you for a little while, then mr. schlesinger is going to talk to you for a little while, mr. gdanski may talk to you. so all of us are going to talk to you about what we showed you throughout the past few weeks. first of all, trial by jury. great thing. it is a great thing we have in this country. thomas jefferson said, "the best of all safeguards for the person and property of every individual." he said that a long time ago, and it still stands true today. what you all are doing is magnificent, the fact that you have been here, and we appreciate that. you know, it is been 20 years, nearly 20 years since ed was first diagnosed with copd. on that day, he learned he had a life-threatening disease. on that day, he learned the impact of the cigarettes that he would been smoking for all those years. he started smoking when he was 15 years old; a kid, a kid. he started smoking as a kid, when the world was different. the world was totally different. and, you know, he tried -- as soon as he found out how smoking was affecting him, he tried to quit. number 37. he tried to quit so many different ways. we talked about this. many times you have seen this. we put it up, the defense put it up. dr. seidman talked about it. ed talked about it. dr. dorce talked about it, their own addiction expert. he tried so many different ways to quit, and he could not do it. thankfully, today he sits there, since january 1st of this year, not smoking. it is miraculous. hopefully he never goes back again. but he tried to quit. and the question that you have got to decide in this case is, was ed addicted? well, he tried to quit, and every time he tried -- number 38 -- he went through all sorts of withdrawal symptoms. every single range. all the -- the whole gamut of withdrawal symptoms. we talked about this. you saw this slide. and ed talked about it, dr. seidman talked about it, dr. dorce talked about it. dr. dorce said: yeah, but he had control over his smoking. okay, that was her opinion, and she is entitled to that. throughout the years, he quit. he would quit for brief periods of time. but that hook kept drawing him back. he was addicted. this is a man that was hopelessly addicted and still is today. he still craves the cigarettes. that is crazy. it is crazy, but he does. that is how powerful this addiction is. and for some people, they can put it down, never look back. ed cannot do that. he has not been able to do that. he is done it now for the past, now, what is it, i do not know how many -- 38 days now, i guess. but, you know, it is a difficult task. and every day he fights it. he told you that. nearly every doctor that saw ed, all the people close to him, bryan, ed himself, louise, all his doctors, throughout the medical records said nicotine addiction, tobacco addiction. the doctors that treated him, that had their hands on him. you heard from dr. patel and dr. herrera, the men that touched him, that felt him, that talked to him directly, that knew him the best, all throughout the medical records from '96 on, said he was addicted. they had no doubt about it. we have to prove that ed's addiction led to his disease. caused his disease. and there is legal cause. i'm going to talk about that in a minute. but, you know, there is no dispute in this case -- number 18. there is no dispute in this case that ed's copd and lung cancer was caused by smoking. dr. andrews, remember dr. andrews, the defense expert even came in and said: no, he had lung cancer. he had copd caused from his smoking. now, he did not talk about addiction. dr. dorce from the defense talked about addiction. but what did dr. mannino tell you, the world-renowned expert. what did dr. patel, dr. herrera. they told you, ed's addiction caused him to smoke all those cigarettes. ed's addiction caused that disease. that is what we have here. now, by virtue of those facts alone, ed should be considered a member of the engle class. that is the first question you have to answer. first question, engle class. the engle class, a member of the original 700,000 members of sick or dying smokers in the state of florida. that was the original class. what we are here to determine today, is ed caprio one of the children, the progeny of the engle class action case that took place 20 years ago. we said he is. of course he is. that is why he is sitting here. he is waited now -- since being diagnosed with copd, he is waited for his day in court. and we thank you for that. he thanks you for that. now, number 22. the engle findings. the engle findings, the judge read these to you. this is what the engle jury determined. the supreme court said this stands once you find that ed is a member of the engle class. is he a member of the engle class? of course he is. let us take a look at the verdict form. this is the verdict form you are going to be getting. the first question you have to answer is: was ed caprio a member of the engle class essentially? was ed caprio addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of mr. caprio's copd? (there was a telephone interruption.) mr. gdanski: it is a tradition. mr. hammer: was it? of course it was. so we would ask you to check off "yes." and each of these cigarettes, philip morris, lorillard, and r.j. reynolds, did their cigarettes cause them? yes. that is what he smoked. he smoked philip morris cigarettes, marlboros, he smoked kents. when he switched, he smoked winstons. he smoked their products. so, of course, those cigarettes, each one of them that he smoked, caused his copd. that is a threshold question to determine whether or not -- let us go to the engle findings in this case. to determine whether or not the engle findings apply to this case. it is a threshold question. it should be a no-brainer. it should be simple. a simple question to answer. now, was ed addicted to the cigarettes? of course he was. go to slide 8. this is what he smoked. all these different brands. this is what he started out with liggett, but he only smoked a handful. started out with chesterfields. then he went to r.j. reynolds' products; lucky strike, camels. philip morris, lorillard, again back to philip morris, marlboro lights. continued with philip morris, and then he smoked winston lights, an r.j. reynolds product. that is why these companies are liable for his injuries. liable for his copd. that is what he smoked. now, defense will probably get up here and say it was not his addiction that caused his copd. it was not his addiction. it was his choices. it was his failure to quit. but you know what? nobody chooses addiction. nobody chooses addiction. and, you know, dr. dorce came in here and she is harvard, yale grad. very impressive. she is an addiction expert in heroin, cocaine, opiates, pills. she works up in palm beach at a facility that treats inpatient. and what did she tell you? well, what was interesting is she tells you that she also treats nicotine addiction. however, at her facility, they recommend their patients to bring a carton of cigarettes with them. the people that are addicted to nicotine, bring your drug with you. she is not focusing on nicotine addiction. she may be a great addiction specialist with regard to heroin and cocaine, but she does not know a whole lot about nicotine addiction. she has not written on it, she has not published on it. we brought you people who devoted their lives to nicotine and to tobacco and nicotine addiction. dr. seidman, dr. mannino, people that contributed to the surgeon general's reports. these are all in evidence. people contributed to these reports. we brought you reputable, world-renowned doctors that specialize in nicotine addiction. they brought you dr. dorce, and she said under the criteria of the dsm-5, that ed's not addicted. well, okay. well, let us take a look at the dsm-5. and go to 36. video technician: 36 or 12? mr. hammer: i'm sorry, 12. you are right. i apologize. number 12. she talked about the dsm-5, and she said, well, he meets two other criteria, so he is got a tobacco disorder. but it does not rise to the level of addiction. and then mr. gdanski you remember was asking her questions about, well, what about this one, what about that one? and he asked her the one about -- which one is it, number 8. recurrent tobacco use in situations in which it is physically hazardous. and she said, no, he does not fit that. let us put up the next slide. she said -- in fact, there was a medical record that jon said: well, he smoked by his oxygen tank. she said: yeah, but he knew the risk. well, that fits that criteria right there. a man that is sitting here on oxygen, lights up a cigarette? come on. he fits that criteria. that is a lot more dangerous than smoking in bed. and yet she said he does not fit that criteria. you know, unfortunately, i do not think dr. dorce was an unbiased, unprejudicial witness. she was an expert witness that was paid by the tobacco companies to come in here and say that ed does not meet the criteria. and yet she could not argue with mr. gdanski when he asked her about all those other definitions. now, i think 36, right? about whether or not tobacco was highly addictive. and she kept saying: well, highly, i do not know about highly. it can be addictive. and she kept saying: well, i do not know, you know, it could be. it could not be. and it sounded a lot like -- i do not know if you remember when we were playing the videos with dr. proctor, there was that woman anne browder that talked for the tobacco industry. and she said: well, it could be, it may not be. and that seemed to be the tagline for tobacco all those years in the conspiracy. and, you know, dr. dorce, she followed that tagline. it can be addictive. it may be, it may not be. and she actually -- this is what kind of boggles the mind. mr. seiden: objection, litigation objection. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: a woman who treats people with heroin, cocaine, opiates, pain killer addiction, when jon -- when mr. gdanski asked her: well, doctor, how about heroin, is that addictive? well, it can be. seriously? heroin, crack cocaine can be? use your common sense. crack cocaine, by its very nature, is addictive. heroin is addictive. all of those drugs are addictive drugs. she was using the tobacco tagline. and that is because she is a tobacco expert. now, the other things you are going to be asked to do on this verdict form is state whether mr. caprio reasonably relied upon any statements made after may '82 which concealed or omitted information and whether he reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made after '82 in furtherance of the conspiracy. well, mr. caprio started smoking when he was 15 years old. he started with the non-filtered cigarettes and then switched to filters, because he did not like the tobacco in his teeth. remember, he told you about that? but then he stayed smoking filters for the rest of his life. and he relied upon the fact -- ultimately, he switched to kent, because kent, by lorillard, came out with a safer filter, a charcoal filter. that is why he switched to kent. he told you that. that is in the '60s, right when all the information started coming out. and he said to you: there was confusion. and there was confusion generated by the tobacco companies. now, i'm sure the defense will get up here and say, well, wait a minute. what statement did he rely on? we asked mr. caprio, what statement. did you see any of these statements? well, no, but all of those statements formed the public's information. they formed what america relied upon. they formed what ed caprio relied upon, and he relied upon the ads that said filters are safer. and then what did he do? he switched to lights. when it became known, more known that cigarettes may be dangerous or are dangerous, what did tobacco companies do? they came out with light cigarettes, light cigarettes. and he switched to light cigarettes. why? because the ads said, not necessarily said "they are safer," but they certainly implied that. and the tobacco companies duped him. he told you: i was duped. and he continued smoking lights until he finally quit. and what is so significant is that when he meets up with bryan, bryan is smoking regulars. bryan and he get together, and ed convinces bryan to switch to light cigarettes. in the late '80s, close to '90s, bryan told you: i switched to lights. why? because ed told me they are safer. smoke lights, they are safer. well, so did ed rely, continue to smoke light cigarettes based on something this tobacco company said or did, or omitted to say? it is kind of hard to rely on something that is omitted. but of course he did. it is kind of -- how do you know if somebody omits it from you? they do not tell you if they conspire to conceal it. well, that is what they did, they conspired to conceal it, and ed relied upon the light cigarettes into the '80s, beyond '82. and that is why you should check these boxes off. and, you know, now, liggett, they will get up here and tell you, well, we were not part of the initial conspiracy in 1953. we did not sign on to the frank statement until 1954. dr. proctor will tell you, no, they did not. but they became part of it, and they contributed to it. they did. that is why they should be held responsible as well. now, the other thing we are going to have to ask you about is talk about fault. talking about fault. well, what did ed caprio know about smoking cigarettes? well, he did know eventually that smoking cigarettes can be harmful. he did learn smoking cigarettes can cause disease. i mean, he had family members that got sick. i'm sure the defense will point out that john's uncle -- i'm sorry, john's father, ed's uncle, got sick and had copd. i'm sure they will point that out to you. so he should have known better. you know what? maybe he should have. but you know what? these guys really knew what was going on. and had they told the world the truth in 1954, instead of forming that conspiracy, had they said -- and taken out the frank statement and said, hey, smoking is linked to cancer, you ought to quit now, guess what? if they did that in 1954, hey, smoking is linked to cancer, we are stopping, we are not going to make our product anymore. guess what? ed would never have been able to smoke that first cigarette in 1958, if they lived up to their promises. but instead, they decided to form a conspiracy and hide the truth for the next 50, 60 years, hide the truth from people like ed caprio. so what kind of responsibility should ed have had? really, when you think of it in light of the tobacco companies? i would say -- i would suggest to you that each of the tobacco companies should share the blame. liggett, maybe a little bit less because they joined the conspiracy later. they got out earlier. and ed, a total of 5 percent. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. may we approach, please? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. cofer: i move for mistrial. i move for mistrial. they should be estopped from arguing that he accepts any responsibility. mr. hammer represented in jury selection that he accepted no responsibility; that we were one hundred percent at fault. they used that argument to kick people off the jury, and now they cannot -- having kicked people off the jury and taking that position, they cannot now come back and try to seem reasonable. they are judicially estopped from that, so you neither need to instruct the jury that it is one hundred percent at fault or we need a mistrial. mr. hammer: judge, i totally disagree with defense. the court: i do, too. i'll deny that request for mistrial. mr. cofer: you know what i want to do? then i want to admit their prior petitions, their prior complaints where they admitted fault, and they then backed off and got you to let them say they are no longer at fault. they use ed as both a -- in their words, a sword and a shield. you cannot do that. you cannot take the position to kick people off the jury, and once you get the jury you think you want, you completely change your position for the jury you had. the court: i'm going to deny that request. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. hammer: may i proceed, judge? the court: if the court reporter is ready. the reporter: i'm ready. mr. hammer: you know, you should say, hey, ed should not be held responsible at all. and we do not think he should be. but -- but -- if you think ed could have tried harder, if you think ed maybe should have quit earlier, his share of the responsibility pales in comparison to these guys. that is why i say if you are going to fault ed at all, fault him 5 percent, at most. because these guys, what they did is reprehensible. mr. schlesinger is going to talk to you about that, about the reprehensible conduct, and why they should be punished. now, the other thing you are going to be asked to do is determine the amount of money sustained by ed caprio with respect to the following elements. one of them is ... there is been a stipulation with regard to the amount of money involved as far as past lost wages, as far as past medical costs, and as far as future medical expenses. the stipulation of past lost wages of $206,158. stipulation of past medical costs of $103,014. and future medical expenses of $75,000 a year in the future. and we read to you the life tables, the life tables, according to the national consensus bureau, centers for disease control. they say a man of ed's age should live to about another 13-1/2 years. and you may think he should live less, he may live longer. we do not know. but we would submit to you that he hopefully has another 13-1/2 years left. and so 13-1/2 times 75,000 is $1,012,500, for a total of economic loss of $1,321,672. thank you. now, you are also going to be asked to determine what damages ed deserves for pain and suffering. you know, ed has been on this oxygen tank. he lives every day in fear that his oxygen might run out. he lives every day without this oxygen like a fish out of water. he told you about this lung cancer surgery he had, a lifesaving operation where they removed two lobes of his lung as a result of an epidemic that these companies created, lung cancer, which was not existent before cigarettes. remember, dr. proctor told you, lung cancer, if a doctor saw that in the 1900s, he would call the medical students together, look at lung cancer. and now it is rampant, one of the number one killers in the nation. it is unbelievable. and it was created by these companies. ed has pain to this day as a result of that surgery. pain to this day. he described for you what they had to do to cut open his body. he is got a scar going from front to back. he feels it every day of his life. how do you compensate somebody for that? i would suggest to you that a fair compensation is $12 million, for a total award of $13,321,672. that is fair, that is just. for a man that sits here today a cripple. and he only sits here today a cripple as a result of their product. this product kills more people than the number of bullets have killed people in the war. dr. proctor told you that. mr. bideau: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: that is crazy. and yet, yeah, it is legal. but you know what? a responsible company would have done what they promised back in 1954. they would have looked out for their customers, and they would have shut down. yeah, it is legal. but they would have done the right thing. because in this country, corporations do not do that. in this country, if you are going to make a product, stand behind it. if you are going to make a product and it hurts people, fix it. if you are going to make a product and it kills people, then stop making it. it is not a lot to ask. but you know what? they just cannot do it. they cannot help themselves. you know why? because for them, it is all about money. it is all about money. and that is why when you are asked should these companies be punished, absolutely. they deserve to be punished, they need to be punished. they need to be told, hey, look, you cannot do this. we -- this jury, you, who decide this case, we cannot accept this kind of behavior. shut these boxes off and let us go on to a punitive damage phase. it is going to be very short. very short. mr. schlesinger is going to talk to you a little bit more and talk about the conduct of these companies. but as you sit there, think about ed. show some of the photos. think about ed caprio, think about the fact he sits here before you, as he told you, a proud gay man. he got married last month. finally, his dream fulfilled. thirty-two years he is been with the same person. that is amazing in this day and age that couples can stay together that long. and now he is married. he hopes to live a long life with bryan. ed sits here before you, and it is been our honor and our privilege to represent him in front of you all. i ask you to listen carefully to mr. schlesinger's argument. i ask you to listen carefully to the defense argument, and see what they have to say. because i've got news for you, folks. this case is important to them, and it is important to mr. caprio. the case is going to be in your hands soon, and we look forward to talking to you some more about punitive damages. thank you, judge. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court. counsel. ladies and gentlemen of the jury. good morning. i'm scott schlesinger, and i've been with you for as much of this trial as i could be. circumstances have impaired some of my involvement in the case, nothing you need to worry about, but i am glad to be here. i'm busting to be able to talk to you. so i've tried to pay close attention to what is going on with this case as best i can, read the transcripts, keep up with my great trial team who really stepped up and supported me when i needed help from them. it is a wonderful thing. nothing that is any of your business, but just -- we have a great trial team, and we do these cases in a lot of different places. so if you will indulge me, even though you do not know me. i missed your jury selection process, so i have not developed a comfort level with you. you do not know me to know is this guy trustworthy? i have not seen how he is acting. so if you will take one thing from me at face value, i will not intentionally mislead you about anything that is happened in this court or evidence in the case. if your collective recollection differs than anything that i say, rely on your collective recollection. okay? my job is to talk to you about an enterprise of death, a great historical wrong that brings us into this courtroom in the united states of america to pursue a system of justice that only we have, where the mighty and powerful can be on -- brought to bear to be on equal footing with regular folks like us. i want to talk about that, talk about some of the evidence that came in with regard to wrongful conduct by the tobacco companies. now, let us just start right here. okay. and you will see that in evidence -- you actually have these textbooks in evidence. now, these books are the surgeon general's reports. they are the -- our top health agency, our federal agency, the surgeon general. this is for the health and welfare and the public good. this is for the benefit and the well-being of the health of americans. and we hopefully honored this process by bringing you heavyweight experts who contributed to this -- to the chapters in these books who were senior scientific reviewers, who hew to the truth of medicine and science as we know it. and even a book like this, that is just published in 2014, a year ago, where even dr. proctor went to the white house to attend the unveiling of this book, because he was such an important contributor to it. you can get this book free from the government. every one of you. get five copies. they will send it to you for free. they will even pay the mailing. but this is the statement of the truth about tobacco, and it is news. because, even in 2014, they continue to say we have an industrially driven epidemic. the tobacco epidemic is not about people smoking, it is about an industry that -- the epidemic is persistent. not because kids are reckless, but rather, because a powerful industry depends upon its perpetuation. that is where the tobacco epidemic has come from. and now, as recently as 2014, they have begun to focus on the role that the tobacco industry has played, because they, too, have had a decade or more now to research the internal secret documents that did not previously exist. imagine what a different world we would live in if all of those research of scientists that the internal documents at those -- that the tobacco industry had. if they had that out in the open and contributed to the knowledge of the public health authority, all the things we would have learned, how much sooner we would have learned it. but we did not, because it was all withheld. now that it is not withheld, the surgeon general and all the myriad of professors and authorities that are contributing to this document are using those internal documents to learn things they never knew. the secrets that tobacco held in their own laboratories about how they knew it was addictive, how they celebrated addiction. addiction was the center of their universe. it was the sine qua non, nicotine -- without nicotine, there was no business. so one of the things that is here, the major conclusions, you can turn right to them. you have this in evidence. you can turn to major conclusions and you can read. this is on page 7. scientific basis of report. this is all heavily vetted, peer-reviewed literature. take a look at something like this. and what they say is, in major conclusion number 1: an enormous avoidable public health tragedy, the century-long epidemic. more than 20 million premature deaths. i challenge the tobacco defendants, the cigarette lawyers who will come up. mr. tepikian, who may be a nice guy, but he is not philip morris. he is an attorney representing philip morris. and i challenge him to come up here and say, we have been responsible for the deaths of 20 million. or do not even say that. we agree there have been 20 million deaths from tobacco. but you will not hear that. because much as we are asking you to say, this case is about punishment. this case is about correcting a historical wrongdoing. part of it is no acknowledgment of past wrongdoing, which requires further deterrence. when we ask you to consider this case as one which merits a penalty, a fine, punishment, it is because we ask you to see the truth of this case as it is unfolded in this courtroom and in the evidence that you have available to look at, as something that calls out from you for an expression of moral condemnation for quasi criminal behavior by the tobacco companies -- mr. bideau: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- and you will see that as we go. the court: sustained. mr. bideau: move to strike. the court: i'll strike it. the jury is to disregard. mr. schlesinger: i have case law supporting that statement, judge. but i'll move on. the court: okay. mr. schlesinger: now, then, the tobacco epidemic was initiated and was sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking cigarettes. you see? in 2010, 2012, 2014, the most recent pronouncements with wonderful pieces of data that you really should take a moment to look through, if you have a chance back there. here is a conclusion that says, it is not about let us quit smoking and try harder to quit. it is about a tobacco epidemic that was initiated and sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking cigarettes. and what do they also say? what is a big point of this document here which also says that 40 million people are caught in the web of addiction? we will get to that. that is all the smokers. 40 million people. over half a million deaths a year. one-third of all cancer deaths. one in five of all deaths of americans in this country. imagine you went to a cemetery, and every fifth headstone had a little no smoking symbol on it. mr. bideau: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: that is how broad this epidemic is. we are inured to it. i say it is an irrational madness that hides in plain sight, you know, because cigarettes look like normal consumer products. and they are nothing but drugs. all these are, are drugs. that is all this is. that is all this is, that is all it ever was. but it looks like a normal consumer product. and where it is hard to wrap your mind around it, but this is drugs. that is all it is. that is all it is ever been. a cigarette is a delivery device, a vehicle, a delivery device for nicotine. the product is not the cigarette. the cigarette is the package. the product is nicotine. the nicotine that hits the brain faster, intravenous in less than ten seconds. and a person like ed caprio has smoked over half a million cigarettes. and every puff, every cigarette is 8 to 10 puffs. 5 million hits of the drug nicotine to the brain. 5 million hits. who does that but for the nicotine? taste? pleasure? satisfaction? pep? it gives you a lift? these are nonsense terms. these are the terms of an advertising and marketing culture that is spent a quarter of a trillion dollars to convince people that they were doing something fun with a cigarette. nobody smokes on a clock, day in and day out, a pack, two packs a day, hundreds of hits of nicotine to the brain. except the drug is short-lasting, it goes to the brain, the brain is rewired, it becomes full of receptors that scream for that nicotine, and folks become hopeless addicts. now, when they set out to hook their customers, they are hooking children. that is the basis of the business. that is the dirty little secret that hides in plain sight. and when you see documents -- and i believe mr. seidman held one up from diane burrows from 1984 that clearly said, hey, you know, we have got to get these 12-year-olds. all smoking is based on youth. but by that time, they had a new code word. mr. seiden: objection, misstates the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: they had a new code word. and the code word was, do not call them youth anymore. call them young adults. well, why would it be that in a secret 1984 diane burrows document, there would be so many references to the word "young adults." that is because in 1975, you saw the pittman document where they said, you know what? we better change reference to the word "youth" to reference to young adults. it was a code word for 12-year-olds, 13-year-olds, 14-year-olds, 15-year-olds. but it was in the secret document. why? because it is so incendiary, it is so outside the bounds of moral human decency of what regular folks, human beings that care for one another, that should be protecting children, not addicting them, that in the event that those documents ever got out, which they ultimately did a decade after the lawsuit shook loose the documents, they could come in now and say, look, it says "young adult." but we have got the goods on them. we showed you the document that said, do not call the youth -- the 12-year-olds, the 13-year-olds, the 14-year-olds, do not call them youth, call them young adults. just like dr. proctor said that we have a code word that they use for lung cancer. and what is that code word? zephyr. and what is zephyr? zephyr is a warm, nurturing breeze. everybody loves a zephyr during an indian summer, not an ill wind of lung cancer. so these are some of the things that i want you to reflect on. in any event, they called for the end of this epidemic by getting rid of cigarettes. that is what dr. proctor said. he believes in abolition, and his book says, right on the cover: abolish cigarettes. it is a laudable goal. it makes sense. there is no redeeming basis to cigarettes. and for an industry to get away with a conspiracy for 50 years that killed 20 million americans is -- it does not meet with the bounds of moral humanity or decency. i put up mount everest. why do i do that? because remember dr. mannino talked about just how rare it is for a man like ed caprio to be an engle class member that was way back in '92, '93, '94, '95, '96? you guys thought jon talked fast, right? i have got a lot to cover. so you will get most of it. i know you will not get -- but i -- you know, let it wash over you, get the impression from me. and if i do it too fast, again, i apologize. just thanks for listening to me. you guys never met me before. so mount everest -- and here is the thing. you guys are here for a historic moment in time. mr. cofer: objection, your honor, improper argument. ms. ruiz: objection. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: this is an important moment in time. you guys are on the cutting edge of important litigation going on all around this state, the engle progeny class litigation. it is going on right in this courtroom as we speak. and the thing is, ed is a rare, rare, rare breed. most engle progeny folks are dead, and their family members are here. mr. cofer: objection, lack of foundation, and improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: dr. mannino testified to this. he said it is extraordinarily rare. and i submit to you that mount everest, as seen from the rongbuk monastery, the north face of everest in tibet, that there are more people that have stood at the top of that mountain than have lived to face philip morris in a courtroom, in a court of law, and face them for what they accuse them to do. so this is a rare and special moment, and we call upon you to think about that and rise to the occasion. because this is a case in which you all probably hold now more power than you have ever held in your entire lives, and more power than you will ever hold -- ms. ruiz: objection. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. the court: i will sustain the objection. mr. cofer: ask to strike. the court: i'll strike it. jury is to disregard it. go right ahead, sir. mr. schlesinger: when i talk about the power, i mean the jury instructions empower you to follow the law and apply the law. we will get to the law in a minute. right here, what business is this company in? what business is this company in? this is just rjr's website. philip morris has a similar website. this is one of the things they say about tobacco and health. they have got a mark up there. and it says -- it says: consider the conclusions of the u.s. surgeon general. that is why you have got these reports. they say, rely on the surgeon general. they admit the surgeon general now is the place to go. but here is what is more important. the best course of action for tobacco consumers concerned about their health is to quit. and then it says: minors should not use tobacco products, and adults who do not use or have quit using products should not start. so i'm scratching my head. what is the business of tobacco? if this is sincere, as opposed to insincere, as opposed to marketing pap, then here is the question. what business are they in? if what they do is something that they recommend nobody do, and anyone who is doing it should quit, then why are they in business? why are they making the cigarettes when they said over and over again in the '60s, '70s, and the '80s, if it is ever proven to be harmful, we will quit making it? how different would the world be if they had done that? and how stronger would our nation have been, because it weakens a nation to kill off its citizenry 540 -- mr. cofer: objection, your honor, improper argument. move to strike. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: 540,000 people a year. you learned in this courtroom for the first time a brand-new finding. it is not 484,000 a year -- mr. cofer: objection, your honor. for the record, 401, 402, williams-state farm. lack of foundation. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: you learned a brand-new fact in this courtroom, which is that it is not 484,000. i jumped ahead. do not look at that yet. finish this thought. it is 540,000 a year, because there is new research out. i found this very interesting, where a bunch of universities came out and research, it got in the new york times -- mr. cofer: objection, lack of foundation. there was no testimony about this. there was an article in the new york times. the court: overrule the objection. please, no speaking objections. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: you heard about the research in the new england journal of medicine. there is a fresh off-the-press report in the new york times. dr. mannino talked about it. all of a sudden, it is 540,000 a year. that is 1400 people a day dying. there is nothing we ever see on the evening news that compares with the calamity of cigarette-related death and destruction. there is just nothing that compares to it. it is weird what -- depending on what you learn. you guys have now joined and gone to the college of tobacco knowledge. right? you heard about the defense having the traveling truth squad and these words to try to suggest that they were out to have the truth when really they were confusing it. but you have learned stuff now that folks have not learned. and in realtime, right in this courtroom, fresh information came in. cigarettes are even more dangerous and deadly than imagined. how much worse can it get? so believability of witnesses. this is an important instruction that was read. i want to reflect on a couple things, because you heard different experts. you heard our experts, you heard their experts. but you also heard our treatings. and remember, the treatings are independent eyewitnesses. they are standing on the corner when a car wreck happens at the intersection, and they are just saying what they saw. those treatings, herrera, patel, the rest of them, the other folks whose record says "tobacco addiction," they had nothing to do with litigation. their record is organic. it is natural. it is credible. it is believable. it has no interest in the outcome of the proceedings. it is not about anything having to do with a specially retained expert for a court trial. that record was chock full of references to addiction. are you going to disagree with the record that is the natural record of doctors who cared about the patient as they were treating him? of course he was addicted. but the point is, there is two kinds of witnesses and two kinds of instructions for believability. this is how i say you are empowered. you have the right to do stuff. you may say, wait a second. i'm not a doc. i heard these docs testifying. how do i know? maybe i have to accept what they want to say. and i say, some of the doctors they brought in were not worthy of belief, should be rejected by you. and guess what? the court empowers you with this instruction right here, which is different than the regular witnesses, which is just what is their believability, what is their lack of frankness, what interest do they have in the outcome, what is their body language, how do they look? it is not just what they say. it is everything about what you observe when you are observing. it is part of the reason why we do not want you to get too deep -- caught up in the notes. it is because you have got to look at people. you have got to eyeball them. the psychologists say eighty percent of communication is nonverbal. i mean, look at me, i'm moving around like a spaz in front of you guys. so they say that communication could be nonverbal. but the point is this. with an expert, you can accept an expert's opinion. you can look at his credentials. but here is what i like, the power. you can reject it. therefore, with all due respect to witnesses that deserve to be rejected, dr. dorce, i'm sorry to say, who comes here and does what dr. proctor told you they always do, and that is to deny anybody could be in the engle class. and the logic is flawed. because the logic is, oh, you could have quit. well, you did not quit. if you did not quit, you should have quit. you did not quit. it is got nothing to do with engle. mr. seiden: objection, litigation. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: it is a misconstruction of the dependence of nicotine, which is one of the most highly addictive drugs anywhere. in any event, you have the right to reject. that is the power. i put that up there. i was looking for a straw man. that is a scarecrow. but call it a straw man. what is a straw man? a straw man is like a false logical construct. there is two of them i want to address. the first one is, dr. dorce using the dsm-5. now, his honor has not read you an instruction. you will not hear an instruction. there is no law that says anything about the dsm-5 being the applicable test that determines addiction. here is what is really interesting. if you had a motivation to not find somebody addicted, what better book to go to than the dsm-5, which does not have a diagnosis of addiction? it is like saying, well, you know that book, the hobbit by tolkien, he is not addicted under that book. well, the dsm does not have addiction in the book. but every other test for addiction that is in the surgeon general '10, which has an entire chapter starting on page 105 -- write it down, read it, and read the summary in there. and the very first word is nicotine is the fundamental reason people persist in using tobacco products. and this persistent use is what contributes to the diseases in the book, including emphysema and including lung cancer. so using a book that does not diagnose addiction because it does not have an addiction diagnosis in the book, and then saying, i could not find that person addicted in that book, i'm like, i need a v8. what are you talking about? that cannot be possible. you have to use something that is relevant. all things that relate to addiction in this case overwhelmingly point to dependence. and here's the thing. the engle finding says nicotine is addictive. well, the engle finding was a war and a trial that took a year, where the defendants denied that it was addictive. now the finding is it is addictive. those findings are binding on you. and i say you can -- and the instructions say they cannot be denied. you must embrace them and incorporate them. nicotine is addictive. so when you get up and try to say, under this book, which does not do addiction, i do not see addiction, that is a reputation of the engle finding, which is the binding law on this case. mr. bideau: object, your honor. misstates the law, and definition. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: it is a repudiation of the binding engle finding. so you can think about that and apply what we know the law is and find that it is addictive. and if not him, who? because this man smoked an awful lot. something else is, when you smoke despite harmful consequences, that is a key indication of addiction. so dependence on nicotine, the drug, i think is clear. the straw man is the dsm-5, trying to say that is what is applicable. here is another straw man. something very interesting. i'll do this very quickly with you. you remember, remember communication, nonverbal. okay. dr. proctor -- no, seidman, first medical expert. well-credentialed. he wrote books on addiction. so they could say, hey, did not you say in this book people are addicted. dr. dorce does not have a book on addiction. we could have seen the position if she had a book or a paper or research on addiction. she testified even in violation of her own society of addiction medicine rules -- mr. cofer: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- against having -- the court: hold on, hold on, sir. mr. cofer: improper argument about dr. dorce's testimony. the court: overruled. argument. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: she testified against the asam, just like dr. andrews testified against the ats guidelines. why do medical health organizations have guidelines discouraging doctors that are members from involving themselves with tobacco? it is to avoid the insidious and undermining effect of tobacco, because of the historical way in which they would infiltrate healthcare institutions -- mr. bideau: objection, lack of foundation. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: it would infiltrate healthcare institutions and create either a sign of credibility for tobacco companies or research that was distraction or confusing. and that is what dr. proctor talked about so extensively with you. but the other scarecrow here is this. i've got to do it quick, because i'm on limited time. so, dr. seidman is on the witness stand. now dr. seidman is being cross-examined. now remember, we go first, they go last. you have got to keep an open mind so that they get to tell their side of the story, right? and we get to go first. we are telling our side of the story. but on cross-examination they get to tell their side of the story, too, a little bit. so the first cross-examination of a treating or an expert doctor on addiction was seidman. and the defense counsel, that represents the cigarette industry, says: you did not treat him. if he was so addicted and you are such a caring doctor, why did not you treat him? now a jury is sitting there, may not know the ins and outs of that and they hear the body language, the tone, the tenor, the voice and say, yeah, man. why did not you treat him? because it sounds like someone is indignant and impairing the credibility of the witness. well, if you really care, why did not you treat him? now let us unpack that. that is a word people like to use here. let us unpack that. why did not you, hired as a forensic expert with no treatment relation with the patient, not licensed to practice your psychological medical services in the state of florida, violate your ethical obligations and insinuate yourself into the care when your only basis was to come here and give expert testimony to help a jury understand the medically complicated subject such as addiction? it was not until dr. dorce got up on the witness stand that we took away that straw man. the straw man being he should have treated, and by not treating, you guys should think his credibility is impaired. and mr. gdanski, right out of the box, said to dr. dorce. you did not treat him? no. you would never treat him? no. you know the forensic experts and folks who are coming to be experts from out of state -- mr. cofer: your honor, sidebar? the court: sidebar. mr. schlesinger: will you hold my time, judge? (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. cofer: your honor. the court: gentlemen, gentlemen. mr. cofer: we need an instruction that the defense experts cannot contact the plaintiff, because the plaintiff is represented by counsel. it would be improper, unless you have the cme, which did happen. however, their experts are retained by mr. caprio through their lawyers. so, of course, they can do whatever they want to do. that is the difference. mr. schlesinger: except there is no evidence of that in the case. the court: hold on, mr. schlesinger. you will get your opportunity. mr. cofer: that is the difference. they have now misled the jury. legally we cannot contact the plaintiff. their experts can. so we at least need that instruction, that the defense experts, defense lawyers cannot talk to or contact the plaintiff, because they do not represent them. mr. schlesinger: fair comment on the evidence. i'm definitely inferring from the evidence, only commenting on the evidence. mr. cofer: he is making fun of me and attacking my credibility. the court: i'm going to overrule the objection. hold on. deny the request, and i suspect you are going to ask if you can do this. mr. cofer: i can address it in closing. the court: sure. mr. cofer: okay, fair enough. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. schlesinger: i'm going to start my time again, judge. thank you. so that is the other straw man, is to intimate that there is some reason why someone should have treated, when their own expert acknowledged that no expert involved in these cases would be treating or insinuating themselves or anything like that. so everything that dr. seidman did, dr. mannino did was perfectly appropriate. and that was an apparent credibility attack that does not have validity. and you can think about that. and by the way, this is a mousetrap. okay. here is what i say. build a better mousetrap and the world will beat a path to your door. dr. proctor has achieved the status of scholarship, harvard university, full professor at stanford, he teaches on tobacco. where is his book? he is got a book that he published that is -- an incredible work of scholarship, highly valid. anybody can read it. you guys cannot read it now, but after this, when the trial is over, anyone can study anything they want and develop a story. one of the interesting things with this book, okay, that dr. proctor -- and it makes the man a hero. he is an advocate for public health. he is a big contributor to the surgeon general reports, and what he is doing, he is doing the right kind of work. but what is interesting is that they did not challenge him with a single solitary word out of this 800-page book, with footnotes, heavily footnoted, all referenced to tons of internal documents, the scholarship of the secrets of the industry, made open. it will take decades for scholars to fully digest the 60 million pages, and that does not include the ones that dr. proctor said were destroyed. so this is an interesting element in the case. they talked to dr. proctor. he seemed agreeable with them. he gave them the points they wanted. yeah, there was this, there was that. but they never once took a word out of this book and tried to discredit him. i thought that was important. build a better mousetrap and the world will beat a path to your door. why do i say that? because it is a false equivalency to put an expert witness on the witness stand such as andrews or dorce, who do not have a dedicated specialty and have not committed their life to helping smokers or researching nicotine or understanding the scourge of diseases, and then say, well, dr. proctor made money. well, he earned that money. you know, you earn money if you do something spectacular, if you dedicate your life to something, and then it turns out that what you did fulfills a need, as it does in this litigation across the state with all these engle smokers. it fulfills the need one case at a time. he is teaching jurors one jury at a time. he built a better mousetrap. the world has beat a path to his door. it is a false equivalency to say that dr. dorce was button-holed by a friend of the tobacco industry, with no specialty in nicotine addiction, and comes in and becomes an expert and earns a tremendous amount of money. there is two different purposes behind one. one is a man who has paid his dues, certainly deserves to make money. making good money, doing good work. and the other is someone who perhaps, you can consider the money is a motivation to do something that does not meet with credibility. dr. andrews, it looks to me like he joined the ats, which prohibited -- he worked for tobacco, and in the aftermath, he quit the ats because on balance at $900,000 and counting, the money was more important than the professional society that dedicates its members to the helping of sick people. so that is something to think about. and by the way, this book, all three of these books, look at the beginning of the book. there is pages and pages and pages of contributors, professors, scientists, public health officials; a universe of them. why could not the tobacco industry bring one of those witnesses in who really dedicated their lives to cigarette issues and nicotine addiction, or any of that? out of a universe? because uniformly the truth is what you heard from mannino and seidman and patel and herrera. and herrera -- mr. bideau: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: i dug herrera, because he was like, let us cut through all this, you know, chitchat. he was not like a guy in a depo room with lawyers talking all that formality. he was bam bam, straight to the point. he said nicotine is one of the most addictive, dangerous and lethal legal drugs on the market. let us talk about legality. in engle, those findings of a dangerous product, unreasonably dangerous, and findings of culpability for fraud and conspiracy and lying to the american public about the dangers. that is not legal. and in addition to that, those are violations of law. that is why we are here. those are liability fault findings. and in addition to that, when it comes to kids under 18, it is not legal to sell them to kids under 18. and that is what ninety percent of the business is. so here is the asam guideline. do not take money from tobacco. despite that, their expert did. they say it is a conflict. dr. dorce disagreed with everybody. here is the american thoracic society. it is a conflict of interest to have a relationship with the tobacco company, but these experts did that. trying to avoid that insidious effect that tobacco companies have on legitimate science, which dr. proctor testified about. then we get to punitive damages. and you must decide if punitive damages are warranted as punishment to the defendants and as deterrent to others. the engle findings are all here. and number 4 is fraud, number 5 is conspiracy. because they all work together. remember, the tirc, the ti, the ctr, the tobacco institute, the tobacco industry research council, the center for tobacco research, these were all co-conspirators, found out to be in engle. so defendants include all of those guys. so all of those statements that you heard from the industry spokesmen that were really a defensive front, a shield, they were sham organizations. they were all co-conspirators. what is important here, though, it says -- and you will have these back there to read -- but that these findings show that these misleading statements, what was withheld was entered with the intention that smokers and members of the public relied to their detriment. so what they did was, with the doubt campaign, they did something that was designed to make sure folks would keep smoking. because as long as you keep smoking, we keep selling cigarettes. and selling cigarettes and making profits by the billions is really what we are all about. even if it derogates the common human decency of looking out for the health of people. so, punitive damages are warranted. and it talks about clear and convincing evidence standard, which is different than the greater weight of the evidence. here is the greater weight of the evidence. as far as is ed a member of the engle class? yes, he is. if on balance, if the scales tip slightly in our favor what weighs more, what sways me more, he is a member of the engle class. that is all there is to it. this is not a criminal case where someone is trying to raise a doubt. doubt. if you think he is probably a member of the engle class. if i was a betting man, 55, 60, 75, 80 percent member of the engle class. maybe there is a 5 or ten percent chance. maybe there is some expert. i heard some things, i'm not sure. in a civil case, the benefit of the doubt is resolved in favor of ed caprio. so that if you think he probably belongs, and the greater weight of the evidence, that which weighs more and sways me more, he is a member of the engle class. i'm not going to spend too much time on it, because i feel the evidence is overwhelming that he is, and you are going to find him to be. and then you are going to have to work on the percentage of fault. and the most important question for me is that we get a chance to discuss punishment for past wrongdoings, unacknowledged. no contrition. some folks say, listen, tomorrow it is going to be friday. you are going to be deliberating. if i go for punitive damages, i'm going to have to come back and listen to these guys for more. but you know what? out of many -- there were many called, few were chosen. you all were chosen. and we feel confident that you will not shirk your responsibility by saying, i was going to agree that they need punitive damages, but i want to get out of here, so i'm not going to do it. we do not even have the first compunction or concern that you guys would ever do that. we are not worried about that. you are going to do what is right. you have been responsible in this regard. we trust you in that regard. and you have no stake in this outcome. you were an independent, neutral, calm, cool dispassionate, deliberative body. that is all we want. so, anyway, reckless indifference. you will hear about that. what should we be doing? let us cure cancer. let us not cause cancer. let us cure emphysema. let us not cause emphysema. those were some really smart scientists. those conspirators were some smart scientists. claude teague was real smart. what would have happened if they had dedicated their lives to doing human, decent things to help people? can you imagine? wow. where would we have been, if it had been a cooperative effort to benefit the public health, as opposed to a fiendish manipulation of nicotine to addict children and then replace them when they invariably died prematurely from very horrible diseases that do not -- mr. bideau: objection, improper. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: -- that do not end in a peaceful death in any way, shape or form? so we say a motivation of a responsible person would be cure, do not cause. and they could have done that. how -- how about this? how about we product children and do not addict them? is that a laudable goal? is that reasonable? should not we be protecting children and not addicting them; not putting them down the path to make them a 20-, 30-, 40-year customer, so that you can grind these kids through this process of addiction leading to horrible diseases and death and use them as replacement smokers? it is callous, it is cynical. a replacement smoker for those leaving the market. now, here is another thing. there is an instruction which says that the corporation has the rights of people. okay? so, in your deliberations consider the rights of people. well, i've got a great answer for that. they are human, but they are not humane. because if you have the rights of a person, then you should also execute the responsibilities of a person, and you should not act indecently towards your fellow man. so i say, if you want to be treated like a person, act like a person. do they have a soul? do they have the nurturing spirit for their fellow man? do they pursue those goals that we like to see in the best of american citizens, that they care and they try to help? and i say no. i say what has been revealed in these documents is that they are human, but they are not humane. here is one of the things you see. what are they about? they are about money. that is what they are about. now, in this case you are saying, well, ed caprio is asking for money. but the point is, today you are going to speak to them in the only language they understand, and that is money. and that is the only tool the law gives you at your disposal. and sure, you heard a lot of evidence, because one of the rules we do not have is that the jurors can raise their hand and say: enough already. we got it. i got it. i heard you. if you guys could have put your hand up and said, we know enough evidence now to deliberate, if that rule was in place, maybe that case would have been over sooner. but we do not know. what we do know is: who ain't for more money? even back in the '60s, they are talking about, of course cigarette smoke is a drug. but dangerous fda implications to go beyond these walls. here is really what it is all about. let us get to that. what is it really all about? what is this corporate human? what is this corporate human's lifeblood? what flows through the tobacco industry's veins? green money. what did dr. proctor say? why do they keep doing this? he goes: greed, i guess. this is something we are asking you to consider as being reprehensible. indecent. in the nature of an atrocity. to addict a child and trade his golden years of life to replace him with additional children, in a business that is based solely and exclusively on youth. what is oscar wilde? i think it is the picture of dorian gray. that is the book. oscar wilde, who was interesting, he was a homosexual writer. famous homosexual writer. is not that interesting? we are in a courtroom, how times change. used to be if someone said they were homosexual in a courtroom, they would go to jail. there were anti-sodomy laws. now the world is changing. we are in a courtroom in another setting. and we are looking at someone who is a minority, but who has someone he loves, who has a partner in life. and it is normal. and i feel no prejudice in this courtroom from the defense lawyers, from the witnesses, from anybody. we have accepted it, and we are moving along. that is progressive, and that is good. but what did they say? what did oscar wilde say? in the picture of dorian gray, which by the way, the picture of dorian gray is a great analogy for the tobacco industry, because the picture of dorian gray was -- does anyone know what that is? anyone know the picture of dorian gray? it was a story by oscar wilde, great writer, playwright. where he, the guy, dorian gray, was like a debaucher. he was a bad -- he was out doing all kinds of terrible things in his community, back in the victorian era, or wherever he was, on his horse. he was doing bad things to people, lots of bad stuff. but he looked great. he looked clean and beautiful. presenting to the public, he was a smooth and beautiful guy. but at home in his mansion, on the wall was his portrait. and it was rotting. it was rotting. the evilness of what his conduct was, which did not show on him, internally, in secret, in his mansion, on his wall, that picture would show, over time, a deterioration. that is the picture of dorian gray. in some ways, the tobacco industry is saying: wait. they look beautiful. they look pretty. there is models, there is actors, there is great colors of package products that look like everything else, and, you know, are indistinguishable from normal consumer products. i mean, look at this stuff. here is a pack of cigarettes. pall mall. look at the colors. and then look at how the colors match up with every other normal consumer product. everything around the same size. it hides in plain sight. here is a batman. how are you supposed to know this stuff is bad? a six-year-old boy walks up to his father and holds up a pack of these cigarettes and says, dad, what are these? and the father, dutifully trying to protect his son, says, they are bad. dad: those are bad. and you know what the six-year-old son says? they do not look bad. they look nice. some of them have a nice camel on the cover. just like a little toy camel the kid has. how do you teach them it is bad? it looks like a normal consumer product. how do you team them that? and what do they say? what is the cigarette? it is exquisite and it leaves one unsatisfied. what does that mean? we kept hearing about satisfaction, right? pleasure, taste, satisfaction. you saw the ads. you heard about the ads. we heard about all of that. but what does it really mean? cigarettes leave you unsatisfied, because smokers are addicted, and the nicotine wears off. and you are not smoking to feel better; you are smoking to avoid the effects of withdrawal, the jitteriness that happens when in a few minutes to 30 minutes, the cigarette and the nicotine begins to wear off. so here's the truth, internally. let us hope our addicted customers stay unsatisfied, and then what will the effect of that addiction be? all we will need is a bigger bag of money to carry to the bank -- a larger bag of money to carry to the bank. this is what it is really about. you can decide, hey, i do not think that meets with the bounds of moral decency. i find it to be reprehensible. so the case is about ed caprio much more, because you may consider harm suffered by other persons not party to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the defendants' acts. that is why we talked about 20 million other deaths. so, when you talk about what they did to ed and what happened to him and how he believed and how he was duped, you can make the decision, by clear and convincing evidence, no confusion, that punitive damages are warranted as to ed. and when you deliberate on the punitive damages, it will be as to ed. it will not be as to everybody. but whether or not this industry, a non-contrite industry should be punished, you can consider harms to others. now remember. remember that lung cancer line going up that matched the cigarette sales line? you know, that is not just a statistical line. that is mothers and fathers and aunties and grandparents and brothers and sisters and folks who suffered. and not just the people that actually were sick, but their loved ones. the toll that tobacco exerts is amazing. elton john's got a song. mona lisas and mad hatters. it is got a line in there: "i thought i knew, but now i know." you all came in here and maybe you thought you knew something about it. but now maybe you know something different. because a lot of folks do not know the truth of what the tobacco industry really was all these years. so, 20 million people. that is a lot of people. and i say the numbers numb. you know, one or two deaths is a tragedy; 100 deaths is a statistic. folks have that. how do you wrap your mind around a case where you guys are called upon to take responsibility for deciding punitive damages and harm to others? we are talking about 20 million deaths. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. 401, 403, state farm. improper argument. the court: overruled. go ahead, sir. mr. schlesinger: take a look at our great state of florida. i'm born and raised here. now, from key west to st. augustine, to pensacola, jacksonville, tallahassee, eustis, arcadia, zolfo springs, hardee county, you name it, from one end of the state to the other. you name it. i want you to picture in your mind -- mr. cofer: objection, your honor. improper argument, williams, state farm. 401. 403. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: thank you. and imagine that no matter where you went in the state of florida right now, that that entire state was empty. there was not a single living, breathing human soul anywhere, from one end of the state to the other, no matter where you drove, no matter what school you went to -- mr. cofer: may we approach? the court: hold on, sir. mr. cofer: may we approach? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. cofer: i move for mistrial. he is now basically said we exterminated the state of florida. this is ed caprio's case. you cannot punish for harm to others. you can only consider harm to others in reprehensibility if it is the same conduct that also harmed ed caprio. that is williams-state farm. he is made no nexus between all these other people that may or may not have died and all the circumstances. but this argument got so incredibly prejudicial. he is now basically said we killed the entire state of florida. improper argument, pandering, inflaming the jury. it is outrageous. i've objected several times. you permitted it. at this point, we need a mistrial. mr. schlesinger: it is not close to it. i did not say they killed anyone in florida. i was trying to give them context for the magnitude of 20 million. the court: i'm going to deny the request for a mistrial. mr. cofer: can we at least have a standing objection? mr. schlesinger: he already ruled. the court: hold on. mr. cofer: can we at least sustain the objection, tell the jury to disregard, and have him move on? the court: no. mr. cofer: this is outrageous. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. schlesinger: if i may, start my time up, judge? may i continue? the court: sure. we have about another 20 minutes, and then we will take a break. mr. schlesinger: okay. so, continuing on. the point i'm trying to make is, there are 20 million people in the state of florida now. imagine there was nobody in the state of florida. i'm trying to give you a sense of the magnitude of loss from 1964 to the present of 20 million folks dying prematurely and needlessly from a tobacco epidemic perpetuated and sustained by an industry. that is how significant that loss is. and you know what? america is this industry's ashtray. they stub out 540,000 lives per year -- mr. bideau: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: america is this industry's ashtray. they stub out 540,000 lives a year, for money? you know, we have lost the attention to it. we hear so many things, but we have lost the attention to it. this is an attempt by me to persuade you to talk, but also i want you to say, i want you to think, we are seeing things as they are, the truth of what the tobacco scourge really is. and then we talked about truth and consequences. and so, when it comes to punishment, you know, when you sell a product to millions of people, the truth matters. okay? when your greed causes devastating consequences for millions of your fellow americans, there should be consequences for you. there should be consequences for companies that engineer their products for addiction, target children and teens in order to addict them, choose to keep selling addiction as part of a defective product. because remember, this is, according to the engle findings, a defective product, unreasonably dangerous. it is unreasonably dangerous, more dangerous than it needs to be. dr. proctor said: make it uninhalable. take it out of the hands of anyone under 25 years of age, and you would have a much different situation. or ban it altogether. okay? but it is an unreasonably dangerous product. more dangerous than it needs to be. that is a finding in this case. when you trivialize the power of addiction, when you do not tell the truth about a dangerous and defective product, when you know full well about it, and when you deceitfully offer up false illusions of safety for a deadly product. this is about truth and consequences. it is about the truth and how they need to tell it, when, in fact, they butchered the truth. and consequences. and they need to face them. and punishment, has been said by augustine, to be justice for the unjust. they are not supposed to like it. they are supposed to be punished because you all have made that conclusion that they deserve to be punished. so they say right here, our basic position? the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to findings that we are making false or misleading statements to the promote the sale of cigarettes. so they say, years ago, in 1968: we are lying, and we are going to get caught lying, and we are going to get busted for it. they knew internally they were lying to the american public, but they decided to do so for their business. and this jury instruction talks about how do you get to punitive damages.how do you arrive at the justification to exact a penalty for this pack, this pack of lies, a pack of lies is all this is. how do you get to that point? some of the things is that there is a little bit higher standard. it is not just the greater weight. it must be without confusion. lacking in confusion. you will have the instruction. you can read the whole thing. i'm saving time. let us talk about lack of confusion. there is no doubt about the doubt. right? they created a doubt campaign. they pursued a doubt campaign. they made it so that folks would not know. it is unproven. nobody knows. we have to wait to see. there is no doubt about the doubt. we have got records and documents that you saw. i'll show you some. there is also no confusion about the confusion. remember, are we going to arrive at this jury instruction without confusion? sure, there is no confusion about that. what is not there confusion about? that is what is funny. the confusion. the confusion that was the business model of the tobacco industry. where do they say it? obviously, the key word is "confusion." this is their internal document from 1966, as part of the conspiracy. started in 1954. he felt into their conspiracy, started smoking in 1958 as a 15-year-old. what chance did he have? there were no warnings on a pack of cigarettes when he was smoking. and even the first one was not even a warning. it was a caution. maybe cigarettes could be hazardous to your health. maybe they are not. the poor man falls into addiction at the age of 15, when the pediatric brain is the most susceptible and exquisitely sensitive to the addiction of nicotine, and he becomes an addict for all those years. so there is no confusion about the confusion. anything we can do to confirm such a situation works to our advantage. and there is no doubt about the doubt. how is this? what about this? doubt is our product. they sell cigarettes, they make cigarettes, they fabricate them. they manufacture them. they juice them up with sugar and ammonia compounds to freebase crack nicotine that goes to the brain and makes the maximum amount of addiction possible. and they say: doubt is our product. because it competes with the body of fact. we are competing with facts. and it is a means of establishing a controversy. they admit that tirc and all those things were defensive operations and front organizations, and they would be in a deplorable position. and they say, now that folks are hearing it is bad for you in '64, we will put the phony filter on it. the phony filter, which not only did not it help; it made things worse. filter cancer. adenocarcinoma. the new scourge of addictive cigarettes, the drug of cigarettes today. these are things that help you know, hey, we meet the obligations under the clear and convincing standard. here is what i want to say. there is no doubt about the doubt. there is no confusion about the confusion. is that clear? i think it is. i hope you will find that it is. then they misled about filters. filters were a fraud, they were a marketing gimmick. they were the health reassurance campaign. in the '50s, when the health scare came out, they needed to come up with a psychological crutch. so they put stuff on and said, they are getting just as much tar and filter, but they abandoned the cigarette on grounds of reduced risk to health. what is it really about? the illusion of filtration. what are they really saying? we will advertise and say here is the super duper, super extra you-know-what 5,000 filter that is capability of taking out anything bad, and a nice jolt of nicotine. and what does the surgeon general say? here is a few pages you may want to read in this good book. i call this one of the "good books" because it is good in a lot of ways. page 16, page 17, page 20, tells you the whole story about the filter fraud and how they faked out the surgeon general for decades, and they had to admit that the new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts. so they fooled and duped the surgeon general, as well. and then this is the national cancer monograph. that is in evidence as well. and it talks about the lights being the same kind of fraud. give folks a psychological crutch. keep them smoking, because if they start quitting, we are going to lose business. here is the scheme linking. the only one second on this is, hey, linkage is not causation. i heard dr. dorce. i thought that was really parsing words. i did not think that you will find that that was very credible. chains linking together, associations, causation. playing word games to avoid that. nicotine addiction leads to lung cancer. that is the bottom line. how do we know that? can we play? (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: this is way back then, in koop. the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing 300,000 americans a year. that is when those numbers were down lower, back in those years. tobacco addiction killing. that is what is known as addiction causation. that is the consequence. the addiction makes you smoke crazy compulsive, hundreds of hits to the brain a day of nicotine. there is no other reason for smoking. hard to wrap your mind around it, because we live in the culture they created. we are in the business of selling nicotine. it is a potent drug. it is all about nicotine, its addictive nature. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker without nicotine. and then they even say the cigarette is not the product; the cigarette is the package. the product is nicotine, and the cigarette pack is a storage supply of a day's supply of nicotine. cigarette is a nicotine delivery device, one of the most craftily designed small devices on the planet. this here, this package here, has been sold more than any other packaged product in the history of human civilization. the most successful advertising campaign, the most recognizable logo. and what is the leg up? they are selling an addictive drug. gives them a nice leg up. anyway. and the surgeon general is very clear. it is not free choice. you cannot say ed chose, ed chose, ed chose, when everyone knows, including their own internal memorandum. shook hardy reminds us, we cannot defend a smoking and health case as free choice if the person was addicted. that was in 1980, when they were denying addiction. that was before 1988, when surgeon general koop declared the drug nicotine to be so highly addictive as cocaine and heroin. they were saying: if it ever gets out that it is addictive, we cannot defend that someone is making a free choice when they are addicted. and they are. millions are caught in this web of deceit. as a matter of fact, surgeon general 2014. there is ed. ed is the web. there are the defendants. and here is what the surgeon general says. chief preventable killer with more than 40 million americans caught in the web of tobacco dependency. ladies and gentlemen, that is all of them, or darned near all of them. if there is 45 million smokers, 40 million is almost all the smokers. because it is known that when you smoke, you smoke for nicotine. the drug gives you a dependence. let us not keep talking about how a million and a half or a million people a year quit over the last 50 years, at a rate of 3 percent of the 50 million smokers that ultimately added up to 50 or 60 million quitters. that is what the defense, the cigarette attorneys, want to talk about. let us talk about the 50 million that are smoking and the 40 million caught up in the web, and the millions that have died, and the 1200 to 1400 that are going to die today. and the 50,000 that died during this trial. as many as died in the vietnam war. let us talk about them. let us hear from them about that. but there is going to be blinders. you will not. so how about this? philip morris stood in the way of nicotine cessation. they did not want ed to quit. he was the perfect customer. he used the product as they intended. he bought the product, he used their coupons, they incentivized him. he did everything they wanted him to do. is not it interesting to spend a couple weeks in the courtroom with the tobacco company saying, he should quit, he should quit, he should quit. when the last thing in the world the tobacco company wants you to do is quit. and when merrell dow first came out with a way that maybe would help smokers quit, that chewing gum, they went crazy, they boycotted them, they blocked them, they said everything about this gum is offensive to our business. that is not an entity that cares about their customers. what if they really cared about their customers? what if they did not ever let a cigarette be sold to anyone under 25? you had to have behind the counter at the pharmacist and ids. what if when a 30-year-old said, i'm 30 years old now, i've been smoking since i was 14 years old, i want to have a family, why do not they say, you know what? you are a great customer. we are going to help you quit. what if they did not sell to minors? if all smoking begins at adolescence and youth, and they lost that business, because if you do not start smoking by 25, you do not start smoking. they would lose ninety percent of their business. they would have ten percent left. so they would only be making hundreds of millions of dollars a year instead of billions of dollars a year. they would still have a business. would that be more responsible? sure. could they have done that? sure. these are the choices they chose to make. let us talk about who really is making free choices. ed was an innocent, addicted. maybe his human frailties, his human weaknesses were such that he was not maybe completely able to try as hard as he could. he should have tried harder. he got copd. they said: you are sick, you need to quit. he tried hard to quit, but he did not. but the fact that he could not quit when he got sick is evidence of addiction. substantial impairment demonstrated by continued use despite harmful consequences. robert heimann said it was not injurious. and he said: smokers are justified in relying on our statements. so was ed. they did not tell the truth to ed. what about the stuff they concealed? if they had told him the truth about it, would it have been important? would it have been material? if they got up in said, in 1964, you know, you are right. this is a dangerous problem. we are killing people. how different would it have been? i'm going fast. a quarter trillion dollars, 250,000 million dollars, since the '60s, on advertising that supposedly has no effect. well, look at page 618 in surgeon general '12 where tyler foote, a famous advertising guy, says tobacco companies trying to maintain that advertising does not work, that is utter nonsense. by the way, we also heard something -- and this is important -- on peer pressure. there are pages in this, 2012, i hope you will get to, where the tobacco companies' marketing practices create peer pressure. they are the ones that create the peer pressure. they want people to smoke. and then for it to be like a communicable infectious disease, for everybody else to smoke. that is good for business, when smokers beget more smokers. but it is in the culture they have created. so i said: protect children, do not addict them. and then here is all the youth marketing. which they have never admitted, except for bennett lebow. today's teenager, tomorrow's regular customer. the smoking patterns of teenagers are particularly important to philip morris. the success of philip morris red during its rapid growth was it is the brand of choice among teenagers, who stuck with it as they grow older. what did dr. robert fulton say in the book, everything i need to know i learned in kindergarten? he said: play nice. do not hurt people. if you do, say you are sorry. be decent to people, not indecent. this is not decent. this is reprehensibility. this is atrocious misconduct. then all through here, more documents. the great bonanza to get the youth market. the 14-to-24 age group, tomorrow's cigarette business. oh, by the way, better get that word "youth" out of there and throw "young adults" in there. from now on, 12-year-olds are young adults. let us tell that to our 12-year-olds. and now you are young adults. young lady, you are a young adult now. you can start smoking. younger adults have been a critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand for the last 50 years. that is diane burrows, it is in evidence. her whole chart starts with 12-year-olds smoking. up to ten percent of the 12-year-olds are smoking in that chart. and then dr. teague. if we are going to survive and prosper in the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. how can we induce a pre-smoker and a non-smoker to become a habituated smoker? how do you get someone who does not know about nicotine to think of a valued image, or a cool baseball player or something neat or some rebellious act to take up that first puff? because that first puff starts the role of addiction. and then joe camel. it is as young as you get. as young as you get. selling kids cigarettes with cartoons. there is the 12-year-old replacement smoker. talk about cynical and callous. we are losing customers who are dying or quitting and then getting sick and dying, and we are going to replace them with 12, 13, 14 years old. here it is. it is about as young as you can get. that is joe camel. okay? and then this is a paper on nicotine, claude teague. you can read about it, that the nicotine is not important to the kids. right there at says: at the beginning they are free to choose. plus, plus, plus, plus, plus. but at the end, negative. you are not free to choose. you are not free to choose when you are an addicted smoker. then this is referring to the kids as crops. right? referring to the little kids as -- the youth as a crop. they dehumanize the customer, while humanizing themselves, making themselves out to be healthy and strong and hale and well-met. the youth is going to join with this crop of prospects, like they are an orange to be like squeezed and juiced and squeezed. all that profits out of them so there is a dried-up husk and there is nothing left and your lungs are rotted, or they have cut out your lungs, or two lobes of your lung. and then they said something when they cut out his lungs about, oh, the only thing that bothers him is he is got an itch on his scar. that was one of the cross-examinations. you know, he is all better. they cut out a couple hunks of his lung, and the only thing bothering him is a little itchy scar. come on. you cannot breathe when you have emphysema and they take out a chunk of your lung. that is unreasonably -- saying he is not hurt. and he is terribly hurt. so, here's a document i call the chiller. the court: five minutes. mr. schlesinger: thank you. this is claude teague. claude teague says: we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try it. instead, we must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he just try smoking, in the hopes that he will then discover -- that he will for himself then discover the real satisfactions obtainable. is that cold blooded? is that just cold blooded? that is why i call it the chiller, because that is just somebody completely devoid from the humanity of what he is saying that articulates in a sentence what the business is. the two-stage model. get the kid that thinks it is cool, and then he is going to discover the real satisfactions. he is going to be hooked. why do you think fishermen use hooks? the fish do not know there is a hook in there. the fish does not want to get hooked. that is a petri dish with bacteria growing in it. that is the peer pressure i was telling you about. all those peers, all those other smokers, they are not smoking because the bacteria is growing in a culture medium. the culture. the culture medium. they created the culture, the environment in our country that allowed the proliferation of smokers among peers. there is extensive scientific research that explains that. they created the culture. that is how things grow and proliferate. without that warm nurturing environment of advertising and assurances of health and promises of glory to children and rebelliousness to children, you are -- and the food, the agar, medium in the food. you do not proliferate it. they are the ones that create the peer pressure. they cannot disappear in this courtroom. they are not flying colors. you do not see them flying their proud logo. you are not seeing this, what you see with advertising. because, as dr. proctor says, the tobacco company, in a courtroom, would like to disappear. and this is surgeon general 2012: all tobacco use begins during youth and young adulthood. thousands of kids started today. every day. this is why you have a chance to say something. we reject this conduct. you can be a brick in the wall. there is the song by ... mr. gdanski: pink floyd. mr. cofer: pink floyd. mr. schlesinger: pink floyd. thank you. that talks about another brick in the wall. you cannot be another brick in the wall. you cannot stop the entire one. but you can look where it says, hey teacher, leave those kids alone. you can say: hey tobacco, leave those kids alone. that is one of the really heinous things they have done. this is the peer pressure document on page 522. the tobacco industry attributes to peer pressure but does not acknowledge a relationship between their advertising and the peer influence. and the evidence shows -- and this is scientific evidence -- that these efforts, the marketing efforts, affect peer influence to smoke and encourage smoking among young people. that is the truth of it. so pay attention to the industry that is driving this epidemic. again, they call the smokers rats in a cage. but it is all about nicotine. and then you remember the quote? if it was not for the nicotine, folks would be no more likely to smoke cigarettes than they would be to blow bubbles or light sparklers. think about it. that is what it is, a mouth thing. you are blowing bubbles, whatever. you are holding up a cigarette, or you are watching some fire. but the truth is, it is a drug. as ed said, he is a drug addict. it is hard to wrap your mind around it. but cigarettes, they do not look in culture as drugs, but that is what they are. the court: time is up, sir. mr. schlesinger: i'm going to take from the back end, if i may. the court: sure. mr. schlesinger: this is robert heimann. he was against the warnings. the warnings were a fraud and a sham from the very beginning. they were watered down, they did not have any applicability. dr. teague said the warnings are a plus, because if you tell a kid not to do something, he is probably going to do it. they were on the side of the pack. they did not really say anything specific until 1985. he had been smoking for decades by then. and when they finally did, they always attributed it to the surgeon general. the surgeon general says -- but they always disagree with the surgeon general. they belittle the surgeon general. they never said "we say." early on, those early warnings did not mean a thing. the ftc reports told you they are dried out and useless. and here's the thing. it is 30 years, they have not changed the warnings. everything we have learned, all these additional documents. everything we know, they have not changed the warnings. the only time, liggett went ahead and put "smoking is addictive" on their box of chesterfields. philip morris bought the chesterfield brand, took "smoking is addictive" off. that is a pretty important thing to know. for a lot of folks, they did not know they were addictive. that is the ineffectiveness of cigarette labeling. here is the thing about warnings. if you see a kid walking up a high dive board to -- a diving board that is on an empty pool, and there is a "no diving" sign there and you see him going by, do you say: go ahead. go ahead. you have been warned. and let him just jump off that diving board into the pool. no. what do decent people do? what do human people do? caring, nurturing people who want to protect children? they scream: do not do that. they yell: hey, kid, it is dangerous. they run after him. they launch themselves up the ladder and they try to grab him to stop him. they do not say: you have been warned. you are on your own. little kids cannot make long-range planning decisions. no kid that tries his first cigarette because of peer pressure promoted by tobacco knows what he is getting himself into. so determine the minimum nicotine required to keep the normal smoker hooked. dr. tamel. i like that one because it shows they know all about their smokers being hooked. who ain't for more money? if we did not have nicotine, we are going to be out of business. overnight, we will lose our jobs and consulting fees. we tend to suffer from the fear that we are devoting our business lives to the propagation of lung cancer. there is one in here that says cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. they cause lung cancer. an unattractive side effect? and the thing, moreover, nicotine is addictive. cancer is in every class of smoke, and you cannot filter it out. but they told the surgeon general you could. they said: there is no cancer, we will filter it out. internally they said: there is cancer all through the smoke, it is full of cancer. but we will filter it out. so they were lying. project scum. mr. seiden: judge, continued objection on the grounds we spoke about earlier. the court: yes, sir. mr. schlesinger: and this is where i will wrap up, i think. unless i've got more slides. but the slides are dictating. project scum. the reason i want to show you project scum and talk about it is because a company that willfully trades lives for profits, that has an enterprise of death as a business, that sells an addictive drug to children to hook them for life to generate profits, even though they foreshorten their life by decades or more and kills people, does not have any compunction in their cynicism to also ridicule those same customers. what is worse? addicting them and killing them or making fun of them while you are doing it? now, internally in the '90s, they were making fun of gay people and homeless people. they called them project scum. some clever person said sub culture urban marketing is project scum. they never sanctioned anybody or got in trouble. they never quit doing that. it was only when they got caught, when the documents came out years later, that the ceo issued an apology, which i say was insincere. because when you apologize only after you got caught, that is insincere. now project scum is belittling the customer. of course, if you addict and kill them, what is the big deal to also belittle them? and, as dr. proctor said, this ain't the only example. there are plenty more. and they said here, it is the castro area, the homeless people. they had to -- those are the kind of people. they were targeting the most vulnerable people. let us sell them cigarettes, let us get them hooked. hey, here is an overlooked market. the weak, the powerless, the vulnerable. let us get them hooked and sell them cigarettes. and then what do they say in their internal documents right around the same time, when the committee of counsel, the all powerful lawyer meeting is getting together? stevens, the head of the committee of counsel, is quitting. and what have we got? the coronation of the god king. the head of the committee of counsel, the number one chief architect and top of this whole entire conspiracy is the god king. they dehumanize their customers, and they deify themselves. and what does a god king who has been crowned in a coronation have over folks, over his dominion? he has the power of life and death. you are celebrating that? addiction and death, and you are celebrating it through the success of your conspiracy? why should you check off that last box that says there is no confusion about the confusion; there is no doubt about the doubt; that clearly and convincingly and without hesitation you can arrive at a decision that this entity deserves punishment? and why is that an important reason why we are here today, and one of the most important things i've been honored to do in my life? because that is the truth of it. that is an interesting comparison right there. and then they said they would go out of business if it was ever proven to be dangerous. they did that a bunch of time. they never did. and, as dr. proctor said, what keeps it going? just greed, i guess. and why is ed -- why does it matter under though reliance instructions, which are complicated but you have to read them? here is the simplified wording of those instructions: lies cost lives. proctor testified to it. lies cost him his lungs. that is why. he was hurt by their lies. that is why, he was one of the millions hurt by their lies. it was nothing personal. they were lying to everybody. but he was caught up in it. they talked about what would happen if they came up with the antagonist in nicotine, if they could block the nicotine. they would be in the process of digging their own grave. and remember, they have got a survival instinct. they humanize themselves, and they do not want to dig their own grave. however, they are fully willing to dig half a million graves a year of their customers who are dying off. and the literature. should i skip that? i'll skip it. and then one of the things real quick they talked about was that the -- the surface area of your mouth. the size of a tennis ball. hold cigar smoke in your mouth, the size of a tennis ball. that is how much absorption. but as dr. andrews testified, the surface area of the lungs, the size of a tennis court. that is why when a big puff of smoke goes into your lungs, which, by the way, has no taste buds whatsoever. there is no taste buds in the lungs. you cannot taste with your lungs. all that nicotine is rapidly absorbed in that highly vascularized organ. and you get all that nicotine shooting to your brain. controlling nicotine, controlling nicotine. they can do it. it is all about nicotine. sales correlating with nicotine. more nicotine, more money. and shook hardy. we cannot defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person is addicted, 1980. i told you that. the waxman hearings. you saw them. i'm not going to play them again. thanks so much for listening to me. i know it was rapid fire. i hope some of it got absorbed by you. mr. gdanski: thank you. good morning. thanks so much. you guys have been a wonderful jury, unbelievably patient. i spent a lot of time on my feet with a lot of witnesses, and now i'm going to be the last one to talk to you today before you go back and deliberate. and before i say anything, first and foremost, thank you so much. thank you very much on behalf of ed, everyone who tried this case. we very, very much appreciate it. now if you listened to the tobacco lawyers, you have heard a tremendous amount of evidence, a mound of evidence, days and days of evidence showing how these companies did very, very, very awful, horrendous, heinous things. but if you listened to them, they make it sound like they have done nothing wrong, zero, nothing. 5489 nothing they did mattered. nothing they did made a difference. nothing they did impacted people. they never killed anybody. they never addicted anybody, never manipulated cigarettes, nothing. they have been absolved in their own minds, but nowhere else have they been absolved, nowhere else, and that is important. now i agree with mr. seiden, the evidence matters. he said: the plaintiff wants you to believe the evidence does not matter. how could that possibly be true? we put so much before you. the evidence in this case indisputably is that this industry profits off the backs of customers they exterminate and then blames them when they press their claims in court. you kill them, and then you blame them for killing them. that is just -- it is mind-boggling. in no other institution, in no other society, in no other environment would somebody be able to defend actions like this. you do not blame the victim, but they do. and now -- i heard it in the beginning 5490 of the case. first thing mr. cofer said in jury selection -- both panels, some of you sat on the first panel, some of you sat on the second panel, and i think some of you might have met when you were all selected for the jury. i think that was the case. both times, he said: there is two sides to every story. two sides to every story. mr. seiden said it again today: there is two sides to every story. that sounds very reasonable. you know, it is a well-vetted tobacco line. dr. proctor talked about it. they used that line to convince americans 40, 50, 60, 30, 20, and 10 years ago that there is nothing wrong with cigarettes. that was the foundation of their entire conspiracy: there is two sides to every story. mr. seiden: litigation objection. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. gdanski: there is two sides to every story. i'm surprised they are still using it, but they are. but you know what? there is not 5491 always two sides to every story. it is not. it sounds good. you like to tell people that. you like to talk to your kids. i've talked to my kids. i'd say: what did you do wrong? who hit who first? sometimes after you hear 16, 17, 18 days of evidence or five minutes talking to my five-year-old, i say: hey, what you did, what they did is really, really ridiculously bad. it is evil. it is heinous. there is not two sides to project scum. there is not. you apologized after you got caught. after they got caught, they apologized one time in one letter to the san francisco times after they were busted. that is not an apology. it is meaningless. where is the record evidence of them going out to make sure homeless people in this country do not smoke? that seems like a pretty noble thing to do. that would be very, very good. where is that? what is the other side to the story of manipulating cigarettes? where is it? when did 5492 they talk about it? what is the other side to the story of joe camel? they still pretend joe camel was not meant to market to youth. come on. we put up the document. as low as you can go. it is a cartoon character. who else are they marketing to? what is the other side of the story to manipulating nicotine, adding ammonia, high fructose corn syrup? what is the other side of the story to killing 20 million people, an epidemic of death unknown in any other aspect of human history? mr. cofer: excuse me for one moment. your honor, just to preserve the objection, williams/state farm, and i will not interrupt again. the court: okay. overruled. mr. gdanski: what is the other side of the story to free-basing nicotine? why are they doing that? so if they wanted to tell the other side of the story, they got all the data on free-basing nicotine. they are the ones who did it. they never 5493 refuted it. they never said: we did not do that. you know, we never free-based nicotine. so then, what is the explanation? what is the other side of the story? none offered. silence. instead, what do they do? they point the finger at ed and say: oh, ed, you knew in 1958 that smoking cigarettes was bad because there was a poll. well, if he knew in 1958 smoking cigarettes was bad, then it also stands to reason he knew everything they were saying. but they want to have it on a one-way street, and this world does not exist on a one-way street. it does not work that way. what is the other side of the story of 485, 500, we heard the numbers growing, 520, 530, half a million americans dying a year? what is the other side of the story? they never tell you the other side. there is no other side. instead, they ignore it. they ignore death. they ignore everything that they do. these companies do not manufacture cigarettes. they manufacture lung cancer. they 5494 manufacture copd, and they manufacture death. and for all these deaths, for all the deaths, the 480, the 20 million, there is countless and endless suffering that goes with it. countless and endless children, parents, family members. it is not like when a person dies, that is the end of that story, and we just -- one person who existed at one moment in time. they have loved ones. john and louise mavrakis are here today. they could not come in the trial. they could not sit in. it is ed's sister and brother-in-law. ed has people who love him, who care about him, and so do every single person these companies exterminate. and you know what? we talked -- let us take a look at a couple of things. okay? there you go. just click it. video technician: yes. mr. gdanski: thanks. so they said: well, we did not get ed to start smoking. this was the very beginning. if you think about their defense, all they have really done 5495 is tell you the same four things over and over and over and over and over again. ed started smoking with a girl in high school. john's dad had copd. ed's uncle had copd, and dr. patel warns. how many times did they repeat that? yesterday they said: you remember ed's uncle. of course we remember ed's uncle. you talked about him every single day in the entire trial. but the reality is the surgeon general tells us the tobacco industry -- so you know, it is funny, some of the early surgeon general's reports do not reflect on the tobacco industry because we did not know how awful they were, and we did not know how evil they were, and we did not know how much they were affecting people. the later surgeon general's reports, the last two, three ones, they are all about the tobacco industry because now we are learning: hey, you guys faked out the surgeon general. you faked out every person. so here they say the tobacco industry routinely attributes smoking to peer pressure, 5496 just like they did. but it does not acknowledge the relationship between advertising and peer influence, or the effects of advertising on normative behavior. the point is, you are never going to find a person who says: oh, of course, i started using that product. i bought my ipad because i saw a wonderful commercial. of course not. but does it all affect us? of course. and where does it come from? from the manufacturer, and they pretend to disappear. they live in a world where cigarettes fall from trees, and the tobacco companies disappear, and cigarettes just wonderfully, magically make their way into smokers' hands, and then they get copd, and then that is the end of it. that is the world they want to live in. it is not reality. the evidence reviewed shows that these efforts also affect peer influence to smoke and encourage smoking among young people. that is peer pressure. the engle findings. i want to be super 5497 clear because there is an issue in this case about reliance and about what ed did know or did not know. and it is not that complicated. it is really not that complicated. the engle findings are that: the defendants, number 4 -- they are in your jury instructions -- concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known, not otherwise known. and so when mr. seiden gets up there and says: well, it had to be something he did not otherwise know, that is the finding. what he said is a rejection of the findings. it is a rejection of engle. mr. seiden: objection. misstates my argument. the court: overrule the objection. mr. gdanski: not otherwise known. he knew this was in the instructions. it is number 4 of the findings. his client was involved in the case. not otherwise known or available, knowing it materially was false or misleading to the company or failed to disclose a material fact 5498 concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. the defendants agreed with other companies and industry organizations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of cigarettes. this agreement was entered with the intention that smokers and members of the public rely to their detriment. that includes ed. that includes ed caprio. and so when you get to the verdict form, the questions that deal with the words "rely," these findings matter. "rely," the findings talk about reliance, not otherwise known. the findings talk about not otherwise known. what evidence is there after the 1980s? they talk about: well, it had to be something that made a difference to him. it had to be something that made a difference to him. ed trusted the cigarette manufacturers. ed testified in this case he never would have believed they would lie to millions of americans. would it have made a difference -- when you are looking at the questions of reliance, would 5499 it have made a difference to a reasonable person if they knew that the tobacco companies were ammoniating cigarettes, free-basing nicotine, and manipulating ph? would that have made a difference? i think it would have. i think if they would come out and said: we are doing this, people would respond. that is called reliance. that is how you rely on an omission because the omission, the failure to tell the person the truth, when revealed, would it have made a difference? that is reliance. would it have made a difference if ed knew how they controlled nicotine? would it have made a difference if ed knew that filters were a fraud? the only place in the world where anybody credibly maintains that filters work, courtrooms. that is it. tobacco companies in courtrooms. that is it. no place else. would it have made a difference if ed knew that they compared smokers to rats? would all of that have made a difference? i think it would have. i think it would 5500 make a difference in anybody if a product we have and we know the manufacturer knows it is addictive and comparing our use of it to a rat in a cage. ed never knew that without nicotine there would be no smoking. that would matter to people. that would matter to ed. here's what ed said: when you think we are smoking -- and back up, before i read it, we have direct, immediate, express, clear, crystal clear, without hesitation evidence of reliance. ed and bryan, roger bryan, they obviously love each other. they are obviously close. they have been through the horrors of not just ed's disease but their close friends that they loved and cared for, watching them die of a disease that nobody understood, that was confusing them, that they were always scared they would get. and ed, who cares for, loves his partner, will remain life partners to the end, said: hey, switch to light cigarettes. these are safer for you. that is what he told him way after 1982. so if he is telling roger, bryan, to switch to light cigarettes, does not that mean that he 5501 probably believed light cigarettes were better for him? i mean, come on. it does not take a rocket scientist to figure that out. and ed testified to that. he said he thought they were safer. did you think that because of advertisements? and ed said, you know, and he sort of said it honestly: of course. they did not say it directly, but less tar, less nicotine. is that what the ads implied? yes. did they work on you? of course. is that why you convinced bryan? did you still believe it? yes. and you told bryan that? yes. when you convinced bryan, were you relying? i was relying on the tobacco industry, their ads. i never imagined an american company would dupe millions of americans smoking a product 5502 with carcinogens that were dangerous to their health. i just could not imagine that type of inhumanity. this pack of cigarettes -- can i turn this off now a second or no? video technician: yes. mr. gdanski: this pack of cigarettes is illegal. it is illegal. can i get a ten-minute and a five-minute warning? the court: sure. which one? both, ten and five? mr. gdanski: yes, please. the court: you got it. mr. gdanski: thank you. this pack of cigarettes is illegal. so what ed is smoking in 1982, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, they are illegal today. why? dr. proctor said why. because they were misleading. so we have a guy smoking a misleading product that today would be illegal to smoke. that is evidence of reliance after 1982. and they went everywhere they could. they told everyone they could that smoking cigarettes was dangerous -- was not proven to be 5503 dangerous, that you should continue smoking. we do not know. we do not know. we have a video we can play? video technician: yes. mr. gdanski: okay. and when you see "lights" on there, that is a statement. "lights" is a statement. it is a word they put on their packs as a statement. so think about that when you see the word "statement" in the jury instructions. (video clip played as follows:) voice: throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? voice: through my tenure? voice: yes. voice: yes, that is so. voice: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? voice: yes. voice: it is a statement that american tobacco placed great reliance on? 5504 voice: we issued that statement, yes. voice: and as far as -- voice: of course we wanted them to believe it. voice: as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? voice: yes. - - - voice: and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking. - - - voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. voice: all right, sir. voice: has not been causally established. voice: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? voice: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. - - - united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful; you are not convinced? voice: it may be, or it may not be. we do not know. - - - voice: do cigarettes cause answer? voice: i do not know if they do or not. - - - voice: i'm not in a position to give you a "does" or "does not" answer. - - - voice: the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? emphysema? voice: it may. voice: they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? voice: it may. voice: do you know whether it does? voice: i do not. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may 5506 find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (video clip concluded.) mr. gdanski: that is all after 1982, and those are all senior executives in the companies. that is the message they were trying to put out. they knew it was critically important to them achieving the goal of sustaining profits because that is what it was about. they want to say mr. caprio is here for money. that is all the law allows. he will take a pound of flesh if the law would allow it. he cannot. but all he can ask for is money in a civil case. and so that is what he can ask for. and, you know, we asked for $12 million in the economic numbers. the $12 million is for his pain and suffering in the past and in the future. the man has suffered. i do not think i have to say any more about that. i know i, my people, we do not measure suffering by how much people make in a year, a salary. we do not choose to do it that way. i think that that is an unfair way to measure suffering when you cannot breathe at night. 5507 and if there is a power outage in south florida, your oxygen tank goes out, and then you have a major, major problem. so i think that the evidence justifies the numbers that we offer to you, but you can do whatever you want. when we are done, you go back; you pick a foreperson. it is all in your hands. you can go higher. you can go lower. you can do whatever you see fit, whatever the evidence calls for. can i go back to this pack for one second? video technician: sure. mr. gdanski: thanks. on the pack, so it says marlboro lights, and then it says -- and dr. proctor talked about this -- hard to see, it says a latin phrase: veni, vidi, vici. this is the corporate motto of greed from philip morris: we came, we saw, we conquered. who on earth did they conquer? they knew it. they knew they were the god kings. they knew they had the world of millions of smokers in their grasp to do with as they chose, and they 5508 did, and they took advantage of it, and they manipulated it. and then they want to come to court proud and beat their chest and say: it is all your fault. nothing we ever did mattered. who puts: we came, we saw, we conquered, on a product that kills people? how is that -- it is mind-boggling. it is mind-boggling. mr. cofer said yesterday: mr. caprio, he had a wake-up call in 1996 when he got diagnosed with copd. a wake-up call? it is not a wake-up call. there is no such thing as a little bit of copd. you know, a diagnosis of copd is a lifelong situation. it is not a wake-up call. it is not like the alarm clock goes off and you shut it off. copd stays with every breath that you have. and i asked dr. andrews -- he tried to trivialize it. he did. he tried to trivialize ed's copd in 1996 by saying: he did not have symptoms. i said: he had shortness of breath. he had low oxygen. he had distant breath sounds. he said: those all could be from 5509 something else. there was nothing else. ed had real copd. of course if he were to stop smoking, he would get better. that is not the point. he was addicted. there is no real question that the man was addicted. i think in any sensible situation, any sensible medical test, the fagerstrom test, it all shows that ed was addicted. but you cannot trivialize copd. you cannot trivialize cutting open his lungs. you cannot do that. next, please, project scum. there you go. thanks. mr. seiden: continuing objection? the court: sure. mr. gdanski: project scum, they say that we are misusing project scum. they say that we are the ones coming forward and, you know, we are taking it out of context. mr. cofer said that we used project scum in a shameful manner. you are the first jury in the history of the universe to hear about project 5510 scum. never been shown to a jury who is going to decide the fate of these companies. never been shown to a jury. this is not shameful. what is disturbing is how lost they are. their moral compass is lost. the appropriate thing to do when you show project scum is to get up here and say: hey, mea culpa, that was really awful, and if we did not apologize enough, we are going to do it one more time. that is what you do. you do not come forward and say: these guys are misusing project scum. project scum was disgusting. that is what they call ed caprio? that is what they call people in this country? mr. seiden: objection. misrepresents the evidence. mr. gdanski: it is insane. the court: overruled. mr. gdanski: it is insane. it is -- there is no words to describe it. it speaks for itself. and the moral compass that they have lost 5511 in the '40s and '50s and '60s and '70s and '80s, you would like to think they got it back, but they have not. they have not. they have shown no real, you know, understanding of what is decent, what is good, what is appropriate, what they should be doing. and it is not us, the lawyers, who thought of project scum. i showed you the article from the san francisco new times right after where they said: hey, what you guys are doing, the purpose -- this is anne landman. dr. proctor talked about it. they said: as i dig through these documents, i come to realize it is all nasty, but this one is particularly nasty. even if it is a cute acronym, how do you justify it? what customers would want to buy a product from any company that calls them "scum"? the name of the project is beyond offensive. and they realized that a little too late. it is one thing to go after a particular group to extract its money, but it is another to be derogatory while you do it. this is the newspaper articles calling 5512 these companies out. that is the truth of the matter. that is the truth of the situation. you put in a -- i hope after this came out you put in new laws at the company to protect against the evils that you have perpetrated in the past. but those are all what dr. proctor called evescasting. do you remember, no one understood the word? he thinks he coined the word. it is basically covering up your tracks. that is all it is, covering up your tracks after you do something wrong. one of the things you are going to see in your jury instructions is legal cause. mr. cofer showed you this paragraph: addiction to cigarettes, legal cause, directly and in natural and continuous sequence, produced or contributed to produce such copd that it can be reasonably said but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, copd would not have occurred. and he thinks legal cause is very important, and it is. there is a second section to legal cause which he did not show you. 5513 nicotine addiction does not have to be the only cause. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of copd, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of copd even though it operates in combination with the acts of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing the copd. that is tremendously complicated language, which, quite frankly, i do not really understand it. what it means is that, did his addiction to nicotine contribute substantially? did his addiction play an important role in his continued smoking? that is what it means, and of course it did. addiction is the center of their universe. without addiction, there would be nothing. it is the sine qua non of their entire business enterprise, without which there is nothing, nothing. 5514 no nicotine in cigarettes, no lawsuit here today. no nicotine in cigarettes, no oxygen tank humming in the back. no nicotine in cigarettes, no 20 million deaths. no nicotine in cigarettes, no 500,000 dead a year. that is what "substantially contributes" means. the surgeon general tells us: nicotine addiction -- page 105. when you go back there, you guys can take as much time as you want. we are not time bound by you. you have all the time you want. we are up against a weekend. we trust and hope that you guys understand the importance and significance of this case. the next phase of this trial i assure you will be extremely short. we have no evidence. we have no witnesses. we will start and rest. they can do whatever they want to do to drag it out. we will not put on a witness. mr. seiden: i object to that. the court: i'll sustain the objection. mr. seiden: move to strike the comment. 5515 the court: we will strike it. the jury is to disregard it. go right ahead. mr. gdanski: page 105, 105: nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason, fundamental reason. that is all you need. and so what do they do? what do they do here? you do not have a leg to stand on, you break the other guy's. you do not have a leg to stand on, you break the other guy's. and that is what they have done. project scum: we are just going to knock one of their legs down. put up addiction as a fundamental reason, we are going to knock one of their legs down. but the reality is, is that when you knock their leg down, you do not hit them when they are down. and yesterday mr. cofer made a low blow. he made a low blow. he called out scott schlesinger for not being here during parts of the trial. scott apologized for that. mr. cofer 5516 knows good full and well that mr. schlesinger's mom died a sudden, a sudden death that was unexpected. mr. seiden: objection. the court: i'll sustain the objection. mr. gdanski: he knows why he was not here. mr. cofer: whoa, whoa, whoa, and we can instruct the jury to disregard? the court: yes. the jury is to disregard that. go ahead, sir. mr. gdanski: he knows. we know. everyone except for you-all know why scott was not here a few days. mr. seiden: can we have a motion, your honor? the court: i'll sustain the objection. strike that. mr. gdanski: yes, sir. dr. herrera, they say dr. herrera sent ed caprio to dr. kirsch to treat him for nicotine addiction. that is just not true. he said otherwise. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 can we play that? video technician: sure. mr. gdanski: thanks. (video clip played as follows:) voice: but you were the doctor, and you had been the doctor primarily managing his nicotine addiction, right? voice: yes. voice: that has not fallen to the responsibility of a psychiatrist, correct? voice: correct. (video clip concluded.) mr. gdanski: he said it. he said: i treated him for nicotine addiction. i did not send him to dr. kirsch for nicotine addiction. i was the one who treated him. i asked that question because i knew one day these guys were going to try to come to court and say: dr. kirsch never did x, y, or z. dr. kirsch's records do not say anything about mr. caprio's nicotine addiction. neither did dr. patel's, by the way. and when someone finally asked him a question, he said: yeah, of course the guy was addicted to nicotine. no doubt about it. no 5518 doubt about it. they could have gone to ask dr. kirsch questions. you notice in dr. herrera's deposition for the first four hours -- look at the time of that deposition, by the way. it is 19:50. i'm not good with army time, but it was late. when i left, it was very dark. it was 9, 10:00 when we finished that deposition. they could have asked dr. kirsch what she thought. they chose not to do that. and you know what? they also called dr. herrera out for not knowing ed had a partner. it was 10:00 at night. the guy's medical records say: patient lives with a partner. patient lives with a partner. patient lives with a partner. patient lives with a partner. patient lives with a partner. how many times? okay. how many times? and you know what? the tobacco companies, they make it easy to start, as easy as possible to start, and as hard as possible to stop. and that is their business enterprise. that is their life blood. that is what they do. 5519 that is how they survive. and at the center of it all were lawyers, were lawyers. lawyers were running it, engineering it, building it up, feeding it, feeding it, and then making sure it went in the right directions. the court: ten minutes, sir. mr. gdanski: and they just kept going. they kept going. this is -- the court: counsel, ten minutes. mr. gdanski: thank you, judge. thank you. for purposes of the litigation, the industry is not willing to concede anything. in the litigation venue, we will require plaintiffs to prove causation, both legally and scientifically. we intend to play hardball with the victims of cigarette smoking when they press their claims in the courtroom. this -- that, that sentence i just read, that they will play hardball and make them prove legal and scientific causation, is the industry's ultimate public relations sham. 5520 our position continues to mislead the public with a wink, with a wink. that is all you need to see. i can sit down though. i will not because i've got extra time. that is all you need to see. the lawyers run the conspiracy, the influence of the lawyers. in consequence of the importance of the lawsuits, the main power in smoking and health situation undoubtedly rests with the lawyers, and more particularly with the policy committee of lawyers. the lawyers -- mr. seiden: litigation objection. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. gdanski: the jensen issue -- mr. seiden: continuing objection, your honor? the court: sure. mr. gdanski: and this is, by the way, a lorillard document. i'm using the clicker, so i cannot blow it up, but it has lorillard/ctr inquiry at the top. so when he said we did not put in a lorillard document, here it is, lorillard/ctr inquiry. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 the jensen issue raises a larger question, whether funds administered through shook, hardy were used to purchase favorable judicial or legislative testimony, thereby perpetrating a fraud on the public. they purchased favorable judicial or legislative testimony in an effort to perpetrate a fraud on the public. and then they have the gall to come in and question dr. proctor. that takes a lot. this man has dedicated his life to curbing this epidemic. he is not taking free money. they have gall to do that. you know, these are their words, how they describe their own conduct, not written for purposes of exposing it to you in a courtroom. this is their secret, secret files. everybody knows that in the story of eve in the garden, the serpent is blameworthy. the serpent is blameworthy. he is the tempter, the tempter, the one who feeds -- mr. cofer: objection, your honor. this is improper argument. move to strike. the court: overruled. go ahead. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 mr. gdanski: and we know that. that is a basic fundamental human being piece of knowledge. we have the goods on them now. the time is up. it is over with. and they have a document, the god king. i said it back then, i feel uncomfortable saying the words. i feel uncomfortable using the words "god king" to call a tobacco company. who refers to themselves as that? they talked a lot about dr. proctor going from courtroom to courtroom. i thought one thing that dr. proctor said -- oh, this one is -- i'm sorry, this one i cannot -- it is an internal document where dr. dimarco said: although i cannot recall his exact words, our medical/scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity. it is the words on their pieces of paper before any experts were ever retained going forward in this case. that is all you need to see. dr. proctor said: have they ever admitted that a single person had a disease caused by addiction to nicotine? 5523 no. of course he is got to go from courtroom to courtroom. they will not admit anybody is a class member. they make it that much harder on the process. i mean he would earn much less money, by the way, if they would just admit someone was a class member for one time, one time. if not ed, who? if ed's not a class member, who is? and if an industry -- mr. bideau: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. gdanski: and if an industry is not deserving of punishment -- if any industry is deserving of punishment, which better one than this one? which better one than this one? and if not now, then when? a billion deaths in the next century. a billion deaths. are we going to wait until then? we cannot wait until then. mr. cofer: your honor, objection. williams/state farm. the court: overruled. go ahead. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 mr. gdanski: in this trial, we learned there is 480,000 annual deaths. that is 40,000 deaths monthly. that is 1,315 daily deaths, yesterday, today, tomorrow. that means if we take the days of this trial, you have 42,000 people dying from tobacco-related diseases during the course of this trial. this is no joke. this is no joke, and that is using the 480,000 number, not the new numbers which are coming out and being substantiated in leading medical journals. this is no joke we are dealing with. this is a mass epidemic, and so what are they? they are what i call engle breakers. they take the once proud and still proud engle class and break them down one by one by one by one, courtroom to courtroom. they will not let any engle class member survive, and that is -- mr. bideau: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. gdanski: that is a repudiation of the process. that is unfair. the engle class is alive. it is strong. it is multigenerational, 5525 and it will outlive them. it will teach them a lesson. today you hold their fate -- like they pretended they were god kings holding the fate of smokers, you are hold their fate in your hands. you hold their fate in your hands in a way they never did and in a way they never could because they do not get to go back and continue manipulations. it is over. i'm going to skip this. before and after 1982, they duped the surgeon general, they duped the national cancer institute, they duped the federal trade commission, they duped medical doctors, they duped millions of americans, they duped ed caprio, and he used the term "shameful" earlier, "shameful." let us blow up the bottom. the court: five minutes, sir. mr. gdanski: yes, sir. the ftc said: we will not continue to be a victim of their shameful marketing practices. they said: we will not continue to be a victim of the shameful marketing practices of tobacco companies. that is the federal trade commission 5526 talking. we do live, we do unfortunately live in the world they created. the truth, dr. proctor said -- and when he said it, i wrote it down. i thought it was very eloquent. the truth was their worst enemy. doubt is our product. it is also the means of establishing a controversy. doubt is their product. that is it. the ftc, they are the ones who said: we are going to rescind our guidance. on that last one i showed you, they took off their guidance and said: we will not let you guys -- be a cloak screen anymore for you, for the industry. we are taking it away. these are not safer. they took away what they had previously said. i'm not going to -- well, it only takes a second. go ahead, please. (video clip played as follows:) voice: please consider yourselves to be under oath. 5527 voice: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first -- and i'd like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it, and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. voice: mr. johnston? voice: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxications. voice: we will take that as a no, and, again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. voice: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. 5528 voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip concluded.) mr. gdanski: they want to say that those guys are not lying. that is what they want to claim in this courtroom today. if you are claiming in this courtroom that they are not lying, then you are lying. that is it. mr. cofer: your honor, objection. mr. seiden: objection. the court: i'll sustain the objection. the jury is to disregard it. mr. cofer: thank you, your honor. mr. gdanski: mr. cofer said: well, ed, he accepts now five percent. before, he accepted no percent. you know, ed accepts some percent. when are they going to accept their fair share of the blame? the frank statement, they said, we 5529 accept as a responsibility. when are they going to accept their fair share of the blame? it has not happened. the surgeon general, 2014, rapid elimination. so we are moving forward in time. we are going from reduction. let us eliminate it. let us eliminate it. that is the surgeon general in 2014. this is the conspirator board. we put this up. mr. seiden showed it. i showed it. it is got faces. it is got names. it is got people. those were real people who worked for real companies and made real decisions. those were real people whose decisions had ramifications. those were people whose decisions caused death, and i fundamentally disagree with the board that he put up where names and faces get erased because we know horrors leave shadows. dr. proctor said that: horrors leave shadows. history is important. we do not forget the horrors of history. we teach our children and everybody to never forget. that is what we say. we say: never forget. 5530 we do not erase them. we study them. we remember them, and by remembering those people, by remembering those people, we show dignity to the people that they killed. we remember the people that they killed. we remember the people who they affected. and you know what? these are not all of the conspirators, but they killed and they hurt a lot of people. they hurt a tremendous amount of people, and i do not ascribe to the philosophy that we should erase them from the board. every one of those guys should have a tombstone put over them for all the people that they have killed. and, you know, ed, ed will not live forever. ed caprio, he will not live forever. many of us in this room will outlive ed caprio, two, three, twelve years. i'm younger than him. i'll live forever [sic]. i'll live past ed. the natural course of things are going to be that way. and i reject the idea that you erase people from a board. i will never erase ed. ed never deserves to be erased. i'll remember ed. steve will remember 5531 ed. bryan will remember ed. louise will remember ed. john will remember ed. scott will remember ed. brittany will remember ed. moni will remember ed. that is what people deserve to be. they deserve to be remembered. this industry lives in a world where they can erase faces. today you can tell them, you can tell this industry: you must remember ed. never forget ed caprio. that is the power you have today. we wish you god speed. good luck in delivering swift justice, and i hope to talk to you again. thank you very, very much.