mr. cofer: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. counsel. members of the jury. good afternoon. you know, i did not catch all that. that was a lot of information we had in the last hour. there was one thing i did write down, and that is mr. schlesinger said he wants a calm, cool, deliberative jury. man, i would hate to see him try to get somebody fired up if that was calm and cool and deliberative. you know, i actually have been with you the whole trial. i was with you during jury selection, and we talked about a lot of those issues, and we talked about what the trial was going to be about, we talked about your experiences. and what we agreed was that you would all be a fair and impartial jury, and listen to the evidence and make our decisions based on the evidence and based on the law. so i'll tell you, my closing argument is going to be a bit different than mr. schlesinger's, because i want to talk about what we have learned in the last five weeks, and how it can help you reach a decision in this case, ed caprio's case. so i told you in opening statement, we think this case really comes down to three pretty simple, straightforward questions. why did mr. caprio become a smoker? when did mr. caprio know that smoking is dangerous? and who was in control of mr. caprio's decision to smoke or quit smoking? and you may remember in opening statement i told you what the evidence would be, what i thought the evidence would be. and that is that mr. caprio smoked because his friends and family smoked, and that he liked to smoke. and that nothing that the tobacco companies did caused him to begin or continue smoking. i told you what the evidence would be, that mr. caprio knew for decades that cigarettes were dangerous and caused lung cancer and emphysema and other diseases. and, finally, i told you that mr. caprio always had the ability to quit smoking whenever he made up his mind that he truly wanted to quit, and was willing to stay quit. in fact, you remember the evidence was that the very first time mr. caprio tried to quit smoking, that est class, he quit for a couple weeks. and if you believe the testimony of his partner bryan rintoul, back in the '80s, he quit smoking cold turkey for six months. so let us talk about the first question and what the evidence was. why did mr. caprio become a smoker? what you heard was one of the most important factors in determining whether someone smokes is whether their friends and family smoked. and you know that most of the important people in mr. caprio's life were smokers. when he was growing up, his dad was a smoker. his uncles were smokers. his friends were smokers. and he and his partner bryan have smoked together the last 32 years. you heard that when mr. caprio was 15 years old, his friend janice brown offered him his first cigarette. and she taught him how to smoke. you remember that testimony? and mr. caprio admitted that the first few cigarettes, he inhaled that cigarette smoke and it made him light-headed and dizzy, made him cough, and it was not a very pleasant experience for him. but he worked at it. he worked at it, and he was able to overcome his body's natural defenses and learned how to smoke. over the next few years, he smoked a couple cigarettes a day, and then he smoked more. and then he got up to a pack a day, essentially a pack and a half a day. then ultimately, two packs a day. mr. caprio was specifically asked why he started smoking, and he told you. he said there were two reasons. he said: because everyone was doing it, and he wanted to fit in. that was why mr. caprio became a smoker. second question. when did mr. caprio know that smoking is dangerous? before mr. caprio smoked his first cigarette, studies were already being published to link cigarette smoking with lung cancer. remember his first cigarette, december of 1958. and i talked with dr. proctor about all the studies that were being done beginning in 1950. remember the retrospective epidemiological studies, those that were done in britain, those that were done in the united states. and dr. proctor told you about the massive publicity about these studies, not just in medical journals, but in popular magazines and newspapers too. and he told you, of all the articles, there was one that was particularly important. you remember it is called "cancer by the carton," published in reader's digest in 1952. and he told you it was important because it had a very provocative and impactful title. and what it said was: every time you buy a carton of cigarettes, you are buying a carton of cancer. this was six years, six years before mr. caprio smoked his first cigarette. you heard from both the plaintiff and the defendant the famous mouse skin painting studies. what dr. proctor told you was these were a really big deal. they got a ton of attention, and they caused people to stop smoking, and they caused cigarette sales to go down. here is how it was reported in life magazine, one of the most popular magazines of the time. remember the pictorial magazine you will have in evidence. "smoke gets in the news." doctors report tobacco tar induces mouse cancer, note rise in cigarette use and human lung cancer. members of the jury, we know for a fact that these studies were getting attention and people were talking about them. because in june of 1954, when ed caprio was around 10 years old, there was a national poll. and the question was: have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs? ninety percent said yes. this is back in 1954. ninety percent said yes. so you had articles being published in newspapers, in medical journals, in magazines. you had people talking about them. you had polls. but they were also reported on television. and you remember both the plaintiff and the defendant talked to you about a program called "see it now." it was hosted by edward r. murrow. he was probably the most respected journalist of his generation. probably the closest thing that many of us remember is walter cronkite. and he had this program called "see it now." dr. proctor told you it was essentially kind of a 1950s version of 60 minutes. so let me show you just two brief clips. one from dr. ernst wynder, who did the mouse skin painting test, and did that early retrospective statistical study. and then from e. cuyler hammond from the american cancer society who did a very important study in 1952. this is dr. ernst wynder. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: we believe that the present evidence that it strongly indicates that tobacco smoking, and particularly cigarette smoking, is a major cause of lung cancer. this does not mean that we believe it is the only cause. certainly there are a few that may develop lung cancer without ever having smoked. and there are, of course, many who do smoke and who never develop this disease. (video clip concluded.) mr. cofer: so that was ernst wynder. and here is e. cuyler hammond, from the american cancer society. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: good evening. this is "see it now," produced by the partnership of friendly and murrow. tonight, the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer. in 1952, drs. hammond and horn of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking habits of american men. here is dr. hammond reporting on the results of the first two years. voice: it is now established in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the danger, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip concluded.) mr. cofer: so members of the jury, that was 1955. and so we know that before mr. caprio ever tried that first cigarette, he was already on notice that cigarette smoking was linked with lung cancer, and cigarette smoking could be dangerous. ten years later, in 1964, the surgeon general of the united states published his landmark report concluding that cigarette smoking was a proven cause of lung cancer. and you remember, dr. proctor told you this was a huge deal. it was literally front page news. remember, i showed you the new york times article and the one from the chicago tribune. the one from the chicago tribune said: cigarettes kill. and you saw the one from the new york times. it was the lead story on nightly newscasts. it was on the cover of major magazines. people were talking about it. you remember i asked proctor about something called a paradigm shift. something that really kind of focuses people and changes their perspective. the '64 surgeon general's report was one of those. here is how the report was covered on cbs with harry reasoner. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. voice: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago, and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this in summary is what the committee says: cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says, if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. the surgeon general's committee presented its report at a news conference in washington. voice: after long and exhaustive deliberations, the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the united states to warrant remedial action. this overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease categories. more specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and i quote, "in view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases, and to the overall death rate." voice: cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. in a case like that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told and maybe even then, you give him a chance to reform. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip concluded.) mr. cofer: that is how the '64 surgeon general's report was covered on cbs. dr. proctor told you there were comparable programs on abc and nbc as well, the only three networks. it saturated -- it absolutely saturated the airwaves, saturated public media of what we read, what we talked, what we saw. so at the time, mr. caprio was 20 years old. he was a smoker, but he had not been smoking very long. so as a result of the '64 surgeon general's report, what happened? congress got involved, and they passed the federal cigarette labeling act, and they mandated that warnings go on cigarette packs. this is the first warning. congress wrote it. they told the companies exactly what it would say, how big it would be, and where it would be placed on the pack. from this time on, from january 1, 1966 -- 1966 -- every cigarette sold in this country came in a pack with a warning on it. four years later, the warning was changed, making it stronger. this time, the warning said. warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. that warning was on the pack for the next 15 years. two years later, this warning went to cigarette advertisements. ads went off the air in 1971. then in 1972, the warning went on all print ads, and mr. caprio testified that he saw this warning; and that he also heard that tar was dangerous, and nicotine was addictive. so he switched to a light cigarette because he thought smoking two packs of lights was the same as smoking one pack of full-flavored cigarettes. mr. caprio admitted that the light cigarettes he smoked had the same warning on the pack as full-flavored cigarettes, and he admitted that every pack he ever bought had warnings on them. in 1979 or in 1980, mr. caprio's first partner, edgar barney, died of aids. in 1982, he began his relationship with mr. rintoul. and they moved in together in '83. over the next several years, the aids epidemic took 32 of mr. caprio and mr. rintoul's friends. and because mr. caprio was at risk of developing the aids virus, he would routinely have his blood tested and would have chest x-rays. mr. caprio said he was constantly worried about his blood work and waiting for the test results. he said that he got chest x-rays all the time. in fact, mr. rintoul said they got chest x-rays every three months. but even though he was a two-pack-a-day smoker in the '80s, mr. caprio said that no doctor ever told him to stop smoking or ever talked with him about his smoking. and that is true, even though in 1985, this warning went on the pack. the warning specifically said smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy and quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. this was the warning that was on the pack when mr. caprio and mr. rintoul were having chest x-rays. now, mr. caprio admitted he saw these warnings, but he also admitted that they did not cause him to change his behavior in any way. members of the jury, we know that for a fact that the public was being warned that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, and emphysema, and that quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health. but more importantly, we also know that at the same time, mr. caprio got a very personal warning that smoking causes emphysema and copd and what can happen if you keep smoking and do not quit. mr. caprio had an uncle named arthur giardello that he was very close to. you remember, he and dottie lived in florida. even moved to georgia with him for a while. and mr. giardello in the mid '80s was diagnosed with mild copd. but he continued to smoke, and his smoking caused his copd to get worse and worse. and mr. caprio told you that he started having breathing problems. arthur giardello was not the only person in mr. caprio's life in the '80s who was having problems with copd. his brother-in-law, john's father, mavrakis' dad, was also diagnosed with copd. and john's dad had to go on oxygen because of his illness. so john called up mr. caprio and said: you have got to quit smoking. look at my dad. so here in the '80s, he had two family members that he cared about that had copd that continued to smoke as he got worse and worse. in 1986 -- or 1996, mr. caprio was diagnosed with copd. and remember, mr. caprio was actually taking care of arthur and dottie, because dottie had alzheimer's. so he actually saw and witnessed the effect of copd on his uncle. then a few months later after mr. caprio was diagnosed, then arthur died from a combination of emphysema and copd. that was just months. arthur died just months after mr. caprio was diagnosed. so members of the jury, when dr. patel told mr. caprio that he had mild copd and he needed to quit smoking before it got worse, he was not telling mr. caprio anything he did not already know. mr. caprio watched an uncle he loved with copd who continued smoking and got worse and worse and worse until his uncle died. his brother-in-law john and his sister-in-law louise were dealing with the very same issue with john's dad. in march of 1996, when mr. caprio was diagnosed, he already had two very personal examples of what will happen to a person who has copd and continues to smoke. so it was a wake-up call for him. march of 1996 was a wake-up call. until then, he knew that smoking could cause copd. he just did not think it would happen to him. but in march of 1996, members of the jury, it did happen to him. and you remember what mr. rintoul told you from the stand? he said: you never think it is going to happen to you. but when it does, it hits home. it is devastating. and mr. caprio said the same thing. now it was not just an abstract risk. mr. caprio knew that his smoking was harming him. and dr. patel specifically told mr. caprio to quit smoking and had a long discussion with him about the various ways he could quit. now, mr. schlesinger said something that i thought was really just right on. and he said that the medical records that the treaters created, they are credible. they are natural. they are organic. they were not prepared for litigation. this was what was happening long before there was ever thought to be a lawsuit. here is what dr. patel wrote back in march of 1996. a long discussion was had with the patient about quitting smoking. various ways were discussed with him, and he was advised that his own motivation is really important to adhere to the program. he was also advised to contact the american lung association. you remember i talked to dr. seidman about that, and what you learned was that starting in the 1980s, the american lung association produced excellent quitting and maintenance manuals that helped people quit. they actually had classes that you could go to, seven-week classes where they had professionals that would work with you to help you quit. they were not just booklets. and you heard dr. patel tell you that he had success in the past with his patients right here locally using the american lung association to quit. and that is why he suggested that mr. caprio go. well, mr. caprio did quit smoking that very day. he quit cold turkey, and he stayed quit for a couple of weeks. but he never contacted the american lung association. and you remember what he said? you remember what mr. caprio said? that once he started feeling better, he kind of resumed his life again and went back to smoking. members of the jury, in 1996, an alarm clock went off. but mr. caprio ignored it. but then five years later, in march of 2001, mr. caprio got a second wake-up call. he coughed up blood. you heard bryan describe how scared they were. and he went to the doctor. he was diagnosed with lung cancer. and he ultimately had two lungs -- or two lobes of his right lung removed. but, again, mr. caprio was really, really lucky. the doctors were able to get all of the cancer. remember dr. mannino told you, a tumor that big, i do not know how often that happens. but they were -- they were able to get all the cancer. and he did not need chemotherapy and he did not need radiation, and he was cured. he has been cancer-free for 14 years, and he is cured. and after his surgery, his doctors were elated at how well they were doing. they had a man with a huge lung cancer. they were able to cure it. here is what they wrote. 2001. this is dr. green, the surgeon. his postoperative course has been smooth and unremarkable. it is important to note that he has stopped tobacco use completely. it is also important to note that he has been able to wean himself off of the home oxygen. he plans on returning to work within the next week. we could not be more pleased than being able to see your patient looking so well following resectional lung surgery. mr. caprio was actually briefly on oxygen because of the surgery, because he needed it after he had the lungs removed. so he had a preview of what life would be like if he required oxygen. but he was able to wean himself off of it. he was clear to return to work. he stopped smoking and did not smoke a single cigarette for somewhere between three and six months. put the cigarettes down for three to six months. but then, according to his sister, one of the closest people in his life, mr. caprio told her he tried a cigarette again because he wanted to see if he could smoke again. at first, he could not. the smoking made him dizzy and nauseous and light-headed. but he worked at it. and just like he did when he was 15 years old, he overcame his body's natural defenses for a second time. and that is how, 43 years after he first learned to smoke, five years after he was diagnosed with mild copd, six months after he had surgery to have two lobes of his lung removed, mr. caprio became a smoker again. for the next six months, he smoked one cigarette, maybe two, tops, a day. he gradually worked himself up to six cigarettes a day. some days, he smoked up to ten cigarettes a day. for the last few years, mr. caprio has not smoked every day. on the days he has smoked, he is smoked between two and four cigarettes. and then two months ago, they told you that he is finally quit smoking for good. members of the jury, there is absolutely no doubt that for a very, very long time, mr. caprio has personally understood that smoking is dangerous. until 1996, he just did not think it would happen to him. in 1996, he got a wake-up call, and he did not answer it. in 2001, he got a second wake-up call, and he answered it for about a year. that takes us to our final question. who was in control of mr. caprio's decision to smoke or quit smoking? members of the jury, it is undisputed. it is undisputed. every expert who was called in this case told you that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. dr. mannino from kentucky told you, being addicted does not mean a person cannot quit smoking. he said addicted smokers can and do quit smoking every day. he said there are currently 60 million former smokers in the united states. and in dr. mannino's opinion, the vast majority of those men and women were addicted. do not get me wrong. i am not saying it is easy for everyone to quit. quitting smoking is not something that you can accomplish just by taking a pill or pushing a button. for some people, it is really hard and they have to try and they have to try again. and then they have to hang in there when they find themselves in situations where they used to smoke. but it is absolutely undisputed that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. mr. hammer said that ed was hopelessly addicted, and ed cannot put it down. that is what he told you today. dr. herrera said he was so addicted that mr. caprio would die without the nicotine. do you remember, on his deposition, he said: i'm not even going to try to tell him to quit, because he would die without the nicotine. well, we know that is not true. according to mr. caprio himself, for the last few days he smoked some days and not others. on the days he did smoke, he did not smoke many cigarettes. he used something called the tarbar that he said filtered at least some portion of the tar and nicotine. and dr. seidman told you, while it is true that mr. caprio has still been smoking cigarettes, it is been years since he inhaled any appreciable amount of nicotine. think about that. if, for the last few years you do not smoke every day, on the days you do smoke, you smoke a couple cigarettes a day, you do not smoke the cigarette all the way down, you use a filter, i do not know how much it filters out, but at least some of it, you are not getting much nicotine. so why did he smoke? he still did. why? if he was not getting very much nicotine, then why would he continue to smoke a few cigarettes a few days a week? well, dr. mannino told you that nicotine is not the only reason people smoke. he told you some people and some smokers enjoy the process of smoking; they enjoy the social interaction of smoking. some people say they enjoy the taste of smoking. and he told you that some people use cigarettes to self-medicate for anxiety or depression. and dr. herrera and dr. dorce both told you that that is what mr. caprio does, at least that is what he did. he would use cigarettes to self-medicate for his mood disorder. dr. mannino told you there is a large behavioral component of smoking, and that making any long-term behavioral change is hard. dr. seidman told you that the constant repetition of smoking involves tremendous habit strength and conditioning, and becomes a part of your life. it can become a ritual. dr. dorce and dr. seidman both told you there are triggers that tell the brain to smoke. let me just pause for a second. i did ask dr. seidman, why did not you try to help mr. caprio quit smoking. once a lawsuit is filed, the defendant cannot talk to the plaintiff. the experts we hire cannot talk to the plaintiff. dr. andrews could not talk to mr. caprio. dr. dorce could only do it under the terms of that compulsive medical exam. the experts, dr. seidman and dr. mannino, the plaintiff hired, are hired by the plaintiff. he is their representative. they can talk to him if they want to. so i want to make sure you understand the difference. you had dr. seidman talking about all the different things he could do to help people quit smoking, and his concern for mr. caprio. and i just asked: well, did you try to help him smoke -- that is not my role. his role in this case was a hired expert to come testify. but in any event, dr. dorce and dr. seidman both told you that there are triggers that tell the brain to smoke. they told you that worries about money or family problems or any kind of stress can be a trigger to smoke. you know and you heard from all the experts and also from the surgeon general that one of the most important triggers is when you are around people that smoke. the surgeon general recognized clear back in the '70s that having a spouse or significant other that smoked can make it very hard for a person to successfully quit smoking. and members of the jury, it is been undisputed that throughout their life together, mr. rintoul has been a smoker. today he is currently a daily smoker. and for the last six years, mr. rintoul's mother nina has lived with them, and she smokes too. now, plaintiff argues that nicotine took away mr. caprio's free will; that it took away his choice whether to smoke or not smoke. we know that is not true. in fact, in response to one of mr. hammer's questions, dr. seidman told you that nicotine does not eliminate free choice, or control of free choice. in fact, here is what dr. seidman says on his app to addicted smokers. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: urges and cravings to smoke are not choices. however, the actions you take in response to the urges and cravings is a choice. the cigarette has no magical power, except what you give it. when not acted on, urges to smoke, no matter how powerful, occur less often and become easier to ignore. by not acting on the urge to smoke, you choose voluntarily to protect your body and your health. you choose not to act on the urge to smoke because you truly believe this will make life better. (video clip concluded.) mr. cofer: you know, the great thing about juries is your collective common sense and your collective life experience. and you can bring experts in all day, but some things just make sense. so let me ask you this. if mr. caprio was so hopelessly addicted to nicotine that he simply could not function without it, how did he manage to quit smoking for six months in 1985 or '86? or for three or four months in 2001? or for four or five or six months in 2005? or since january 1st, 2015? if he was so hopelessly addicted to nicotine, how could he do that? members of the jury, only mr. caprio could choose to smoke or quit smoking. more importantly, only mr. caprio could choose to stay quit once he quit. that is not something anybody else could do for him. why is that so important? as we all know, every time you go to a doctor, a doctor asks if you smoke. if a patient says yes, the doctor tells the patient to quit smoking. and that is been true for a very long time. and why do they do that? the reason that doctors tell people to quit smoking is because when you quit smoking, your risk of getting a smoking-related disease goes down. and if a smoker quits early enough and stays quit long enough, his or her risk basically becomes the same as a never smoker. how do we know that? both dr. proctor and dr. mannino told you about a very important study that proves that is true. in 1951, sir richard doll signed up 35,000 british doctors, and he studied them for 50 years, to learn how smoking increases a person's risk of dying; and, importantly, what happens when they quit. in 2004, dr. doll published the conclusion to his 50-year doctor study. what did it conclude? basically, smokers died on average ten years younger than lifelong nonsmokers. what happens when you quit? if you quit by age 30 -- and actually, it is age 35, you get all ten years back. if you quit between the ages of 35 and 44, you get nine years back. if you quit between 45 and 54, you get six years back. so think about how that applies to this case. the evidence was if mr. caprio had quit smoking in 1964 when the surgeon general report came out, or in 1966 when the first warning went on the pack, or in 1970, when the warning was changed making it stronger to say cigarette smoking is dangerous. or even as late as 1978, based on this study, as proctor told you one of the seminal studies on the effects of smoking and quitting smoking, he would have avoided all of his risk of getting a smoking-related cancer. if he would quit by 1988, by 1988, when he was 44 years old, he would have avoided ninety percent of the excess risk of getting lung cancer or any other smoking-related disease. and what would have happened to mr. caprio's risk of getting copd if he would quit before the age of 45? remember dr. mannino? this is a slide, this is a graph that dr. mannino prepared, and he uses it to teach other doctors and people about copd. copd risk and smoking cessation. and what it says is, the blue line, we all lose lung function as we get older. this orange line, that is what happens to people, they are susceptible, cigarette smokers, susceptible to cigarette smoke. see how their lung function declines, they get symptoms of disability and death. but look what happens when they quit. that red line right there. quitting at age 45. your rate of loss of lung function reverts back to that of a never smoker. the fact that you have got a tennis court full of lung capacity is amazing. because what it means is you can lose a substantial portion of your lung function, and it does not affect you, because you have so much excess capacity. this is dr. mannino. this is their expert. this is the guy they brought to go over the 2014 surgeon general report that he wrote, that he stands by to teach doctors and people -- patients about the benefits of quitting smoking. so in 1989, that was when mr. caprio was 45 years old. 1989. let us look at the things that happened in his life before then. early '80s, arthur was diagnosed with copd. '85, warning went on the pack: smoking causes emphysema. quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to health. his brother-in-law's dad diagnosed with copd, he goes on oxygen. he attends that first est program, first time he quit smoking. and according to mr. rintoul, he quit smoking for six months. what would have happened? if you believe dr. mannino, he could have avoided the risk of copd. and what would have happened if he would have quit in '96 or '97? what would have happened had he quit in 1996, had he waited until he was diagnosed with mild copd? well, if you look at this, right there, quitting at 45, that person is already down to 75 percent lung function, based on fev1, the measure. do you remember what mr. caprio's fev1 was in 1996 when he was diagnosed with mild copd? do you remember? dr. andrews told you yesterday. do you remember? it was 91 percent. up here. and dr. andrews told you that if mr. caprio would have quit smoking in 1996, when he was diagnosed with copd, or 1997 when his uncle arthur died, he still would have had copd, that is true. but his rate of loss of lung function would have been such that he never likely would have had symptoms, never would have been disabled and never would have risked dying from copd. remember in 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, he did not even have any medication. he did not need oxygen full time until 2005, almost ten years later. so quitting makes a difference. all right. do you remember dr. seidman? remember i showed him his book. and i said: you know, dr. seidman, one of the things that is really important to you is helping people quit smoking in time to avoid getting sick, right? he goes: yeah, absolutely, my life's work. i said: you detail in your book some examples of your experience, right? and remember, i read him this one. breathing easier for life. one day a man with emphysema -- this is dr. seidman -- arrived at our clinic, pale as a ghost, seemingly at death's door. he was on a waiting list for a lung transplant and needed to carry a tank of oxygen just to get to the appointment. i had always heard that emphysema patients who quit smoking do not get better; they just do not get worse, except for an age-related decline in their lung function. this man, however, soon began to look more alive after going smoke free. eventually he started smoking up at the clinic without his oxygen tank. more than a year after stopping smoking, he said he never used his oxygen anymore. if this kind of improvement is possible in someone with advanced emphysema, imagine how much more easily you would be able to breathe and the health benefits you will enjoy not just today, but every day for the rest of your life. remember, i showed that from dr. seidman's book. remember what he said. he goes: yeah, that was a great story. thank you for sharing that with the jury. that was an example of one of my patients who followed the program and quit and the difference it made in his life. okay. two ships passing in the night. if you think about the evidence in this case, it is almost as if you are listening to two different trials. the plaintiff's case and the defendants' case have been like two ships passing in the night. you know, i think it is pretty clear from opening statement on, that we believe this case comes down to two words, "ed caprio." that is because this is mr. caprio's case. he is the one that is asking you for money. he is the one claiming that the defendants wronged him. and you know what, as much as mr. hammer and mr. schlesinger may want it to be, this is not a referendum on cigarette smoking or the tobacco companies. this is a personal injury lawsuit brought by one man who claims that the defendants are responsible for his copd and lung cancer. it is a personal injury lawsuit. no more, and no less. it is a case about one man and whether he is entitled to recover under the law of the facts based on his decisions to begin and continue smoking. that is why we have done our best to bring you evidence that focuses on mr. caprio. what he knew and when he knew it. why he smoked and why he waited so long to quit. now, i think it is quite obvious that plaintiff agrees this case comes down to two words. but for plaintiff, those two words are not "ed caprio." those two words are "punitive damages." from mr. hammer's opening statement to the witnesses they called in this case and the evidence they chose to present to mr. schlesinger's closing impassioned argument this morning, it is clear that plaintiff wants to spend as little time as possible talking about ed caprio. if you took all the words mr. schlesinger spoke this afternoon, how many times do you think he even mentioned his client's name? why? because plaintiff wants to make you mad. they want to ring the bell in this case, they want to get you fired up to bring back a big old punitive damage award. they make no apology for it. in fact, mr. hammer said: look forward to talking to you more about punitive damages. mr. schlesinger: most important question to me is punitive damages. you know, you probably -- i actually counted it. you think back to mr. hammer's opening statement. he used the word "punitive damages" five times in opening statement, and some variation of the word "punish" another 14 times. but he never told you about uncle arthur, or john's father-in-law, or the times that mr. caprio quit smoking, or why mr. caprio made the decisions he did. who introduced you to mr. caprio and told you about his family and his life and what he knew and the decisions he made? you know, plaintiff's first witness was dr. proctor. do you remember dr. proctor? he testified for all or part of six days. and what did he know about ed caprio? nothing. not a thing. in fact, he admitted he knows absolutely nothing about ed caprio. in fact, you know what he said? the only thing he knew? mr. gdanski told dr. proctor that mr. caprio is gay. in a lawsuit where you are suing for injuries caused from tobacco, why would that be the only fact you tell dr. proctor? you know, dr. proctor's testimony in this courtroom over those six days is the same as it was the following week down the hall -- mr. hammer: objection, judge, improper argument. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. cofer: the same as it was the following week down the hall in judge murphy's courtroom. the same as it will be in a courtroom across the state next week. the same as it is in every courtroom basically every week. why would mr. gdanski spend the first six days of ed caprio's case calling a witness who knows absolutely nothing about mr. caprio? how could that possibly help you decide the issues in ed caprio's case? i want you to think about some of the things that plaintiff told you and the impression he tried to leave you with. on direct examination, mr. gdanski and dr. proctor showed you this document and tried to leave you with the impression that philip morris paid to put product placement in the muppet movie. well, i think we can agree that would have been a really bad thing to do. but it was not until cross-examination that you heard it never happened. it did not happen. there were no philip morris products in the muppet movie. there were no cigarettes in the muppet movie. in fact, dr. proctor admitted the only smoking done in the movie is by a bartender, a used car salesman, and a hollywood mogul played by orson welles who smoked cigars in the el sleazo cafe scene in the version in the united kingdom. why in the world would mr. gdanski and dr. proctor suggest that philip morris placed products in the muppet movie when they knew it was not true? you know, another example is when mr. hammer and mr. gdanski and dr. proctor all said the defendants lied. that is their word, "lied," when the ceo said they believed it was not appropriate to label cigarette smoking as an addiction. now, it is clear the tobacco companies never said that smoking is not hard to quit. the argument was whether the word "addiction" was the appropriate term to describe that it can be hard to quit. you remember until 1988, the surgeon general said smoking is not an addiction because it is not intoxicating. in 1988, the surgeon general changed the definition and said intoxication is no longer required and said it is now addicting. and it is true the companies cried foul. they said, you know what, it is inappropriate to label smokers as addicts. and they said they believed the definition was not based on new science; it was politically motivated. and they told congress that in the waxman hearings. and then mr. gdanski and mr. hammer and dr. proctor said the ceos lied when they took that position. but here is the fascinating part. this is dr. seidman's book four years later. seidman says -- this is five years after the waxman hearings: although the medical and scientific community would prefer not to use the term "addiction," the term is widely used to imply severe drug dependency. five years after the ceos said they thought it was not appropriate to characterize the fact that it would be hard to quit as an addiction, seidman wrote in a book that the medical and scientific community would prefer not to use the term. why? because the term is unscientific, it is pejorative, and it does not have accepted meaning. why did not mr. gdanski and mr. hammer and dr. proctor tell you that? why did not they tell you that their own expert five years later said the medical and scientific community does not like the term? well, if your goal is a large punitive damage award, you do not want to let facts get in the way. so why did mr. gdanski think it was so important to tell dr. proctor the one fact that mr. caprio was gay? well, that leads us to the most cynical and most misleading ploy of all that is occurred in this case, and that is the testimony about project scum. and i'm not going to say much about it, because i suspect mr. seiden will address it. but here is the bottom line. to suggest that the poor judgment of one employee at one company on one project somehow reflects the values and actions of an entire company or, indeed, an entire industry is just intellectually dishonest. in fact, the argument is shameful. again, why? why was dr. proctor asked these kinds of questions? why did he give this kind of testimony? because they want money. and not just a small amount of money. they want a lot of money. dr. proctor told you on direct examination, and certainly mr. schlesinger's suggestion in trial today was that the company's behavior has not changed. that is been a common theme you have heard from opening statement through closing argument. and then on cross-examination, what did you learn? that was one of the first things i told you before lunch. when i finally got a chance to ask him about 30 minutes worth of questions. you have learned that the companies have not advertised on billboards, in public transit, and stadiums for the last 17 years. philip morris voluntarily stopped advertising in magazines a decade ago. the companies no longer sponsor sporting events, concerts, or have any branded merchandise. you heard that all of the defendants for the last 15 years have websites where they admit smoking causes cancer, smoking is addictive. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette, and they have links that actually take you to public health pages. they say if you want information, you are deciding whether to smoke or quit and you want information, they direct you to public health websites. you did not hear that on direct examination, you did not hear that in closing argument, you did not hear that in opening statement. since 2009, the companies have been subject to extensive fda regulation. the fda can ban any ingredient in cigarettes except nicotine, and they can order the companies to reduce the level of nicotine to any level the fda wants. the companies have to disclose their research and marketing and other documents to the fda. the fda can and does make unannounced inspections at the labs and manufacturing and research facilities. members of the jury, the fact is the companies act in a much more transparent and regulated environment than they did in the past. why did dr. proctor try to lead you otherwise? again, i think the answer is pretty obvious. so let us change topics. how am i doing on the time, your honor? the court: let us see. 52 minutes so far. mr. cofer: thank you. mr. schlesinger, mr. hammer, mr. gdanski talked a lot about filters and light cigarettes. they argued that mr. caprio switched to filters and lights because the defendants fooled him into thinking they had less tar and nicotine so they were safer. so let us briefly talk about the brands that mr. caprio smoked and why he smoked them. when he was a teenager, he would smoke whatever brand was available. janice was the one that bought the cigarettes and whatever she bought, he smoked. when he was first buying cigarettes, remember he went to the newsstand. they were in a cigar box. he bought whatever cigarettes were in the cigar box. he did not buy a particular brand. the first brand he actually bought was after he dropped out of high school and had a job. he bought lucky strikes. why did he buy luckies? he had a co-worker named herbert turner who smoked them. his dad smoked them, and they were a popular brand. he smoked lucky strike for about a year and then switched to marlboro. and mr. caprio's dad smoked marlboro too. marlboro is a filtered cigarette. lucky strike is unfiltered. and members of the jury, mr. caprio told you that health concerns had absolutely nothing to do with his decision to switch to filtered cigarettes, to marlboro in particular, filtered cigarettes in general. he told you the reason he switched to filters is he did not like getting tobacco in his mouth or on his tongue. he was specifically asked if he thought filters were better for his health. and he said, quote, "i think basically why i changed to a filtered cigarette was more because of the nuisance of tobacco getting into my mouth than anything else." he was asked: did you have any health concerns about smoking that caused you to switch to filters? do you remember what he said? he said: well, i do not think really at that point in my life i had health concerns about smoking, to be truthful. i really did not smoke any particular cigarette because i thought it was healthier or unhealthier, for that matter. so health concerns played no role in your decision to switch to marlboro? no. so to the extent that there is any argument in this case that mr. caprio was somehow misled into switching to filters because he thought they were safer, mr. caprio told you that is not true. he told you health concerns had nothing to do with it. he did not like getting tobacco in his mouth. he did testify that sometime in the 1970s, he switched to light cigarettes because they had less tar and nicotine. he said by that time, he would heard that tar was dangerous and nicotine was addictive. so he switched to marlboro light. and he testified that he switched -- after he switched, he started smoking two packs a day because: i thought smoking two was equivalent to maybe smoking one pack of the regular type of cigarettes because of better filtration system. so think about that. it is like the guy who says, you know what i'm going to do? instead of drinking one 12-ounce glass of beer, i'll just drink two 6-ounce glasses instead. mr. caprio admitted that he knew he was smoking more cigarettes. he was not fooled by that. and you learned also with mr. caprio, light cigarettes -- and with dr. proctor -- were never advertised on television. ads went off tv january 2nd, 1971, and lights were not even introduced until later. lights had the same warning on the pack as filtered -- as full flavored. every ad for every light had the surgeon general's warning on it. let us talk for a minute about what the public was told about filters and lights. the evidence was that the defendants did not tell the public that filters and light cigarettes were safer. the surgeon general and the public health community told the public that filters and lights were safer. the thinking is, if tar is bad, less tar is less bad. and the surgeon general never said that smoking lights were safe. surgeon general said they were safer. it is undisputed that all cigarettes -- filtered, unfiltered, lights, full flavored -- had the same surgeon general's warnings. and the consistent message was: if you want to avoid the risk, do not smoke. but if you are going to smoke, you are not going to quit, smoke lights. and why? why did the surgeon general say that? this is the '89 surgeon general's report. the reason he said that is because there were dozens of epidemiological studies that were conducted and published by independent public health scientists that reported that people who smoked filtered cigarettes and light cigarettes got less cancer than people who smoked full-flavored products. that is the '89 surgeon general report. i showed you the others too. they cited studies that proved that. that is what the surgeon general reported, and that is why the surgeon general, the american cancer society, and other public health organizations said stop smoking. but if you are not going to stop, switch to lights. now, dr. proctor says they are all wrong. he said: yeah, that is what the surgeon general published, that is what the surgeon general believed, but the surgeon general was wrong. so then i showed him these two monographs from the world health organization, one in 2003, one in 2012 that says, you know what? the epidemiology does show that lights and filters lower the risk. one more topic. dr. proctor told you that philip morris's competitors thought ammonia was the secret and soul of marlboro and that ammonia makes cigarettes more addictive. remember all that? what you learned on cross-examination is that ammonia occurs naturally in tobacco, and it is been public knowledge since at least the 1960s that philip morris uses ammonia compounds in some of its brands. in fact, philip morris has had patents dating back to the 1960s for the use of ammonia compounds and reconstituted tobacco. i showed you the study where the companies actually worked with the national cancer institute and studied whether ammonia compounds actually worked to make a safer cigarette, because they could lower the amount of tar that the smoker was exposed to. and finally dr. proctor admitted that cigarettes with ammonia compounds are no more or less addictive than cigarettes without ammonia compounds. in fact, proctor admitted that additive-free cigarettes still cause cancer, are still addictive and are no safer. let me tell you something else when they are talking about is the company still behaving the same way. if you want to know what is in any philip morris brand, you want to know the additives, ingredients, go on the website. it is disclosed by brand. all the amounts are not disclosed. the recipe. you could not go on there and learn how to make a marlboro. but you would see a list of all the additives and ingredients that are in there by brand. all right. let us go to the verdict form. the first question: was ed caprio addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his copd. as mr. schlesinger told you, there are really two questions you have to answer. first, was mr. caprio, in fact, addicted to nicotine. and if so, was his addiction a legal cause -- am i in your way, sir? can you see that? -- a legal cause of his lung cancer and copd. it is plaintiff's burden to prove both. plaintiff has to prove that, in fact, he was addicted and it was a legal cause. and if he does not prove both, the case is over and we all go home. so let us talk about the word "addiction." was ed caprio addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? depends on the definition you use. right? you will look at those jury instructions. addiction is not defined. that is something you have to decide yourself. you heard how the definition has changed over time. until '88, the surgeon general said not addictive, because it is not intoxicating. after '88, surgeon general said that is no longer required, it is now addictive. remember dr. mannino's definition? he said: anyone who smokes one or two cigarettes a day is addicted. if you use that definition, mr. caprio is addicted. seidman disagreed with mannino and said a person who smokes a pack a day for many years may or may not be addicted. he would need to know more. he did tell you, though, that it was his opinion that mr. caprio is addicted and highly addicted. but he admitted that is his opinion in every case he is testified in. and mr. schlesinger said, "i dug herrera." referring to dr. herrera. it was an interesting deposition, i'll admit. dr. herrera told you that he too believes that mr. caprio was addicted. but he also testified he thought that mr. caprio was smoking a pack a day when he was smoking at most four cigarettes a day, and not every day. dr. herrera told you he believed it would be impossible for mr. caprio to do what he did on january 1st, quit smoking. dr. herrera told you he believes that people like mr. caprio can die from nicotine withdrawal. and every other witness in the case said you never, of course, die from nicotine withdrawal. 75 percent of smokers quit on their own. and here's a record that tells you about -- here is a record. it is october 25, 2013, record from herrera that speaks to mr. caprio's interest in quitting, his willingness to accept risk, his mental state. readiness to quit. this is october of 2013: not interested in quitting. willingness to accept risk. knows risk of blowing himself up if he lights up near oxygen. remains untroubled by this, mental state, but overanxious about everything else. and, finally, while dr. herrera claimed to have extensive knowledge of mr. caprio's social life circumstances, dr. herrera has never heard of bryan rintoul and does not know that mr. caprio has a partner. do you remember when he said that? you are his treating physician, you claim to know everything about his life, his motivations. and you do not know that he has a partner he is been with for 32 years? you know, interestingly, dr. herrera referred mr. caprio to dr. kirsch, a psychiatrist like dr. dorce, for help in quitting smoking. do you remember that? dr. herrera sent mr. caprio to a psychiatrist for help in quitting smoking. and guess what? dr. hirsch -- or dr. kirsch did not diagnose mr. caprio as addicted. they had all those records, they showed you dr. green, the surgeon who met him for a couple weeks. they showed you dr. herrera, who does not know about bryan rintoul, but the psychiatrist that dr. herrera sent mr. caprio to, to quit smoking did not diagnose him as addicted. let me ask you something. why did they bring dr. seidman all the way down from new york and dr. mannino down from kentucky to tell you he was addicted when his treating psychiatrist works right down the street? dr. dorce is a triple boarded physician who has attended some of the finest schools in this country, schools i would have died to get into: cornell, yale, harvard. she works every day, day in and day out helping people deal with and beat hardcore addictions. she practices right up the street. and she told you that because of her patient population, she has a lot of experience with people who want to quit smoking and people who are addicted to nicotine. you know, for anyone to compare dr. dorce to anne browder, the african-american woman who was with the tobacco institute, and to say that she was just a paid witness who was brought in here for the money ... i do not think they know dr. dorce. so what did dr. dorce tell you? she said there is a diagnostic manual that psychiatrists and mental health professionals use around the country to diagnose people for substance abuse and for addictions called the dsm-5. and she said her opinion was applying the accepted diagnostic criteria. while mr. caprio does have tobacco use disorder, his tobacco use disorder does not rise to the level of an addiction. and she went through the different reasons. one of the most important was control. control. and she walked through those. and you know what? mr. gdanski cross-examined her, and he was entitled to do that. but let me tell you this. i do not think it really matters much whether you decide that mr. caprio was, in fact, addicted, because the real issue is, was addiction a legal cause of his copd. and plaintiff has to prove both. so let us talk about that. back in voir dire, i talked with you about the difference between cause and effect and legal cause. i talked with you about the example of a guy being hit by a truck. maybe you remember, maybe you do not. let me give you a better example. here in florida, we all love our beautiful beaches. when we go to the doctor, the doctor tells us: wear sunscreen, wear a hat, wear long sleeves, do not get too much sun. so suppose you go to the doctor and the doctor says, you look pretty good. you have a spot on your arm. on your way out, check with my receptionist. get an appointment and let us get that checked out and taken care of. you do not do it. six months later, you go to the doctor and the doctor was looking at you, hey, hey, i thought we were taking that off. it is skin cancer now. stop by the receptionist on your way out the door, make an appointment, and let us get that thing taken off. and you do not do it. so six months later, you come back and you are not feeling good at all. and you are talking to the doctor, the doctor looks at you and goes, you have got a malignant melanoma. it started on your arm. it is now metastasized throughout your body, and it is bad. i'm sorry, but it is really bad. so members of the jury, what was the cause, in fact, of the malignant melanoma? the sun. but what was the legal cause? you did not take care of business, you did not follow your doctor's advice, you did not do what you needed to do to avoid getting cancer. mr. caprio knew since the 1980s, when his uncle arthur was diagnosed with mild copd that smoking causes copd. yet his uncle arthur's copd did not motivate him to quit. for that matter, even mr. caprio himself was diagnosed with copd in 1996. once he started feeling better, he just kind of resumed his life again. throughout his life, mr. caprio has demonstrated that he has the ability not to smoke. if you believe his partner's testimony in 1986, he did not smoke for six months. and clearly, you know, after six months, all the nicotine is out of the system. the upregulation of nicotine receptors have downregulated back to normal. mr. caprio said: well, i did not really quit for six months. i just fooled bryan. mr. hammer: judge, excuse me. i have an objection to make. this is an argument as to fault, not as to causation. it is an improper argument. the court: i'm going to overrule the objection. go ahead. mr. cofer: you will have to decide whether bryan rintoul is right and mr. caprio quit smoking for six months with him back in the '80s or whether mr. rintoul quit and did not smoke and that mr. caprio was able to deceive him for six months. and that mr. rintoul, until i cross-examined mr. caprio in this courtroom, never realized that mr. caprio was still smoking. how could that be. people who smoke, you smell the smoke on them. you smell it in the car. they lived together. right? but in any event, mr. caprio admits that in 2001, he did not smoke a single cigarette for somewhere between three and six months, and then he only smoked one or two cigarettes a day for the next six months. and then again in 2005, when he went on oxygen full time, he quit smoking for four to six months. and they told you he has not smoked a single cigarette since january 1st of this year. hey, one thing we know. mr. caprio has demonstrated that he has the ability to refrain from smoking, and that nicotine does not compel him to smoke. lawyers can argue all day. but those are facts, members of the jury. he has demonstrated that he can go for significant periods of time without nicotine. so here is the legal cause instruction that you have. and you will have it in your jury instructions. in order for addiction to have been a legal cause of mr. caprio's copd, plaintiff has to show that he was, in fact, addicted, and that his addiction was so strong and substantial that it can reasonably be said that but for his addiction, he would have quit smoking and he would not have gotten sick. there was no evidence of that. none whatsoever. all of the experts agree that all smokers, including addicted smokers, have the ability to quit and stay quit. whether they quit depends on their motivation and persistence. they have to want to quit and, more importantly, they have to want to stay quit. the bottom line is addicted smokers can and do quit smoking, and they quit when they make up their minds that it is more important to them not to smoke than it is to smoke. and that is what ed caprio did on january 1st, 2015. he made up his mind that it is now more important for him not to smoke than it is to smoke. where is the evidence that mr. caprio was any different from the 60 million americans, former smokers who quit? there simply is none. mr. caprio always had the ability to quit. plaintiff has offered no evidence that nicotine prevented mr. caprio from quitting smoking earlier. plaintiff has not met his burden of proving that mr. caprio was a member of the engle class. and if you agree, when you go back to deliberate, if you agree, you should ring the buzzer and tell the jury -- i'm sorry, tell the deputy that you have your verdict. second question. basically, for all of the reasons why the answer to question 1 is no, the answer to question 2 is no as well. all right. the next question: please state as to each defendant whether mr. caprio reasonably relied to his detriment, reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by the defendant after may 5, 1982, which concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his copd. okay. before i talk about the evidence, let me tell you one thing about the next two questions so there is no confusion. this is actually on page 18 and 19 of your jury instructions. so when you get the jury instructions, at the bottom of 18 carries over to 19. if you answer "yes" to either question 3 or question 4, then comparative fault does not apply in this case. if you decide, after listening to all the evidence that mr. caprio is ninety percent responsible, if you answer "yes" to either question 3 or question 4, comparative fault does not apply and he gets one hundred percent of the damages. so i just want to make sure you understand what you are being asked and the importance of this question. let us talk about the evidence. there is absolutely no evidence. no evidence that mr. caprio reasonably relied on anything any defendant in this case said or did in his decision to begin and continue smoking. what statement? you heard mr. schlesinger for a long time. you heard mr. hammer for a long time. they said filters and lights. those are topics. what statement did mr. caprio reasonably rely on after may 5, 1982, that was a legal cause of his copd or lung cancer? plaintiff did not identify a single statement because mr. caprio did not. throughout this case, throughout this trial, throughout closing argument, they did not identify one single statement that mr. caprio reasonably relied on after may 5, '82. what was the evidence? mr. caprio started smoking because his dad, his uncles and his friends smoked. from the time he picked up his first cigarette, he was on notice that cigarettes are dangerous, they cause cancer. there was no evidence, members of the jury, no evidence that he was enticed into smoking or tricked or fooled into continuing to smoke. he admitted he began smoking because everyone else was doing it, and he wanted to fit in. when the warnings were on the pack in 1966 and 1970, he continued to smoke and made no effort to quit. he admitted in 1985, when the warnings changed to say smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health, he did not change his behavior in any way. he admitted he never read the frank statement, he never heard of the tobacco institute or the council for tobacco research or the tirc. the court: hour and 15, sir. mr. cofer: thank you. tell me at an hour and a half, please. i should be done. thank you. the court: okay. mr. cofer: he specifically said before he filed this lawsuit -- he said this. i cross-examined him. the last questions i asked him, before he filed this lawsuit, ed caprio said from the stand he never heard, read or saw any statement from any tobacco company that he believes was fraudulent. that admission alone is the reason you check "no" to question 3 and question 4. it is true he smoked filters and light. i've already told you. he said filters -- health had nothing to do with filters, did not want tobacco in his mouth. when he switched to lights, he admitted -- he knew tar was dangerous, he knew nicotine was addictive. he knew cigarettes had the same warning. and something else, members of the jury. there was not a shred of evidence that if the companies did not introduce lights, mr. caprio would have quit smoking. his testimony was lights caused him to change brands, not that he said: gee, i'm going to quit, but now i've got lights. remember his analogy. he said: it is like i buy 2 percent milk instead of whole milk, because i think lighter is better. but he never said, not once, mr. caprio never said that his choice was between smoking lights and quitting altogether. all light cigarettes did was affect his brand choice. and he knew, he knew when he switched to lights, he was smoking more cigarettes. there is simply no evidence that the defendants tricked mr. caprio into becoming a smoker or kept him from quitting. and members of the jury, mr. caprio never identified a single statement that he reasonably relied on at any time, much less after may 5, 1982, that caused him to continue to smoke or affected his decisions in any way. and based on the evidence and mr. caprio's own testimony, the answer to question number 3, i respectfully suggest, is "no." for the very same reasons, the answer to question 4 is as well. okay. so that takes us to comparative fault. so if you decide that both mr. caprio and the defendants are responsible for mr. caprio's copd and lung cancer, this is where you can assign how much responsibility or fault each party has. let me tell you something so there is no confusion. you never get to this question, you never get to comparative fault unless you first decide he is a class member. that is a completely separate question. but if you get here, then you can decide how much responsibility to assign to defendants and how much to mr. caprio. you know, i was really, really, really surprised when mr. hammer suggested that you award some fault to mr. caprio today, because for those of you who were here, for all of us that were actually here during voir dire, we remember mr. hammer standing up and saying ed caprio accepts no fault, no responsibility whatsoever for his copd and lung cancer. and if a juror, potential juror deigned to think otherwise -- mr. hammer: objection, this is improper. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. cofer: if a juror, they need to say, well, i think he may have some responsibility, then mr. hammer questioned him on it. so coming in, you think he already had some fault? my client is starting out behind, right? you cannot be fair and impartial, can you? you think he might have some fault -- mr. hammer: judge, this is improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. cofer: he was unequivocal that mr. caprio accepts no fault. but then he comes in, he is actually listened to the evidence, apparently, and so now, well, maybe he does have some fault. well, you know, you get to decide if you get this far how to allocate fault. let me ask you this. would a reasonable person in 1964, when they heard about the surgeon general's report, would they have at least tried to quit smoking? in 1966 when the first warning label went on the pack, would a reasonable person have tried to quit? in 1970, when the warning was changed making it stronger, would he have thought about quitting? in 1985 when the warning said smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, quitting now greatly reduces serious risk to health, would a reasonable person have changed his behavior in response? when uncle arthur had copd. when mr. mavrakis' dad had copd. when he quit smoking at the est program, quit smoking for six months with mr. rintoul. would a reasonable person have started smoking again? when he was diagnosed with copd and dr. patel sat down with him and had a long discussion about quitting smoking and said: hey, it is not abstract anymore, it is not just your uncle, your brother-in-law's dad, it is you. you have mild copd. would a reasonable person have followed his doctor's advice? and in 2001, after he had two lobes of his lung removed and he was cured from cancer, would a reasonable person -- and he quit smoking for three to six months, would a reasonable person have taught himself to smoke again? you know, it is one thing to start smoking as a teenager. but it is something to keep smoking as an adult. we all grow up. we do become more mature. we see the world differently, we have responsibilities, we make different decisions. i mean, who among us thinks if you make a decision at age 15, you are stuck with that for the rest of your life? would not that be a sad, horrible way to live? members of the jury, the evidence is clear that mr. caprio's own actions and inactions played a significant role in causing him to develop copd and lung cancer. i mean, at bottom, mr. caprio is the only person on this earth who is in a position to act on the information he had. now, you heard a lot of evidence about the tobacco companies, and you had this assault today with documents and snippets and impassioned argument and alliterative argument and confusion and doubt. there is no doubt. there is no doubt that you are shaking your heads at some of the things that you have seen and heard. but answering this question, the issue is not whether you are shaking your heads at what you saw or heard. the question is, has plaintiff proved that defendants fooled mr. caprio in some way that caused him to begin or continue smoking, or did mr. caprio have the information that he needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking? plaintiff spent a lot of time showing you internal documents from tobacco companies. obviously those documents did not affect mr. caprio, because he did not see them. you cannot be fooled by something you did not see. what additional information did mr. caprio need to decide whether to continue to smoke or to quit smoking like the 60 million other americans that have? members of the jury, you can be upset with defendants. you can disapprove of the tobacco companies. but under the law, you can only allocate fault for specific conduct that plaintiff proves harmed him. i'm just about done. damages. actually, you know what? this is the verdict form. if you get this far, you fill it out. i'm not going to suggest numbers. you fill it out based on the evidence that you heard and who you think was in a position to avoid what happened to mr. caprio. all right. damages. so basically question 1 says: what is the amount of mr. caprio's lost earnings in the past, lost earnings in the future, medical expenses in the past, and medical expenses in the future. and if you get this far -- and, frankly, i do not think you should get this far -- but if you do get this far, we did stipulate that his past medical expenses is $103,014. they put it up. and the amount of past lost wages is $206,158. i think the total is like $309,172. so that is the past. those were numbers. we know what those numbers are. with respect to future medical expenses and future lost income, there is conflicting evidence of what the future holds. you know, they put up a mortality table saying that the lifespan of a person a certain age is 13-1/2 years. mr. caprio's recent medical records suggest his condition is stable and his disease is not progressing, but dr. mannino told you that he believes mr. caprio has end-stage copd, and his definition of end-stage copd is the person has a couple years to live. so no one knows what the future brings. if you get this far, you will have to decide yourself based on the evidence what an appropriate amount is to award for future medical expenses and lost earnings. and, finally, you know, damages for pain and suffering. let me just say this. mr. hammer asked for $12 million. and i talked with -- you know, it is really hard to put numbers in context. but you remember i talked to dr. proctor about the $3 million that he is earned. i said: dr. proctor, if the average family in the state of florida makes $50,000 a year, how long would it take the average family to earn $3 million? and he kind of sheepishly said: several lifetimes. i said: no, just 60 years. but you know how long it would take the average family in florida to earn $12 million? mr. hammer: objection, improper argument. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. cofer: do you know how long it would take? getting up every day, whether you feel good or not, going to work every day, whether your kids have something going on or whatever. do you know how many years it would take to earn that? how many days a week you would have to work? 240 years. that is what mr. hammer suggested would be an appropriate amount of money to award in this case as compensatory damages. the noneconomic damages. 240 years. they said it is all about money. i tend to agree. all right. last question. punitive damages. the final question asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against any defendants in this case. you only get to this question if you answer "yes" to questions 3 or 4. and for all the reasons i went through, members of the jury, the answer to question 3 and 4 should be "no." but if you get this far, let us talk about punitive damages. you are not being asked to decide at this phase of the trial an amount of punitive damages. the issue is whether by clear and convincing evidence plaintiff has shown that he is entitled to punitive damages. and clear and convincing evidence is defined in the jury instructions. so do not spend one minute thinking about amount. the question for you now is, is he entitled. if you decide he is, there will be another phase of this trial. plaintiff will put on evidence, philip morris will put on evidence, reynolds will put on evidence, lorillard will put on evidence, liggett will put on evidence. we will have closing arguments, and that is when you get to the amount stage. so make sure when you consider this question, you understand what it is you are being asked to decide. when you look at the instructions, clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a -- they took the scales away. it is a much higher standard of proof. you will see it must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. it is a much, much higher standard. you have to be really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate in this case. let me tell you something else. you have to decide if you get there that punitive damages are warranted based on the conduct that harmed ed caprio. mr. hammer: objection, judge, that is improper. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: jury instructions state otherwise. the court: no speaking objections, sir. thank you. mr. cofer: you have got to make sure they are appropriate based on the conduct that harmed ed caprio. you have heard a lot of evidence about a lot of other people. but this is ed caprio's case. the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and deter, and under the law you can only punish for conduct that harmed mr. caprio. you cannot punish for harm to others. mr. hammer: objection, judge, improper statement of the law. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. cofer: this case is about ed caprio. it is note a class action anymore. not about anyone else. this is mr. caprio's case. other people have their opportunity to bring their own lawsuit and ask for damages -- mr. hammer: objection, improper. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. cofer: this is about conduct and whether it harmed ed caprio. i would respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that nothing the defendants did or did not do harmed mr. caprio in any way. they sold cigarettes. cigarettes are a legal product. that alone cannot be a basis of liability. the engle findings are not a basis of liability. the evidence was mr. caprio always had the information he needed to make an informed choice whether to smoke or quit smoking. the court: one and a half hours, sir. mr. cofer: i will be done in five minutes. thank you, your honor. the evidence was at all times, he had the ability to quit smoking. there was no evidence that anything defendants did or did not do, said or did not say caused mr. caprio to begin or continue smoking. dr. proctor spent six days on the witness stand, and he said: i know nothing about ed caprio. you heard mr. schlesinger talk about deterrence. companies need to be deterred. the companies no longer advertise on billboards, on stadiums, on public transport. they have not in 17 years. philip morris has not advertised in magazines for 15 years. the last 15 years, the companies had a website. all of them said smoking causes cancer, it is addictive, there is no safe cigarette. if you want information, check these links. go to the surgeon general, go to public health. since 2009, the fda has had extensive regulation. they said: give us all your documents. we can shut you down if we do not like what you are doing. we can tell you to take every ingredient out. the companies operate in a much different environment, in a much more transparent way than they have in the past. members of the jury, i respectfully suggest that under the evidence and under the law, punitive damages, no matter how much they want them, no matter what a focus it is of their case, even though that is the entire thing they have talked about for five weeks, punitive damages are not appropriate in ed caprio's case. all right. let me just say this before i go. this is a case about one smoker and what he knew and what he did with that knowledge. and whether he is entitled to recover money for his decisions to begin and continue smoking. the evidence was he had the information he needed. the evidence was that he had the ability to quit. you know, back in jury selection, i told you there are two sides to every story. and one of your fellow jurors corrected me. he said: no, really there is three sides. there is one side, there is the other side, and there is the truth. members of the jury, i know you will reach the truth because you have listened to both sides of the story. we have the greatest system of civil justice that any nation has ever known, at any time in the history of this great world. and it is because of men and women like you who are willing to take time out of your lives, five weeks out of your lives, and be here every day so we can resolve this case. on behalf of my client, on behalf of the defendants in this case, i want to thank you very, very much for your dedication and for giving us a fair shot. that is all we ask for. i know we have got it. thank you very much. mr. bideau: counsel. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good afternoon. mr. bideau: i can throw most of this out now. i'll be brief today, in part because i think mr. cofer left us about 30 minutes to split between the other three of us. and also because you did not hear much about lorillard during the course of this trial. i told you when i got up here in opening that i did not think i would be in front of you very often, because i did not think you were going to hear a whole lot about lorillard, and you did not. you know, out of the 56 years that mr. caprio smoked cigarettes, he smoked a lorillard brand or he claims to have smoked a lorillard brand for about three or four years in 1965 to about 1967, 1968; it was kent. that was the only brand of lorillard cigarettes mr. caprio claims to have smoked. can you put up verdict form number 2. you know, mr. cofer talked about this question number 2. this is where you first get to look at each of the defendants. i agree with mr. cofer that your answer should be "no" for all of the defendants. but i want to talk a little bit about the evidence as to lorillard on that case. because, frankly, based on the evidence in this case, smoking of lorillard cigarettes could never be the legal cause of mr. caprio's copd. mr. caprio smoked kent cigarettes for such a short time at the very beginning of his smoking, decades before he ever got sick. as i said, out of the 56 years that he smoked, he smoked kent cigarettes for maybe three or four years. that is it. he has not smoked a lorillard product for almost 50 years. and when he stopped smoking kent, ladies and gentlemen, we know he was not sick. you heard from mr. rintoul, you heard from dr. mannino, and you heard from mr. caprio himself that he was healthy in the '60s, he was healthy in the '70s, he was healthy in the '80s, and he was healthy for a good part of the 1990s. and we have one more crucial piece of evidence that shows mr. caprio was healthy for decades after he last smoked a lorillard product. mr. cofer touched on this a little bit, but you remember that both mr. rintoul and mr. caprio mentioned that in the '70s and '80s, because of the aids epidemic in california, they were getting -- mr. caprio was getting regular health checkups, and he was getting blood work and he was getting chest x-rays. and both mr. caprio and mr. rintoul said that the chest x-rays and the blood work fortunately came back clean throughout the '70s, and throughout the '80s. in fact, he was healthy, according to mr. caprio and mr. rintoul, right up until he was diagnosed with mild copd in 1996. and dr. andrews told you it takes decades of smoking before you can develop copd. so how can three or four years of smoking in 19 -- at the very beginning of his smoking life, back around 1965, 30 years before he was diagnosed with copd, be the legal cause of mr. caprio's copd? it just does not make any sense. and dr. andrews told you something else very important. dr. andrews said if he quit smoking back in 1965 or even 1968 when he claimed to have last smoked a kent cigarette, he would have avoided all the risk of his disease, all of it. then we turn to questions 3 and 4, and i'm going to do this briefly as well. these are the concealment and conspiracy questions. and i talked about the fact that the last time mr. caprio smoked a lorillard cigarette was in approximately 1968. obviously that is long before 1982, which is the key date on both of these questions. the question is: did he rely upon something from one of these defendants after may of 1982. well, we know he did not smoke any lorillard cigarettes after 1982. he had not smoked lorillard cigarettes for decades before 1982. frankly, ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiffs put not a single lorillard document into evidence. when you go back to the jury room and look at the evidence, you are not going to see a single internal lorillard document on the lorillard stationery in evidence. there are not any. in fact, the only -- they put one lorillard ad into evidence, and it is an ad for kent dated in 1960, five years before mr. caprio ever smoked a kent cigarette. no evidence mr. caprio ever saw it or ever relied upon it. and it is an ad for kent and talks about the micronite filter. well, remember both dr. seidman -- i did not ask a lot of questions in this case, but remember both dr. seidman and mr. caprio testified that the one thing they were sure about was that mr. caprio did not smoke kent cigarettes because of the micronite filter. so i'm not sure why that one particular ad is in the box of evidence that the plaintiffs put into this case. but there is no evidence mr. caprio ever saw it or that had any impact on mr. caprio. now, mr. hammer said something about -- if i remember his opening -- well, he switched to kent because of some charcoal filter. ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to tell you there is not a document in this evidence that says that kent ever had a charcoal filter. so i do not know where that comes from. i do not know what they are talking about -- mr. hammer: objection, judge, testimony in the case. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. bideau: -- but i would suggest, ladies and gentlemen, that you not take my word for it. look at the evidence and see if you see any documents in evidence that refer to any charcoal filter in any kent cigarettes. let us turn now to the punitive damages section, because i want to give my colleagues a couple minutes to come up here and talk. and mr. cofer talked about the punitive damages. he talked about the standard being clear and convincing evidence. he talked about the fact that the money does not go to research, does not go to the government, does not go to stop smoking clinics. if you award punitive damages, it goes to mr. caprio. mr. hammer: objection. the court: overruled. mr. bideau: over and above whatever amount you would have already decided is sufficient to compensate him for his injuries. and the standard, as mr. cofer pointed out to you, is that they have to show you that lorillard acted with conscious indifference and reckless disregard intending to hurt mr. caprio by something it did after 1982. now, there is no evidence that mr. caprio ever saw or heard anything from lorillard after 1968, let alone 1982. but, ladies and gentlemen, you did not hear a lot of evidence from us, but i did cross-examine dr. proctor a little bit about lorillard. and you did hear a little bit about ernst wynder, the scientist. i think, in fact, mr. cofer put up a little video by dr. wynder about some research he was doing. everybody agreed, dr. proctor included, that dr. wynder was a legend, one of the giants in smoking and health. he was one of the people who really changed the way people thought about smoking and health. there was no doubt that the work that dr. wynder -- and i think we talked about dr. graham, we talked about dr. hoffmann, that the work that they did was groundbreaking, and that millions of americans quit smoking because of the work that they did. and the evidence from dr. proctor was that lorillard actually worked with and helped drs. hoffmann, graham and wynder. lorillard provided product to them. lorillard provided some funding to them. lorillard provided information that they needed for those famous studies. and when life magazine brought the mouse painting study to the public's attention, lorillard continued to work with dr. hoffmann, dr. graham, and dr. wynder throughout the 1960s and the 1970s. lorillard worked with dr. wynder and dr. hoffmann when they were at the sloan kettering cancer institute and the american health foundation. and they worked on a series of studies to try to investigate what was in cigarette smoke. they worked on projects to see if they could develop a safer cigarette. and they did research to try to reduce the harmful effect of phenols or pmos. folks, that is not reckless disregard. that is not conscious indifference. and lorillard did all that voluntarily. it shared its cigarettes, it shared its research, it shared its money, and it invested in these research projects. and then lorillard made a second and special submission to the surgeon general before the 1964 surgeon general report, and the surgeon general thanked lorillard for dealing with phenols and other harmful contaminants in smoke. now, there was a discussion from plaintiffs about product placement. i know there was a big thing with dr. proctor, and mr. cofer talked a little bit about this. but one of the things that dr. proctor told us was, lorillard never placed its products, never paid to place its products in movies. dr. proctor said lorillard had a long-standing policy of refusing to place its products in movies, going back at least 40 years into the 1970s. that is not conscious indifference or reckless disregard either. as mr. cofer pointed out, there is no need in this case for punitive damages. there certainly is not any need to prevent any company from concealing the dangers of smoking. those dangers are well-known, and lorillard actually worked with the scientists who helped discover those issues. so your answer should be "no" for lorillard. in fact, for all the defendants here. you know, ladies and gentlemen, we all make choices on how we live our lives. we make choices to do things we enjoy, even if they come with risk. some of us choose to smoke and some of us do not. some of us choose to drink alcohol, some of us do not. some of us eat healthy, and some of us do not do that. like everyone else, mr. caprio had an absolute right to make the choices about what he wanted to do with his life and about matters that affected his health. but, ladies and gentlemen, with the right to make those decisions about your health comes responsibility for those decisions. ladies and gentlemen, i thank you for your time. i said i would be brief, and i think i gave my colleagues at least a few minutes to get up here and talk. thanks. ms. ruiz: good afternoon, everyone. you will be glad to hear, and as you have seen, i'm going to keep my comments brief. it is been a pleasure to be here before you. i thank you for the time and attention that you have paid to this case. i'm going to try not to repeat what you have already heard from mr. cofer and mr. bideau and focus my comments on what you are being asked to decide with respect to liggett. now, the court has already determined as a matter of law that liggett brand cigarettes did not cause mr. caprio's illnesses; that is, mr. caprio was not injured by a liggett brand product. he did not develop copd or lung cancer because of a liggett brand. as a result, liggett does not appear on the verdict form very often. you are not going to be asked whether mr. caprio's smoking of a liggett brand caused his illnesses. instead, the only issue left for you to decide with respect to liggett is whether plaintiff relied on any statement made after may 5, 1982, in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit material information. this is the question. it is plaintiff's burden to prove his case as to each defendant. that is as to liggett. he has to prove this. so with that in mind, what did the evidence show with respect to liggett? you heard a lot of arguments about what the industry did or did not do. here is what liggett did. the evidence showed that liggett was a responsible tobacco company, took its own path. we saw evidence that in the 1950s, and culminating with the 1964 surgeon general's report, there was emerging scientific evidence concerning the risks of cigarette smoke. one of the most widely publicized studies, you heard about it, was the wynder graham mouse skin painting study in 1953. liggett, in response to that information, what does it do? it did not go to the plaza hotel. it did not sign on to the frank statement. it did not join the tirc. instead, it responded to this new information coming out by taking its own path. i will just run through a couple of documents really quickly. you remember this 1958 document. this is plaintiff's 3289. it is a trip report authored by british scientists. they visited the united states. they visited liggett, and here is what they reported. liggett felt the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large-scale investment by the company directly in experimental research on smoke and cancer. they reported that they were told that liggett had already invested considerably more in this work than the combined donations of the rest of the industry to the tirc. that is on page 5 of the document. liggett invested enormous resources in its biological testing program with arthur d. little, its consultant. adl was a preeminent scientific consulting firm. together, liggett and adl set out to do two things: to see if the wynder graham mouse skin painting test could be replicated; and, second, to see if they could identify what, if anything, in the cigarette smoke was causing the problems. the liggett and adl research was an ongoing process, during which both companies shared the results of their research with the public, ultimately turning over that research to the surgeon general's committee in april of 1963. you might remember the huge stack of paper i had with me when i was cross-examining dr. proctor. that is liggett's nine-volume submission. it is in there somewhere. it is liggett 231. liggett provided almost ten years of research to the committee in that submission. it covered a lot of ground. the members of the committee repeatedly praised liggett and arthur d. little for the quality of the work and the amount of ground covered. here, the assistant surgeon general wrote to dr. kensler at adl: we feel that simple acknowledgment of the receipt of the nine volumes which you submitted to us is not sufficient. please accept on behalf of liggett and adl our special gratitude for the tremendous time, effort and expense in the production of the materials for our use. here at liggett 238. these are minutes from a 1963 meeting of the surgeon general's committee. and they report: these minutes cannot possibly record the massive amount of data in these reports. the chairman thanked dr. kensler and hainer on behalf of the committee for their comprehensive and well-organized presentation, as well as the documents that had been prepared and those still to come. here you see a memo from the u.s. department of agriculture, also saying that the report contains a wealth of information. they cannot possibly record the many findings obtained in the ten-year period of productive collaboration. now, dr. proctor came here and showed you a document. it is a 1961 arthur d. little document called, "l&m, a perspective review." that is plaintiff's 2138. and dr. proctor told you that liggett did not share that there are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco that are cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful. that is what he told you. i invite you to look at liggett's submission. i think when you do, you will see that dr. proctor just did not know what was in there. it is over 700 pages. i'm just going to show you a couple of excerpts so that you can see what i'm talking about. here is volume 1. this is page 3. this is liggett researchers concluding that there was an association between cigarette smoking and overall death rates. they go on to tell the committee that the effect increases with the amount smoked. liggett also told the committee what it found with respect to filters. liggett never said filters were safe. in fact, they told public health officials -- this is liggett 2398 -- condensate from filtered smoke is just as or almost as carcinogenic as that from unfiltered smoke. here is volume 3 of the submission, the table of contents. it lists materials which have been suggested as possible carcinogens for the human lung. it lists seven items in there, including arsenicals. i think that was one of the things dr. mannino was talking about. he was talking about arsenic. liggett also showed the results of their own mouse skin painting studies and a table there with the results. liggett also covered nicotine in the submission, told the advisory committee the action of nicotine on the central nervous system is complex, varies with the dose administered. there is little doubt that nicotine is a potent central nervous system stimulant. they are telling the committee here that nicotine works on the brain. they go on to say in volume 4: that nicotine is a highly active pharmacologic agent in tobacco. the pleasurable effects of nicotine are the reasons why people smoke tobacco instead of something else. nicotine is a potent stimulant of various chemoreceptors and one of the most potent central nervous system arousal agents known. clearly, this information was not concealed by liggett from the public health officials whose job it was to protect the health of the country. even with this information, the public health community did not come out and find that nicotine was addictive until 1988, when they changed the definition of addiction so that tobacco would fit within it. so you see, contrary to what dr. proctor told you, liggett's researchers showed the committee that painting tar on mouse backs caused tumors. they identified components of smoke that were poisonous, such as arsenic. carbon monoxide was also mentioned in there. and they talked about how nicotine was flavorful and the reason people smoke. liggett was not hiding the ball. you heard a lot about industry organizations. you heard that liggett was not a member of the tobacco industry research committee. liggett belonged to the council for tobacco research, the ctr, for four years. a little less than four years, actually, from march 1964 until january 1968. the evidence showed that liggett was a minor player at best with insignificant financial contributions to these organizations. you heard that liggett's contribution to one of them was a mere .3 percent. so ask yourself, what documents or letters did you see from any liggett personnel directing any of these organizations to do anything? absolutely none. where was the evidence of liggett hiding the ball? not a single document shows liggett keeping secrets. so when you go back into the jury room and evaluate liggett's conduct, along with the conduct of these other companies, please ask yourself, is there any real evidence of liggett's involvement in concealing information? is there any evidence of mr. caprio's reliance after may 5, 1982, on any agreement by liggett to do anything? the answer is no. of course there is a crucial way to evaluate these things. did any of the statements by any tobacco company group or liggett play any role in mr. caprio's decisions, especially after may 1982? there is not any evidence that any of this would have made any difference to mr. caprio. we know that from 1966 on, there were warnings on the packs. and as you saw, they did not make a difference to mr. caprio. did any statement, any advertisement, any conduct whatsoever have anything to do with mr. caprio's smoking decisions? the overwhelming evidence is that it did not. mr. caprio never identified anything that he saw from liggett, certainly nothing that he would have relied upon after may of 1982 that would have made a difference to him. notwithstanding that, dr. proctor came here, talked to you about advertisements, he talked to you about movies. it is up to you to decide whether dr. proctor had his own agenda. mr. cofer covered it. i'm not going to repeat it. but i'll just mention to you, all companies advertise, liggett is entitled to advertise. you did not see very much about liggett here, and mr. caprio did not mention a single liggett advertisement in the testimony that you saw. so plaintiff did not meet his burden of proving that he relied as to liggett on anything, on any agreement to conceal information after may 5, 1982. because of that, you should check "no" for liggett for question 4. and so the last thing i just need to mention quickly is punitive damages. you heard a lot about it. you heard punitive damages are intended to punish a defendant for wrongful conduct. they must be based on liggett's conduct and how liggett's conduct impacted mr. caprio. as you heard, the burden is on plaintiff to prove that by clear and convincing evidence. there is no basis for awarding punitive damages here. we do not believe you should even get there. but if you do, you need to decide whether there is any evidence of any wrongful conduct by liggett that caused damage to mr. caprio and whether it is necessary to send a message to liggett to punish liggett for the way it is currently doing business. based on everything i've just explained, punitive damages against liggett are not warranted. you heard about liggett's research in the '50s. dr. proctor told you this was an honest response to the scientific information that was coming out back then. even after the warnings were on the packs, liggett to continued to do research. liggett was the first company to put voluntary warnings on its cigarette packs. today, liggett is the smallest of the cigarette companies. it is got about 2 percent of the market. there is no need to punish or deter liggett. if you get to this point again, you should check "no" next to liggett. ladies and gentlemen, i ask that you please use your common sense and your natural reason when you are looking at the evidence in this case and making your decision. and when you do that, we think you will find there is no support for plaintiff's claim for money damages or punishment against liggett. thank you. 25 mr. seiden: may it please the court? 5466 1 good morning, mr. caprio, counsel. 2 good morning, ladies and gentlemen of 3 the jury. 4 the jury panel: good morning. 5 mr. seiden: i know you have already heard 6 a lot. this morning, i want to provide you some 7 additional reasons as to why your verdict in 8 mr. caprio's case should be for reynolds and the 9 other defendants. 10 yesterday mr. hammer told you that 11 mr. caprio smoked three reynolds' brands, camels, 12 lucky strike, and winston lights. 13 but he did not even mention to you when 14 mr. caprio smoked them, how much he smoked, or for 15 how long, like somehow that does not matter. of 16 course it matters. 17 the facts matter. the evidence matters. 18 according to dr. mannino, plaintiff's 19 expert, mr. caprio smoked 80 to 100 pack years, 20 but mr. hammer failed to tell you yesterday, at 21 most, reynolds' cigarettes were six and a half 22 pack years, six and a half out of 80 to 100 pack 23 years. 24 if you get to question 5 on the verdict 25 form, you may not get there, but if you get there, 5467 1 on the comparative fault question, of course that 2 matters. 3 so i want to quickly summarize for you 4 the evidence about the reynolds' brands mr. caprio 5 smoked, and let us start with the camels. 6 mr. caprio smoked them in 1959, and 7 let us be clear, they were unfiltered. if there is 8 claims about filtered fraud and lights, these were 9 unfiltered, as were the lucky strikes. 10 he did not smoke camels based on 11 marketing. remember, he picked them randomly out 12 of the cigar box at the newsstand, two or three 13 loose cigarettes a day over a period of three or 14 four months. 15 if you do the math, you will see that 16 mr. caprio smoked no more than 18 packs of camels, 17 not pack years, 18 packs. a pack year is 365 18 packs. this was no more than 18 packs. 19 mr. caprio's smoking of camels amounted 20 to no more than one-twentieth of one pack year, a 21 fact you should know. 22 the next brand is lucky strikes. 23 mr. caprio again first purchased them at the 24 newsstand, randomly picking them out of the cigar 25 box, not picking them based on marketing. he is 5468 1 getting them randomly, unfiltered. again, that is 2 in 1959. 3 1960, he goes on to buy packs -- to buy 4 cigarettes by the pack, and he picks lucky strike. 5 presumably he liked the taste when he smoked them 6 when he got them randomly. 7 he never told you he bought them based 8 on marketing. so he starts in 1960, lucky 9 strikes. he is smoking five to six cigarettes a 10 day. and by the end of year, he is up to eight to 11 ten. that is 1960. 12 1961, he moves on. he is no longer 13 smoking lucky strikes. again, if you do the math, 14 at most, mr. caprio smoked one-half a pack year of 15 lucky strikes, at most. 16 combined, those two brands, camel and 17 lucky strike, were not even one single pack year. 18 he never smokes them again. 19 plaintiff did not think you needed to 20 know that. did not matter. the evidence does not 21 matter. of course it matters. 22 from 1961 to 1990, that 30-year period, 23 mr. caprio does not smoke reynolds' cigarettes. 24 for 30 years, he has no relationship with 25 reynolds. that evidence matters. 5469 1 mr. caprio has his next reynolds' 2 cigarette in mid-1990 or 1991, but a lot has 3 changed, folks. cigarettes, the ads have been off 4 tv and radio for 18 years. the warnings have been 5 on the pack for 24 years. 6 the cigarette packs that mr. caprio did 7 smoke from 1985 to mid-1990 or 1991, though they 8 were not reynolds', they repeatedly warned him that 9 cigarettes cause lung cancer and emphysema. 10 mr. caprio was exposed to those very 11 warnings day after day, week after week, month 12 after month, year after year before mid-1990. 13 those warnings did not say: lights are 14 safer. instead, they say: cigarettes cause 15 emphysema. cigarettes cause lung cancer. 16 those warnings unequivocally advised 17 mr. caprio that he could achieve great health 18 benefits from quitting smoking. 19 all of this information was available to 20 mr. caprio before his first winston light. 21 indeed, it was in his hands as he held the packs. 22 and, please, i ask you to focus on the 23 fact that the warnings were available to 24 mr. caprio, available. i'm going to come back to 25 that point in a few minutes. 5470 1 other things changed before mid-1990 2 also. uncle arthur's copd was a very personal 3 warning to mr. caprio, and so was louise's 4 father-in-law's copd. 5 and mr. caprio was interacting with 6 doctors at least four times a year in the '80 as 7 he is going for his every three-month chest x-rays. 8 so that brings us to winston lights. 9 you know from my questions, i had very few of 10 them, but from my questions to mr. caprio this 11 past tuesday, that he started smoking winston 12 lights in the mid-1990 or 1991. 13 but mr. caprio never told you how long 14 he smoked winston lights for. however, his 15 partner, bryan rintoul, gives us the answer to 16 that, because mr. rintoul testified that by the 17 time he and mr. caprio moved back from atlanta to 18 florida in 1993, mr. caprio was smoking a 19 different brand, not winston lights or any 20 cigarette made by reynolds. 21 so the evidence you have is mr. caprio 22 smoked winston lights beginning in mid-1990 or 23 1991 and continuing until no later until some time 24 than 1993. 25 at most, it is between two and three 5471 1 calendar years, four to six pack years, max. 2 and we know that just like the 3 cigarettes before, every pack of winston lights 4 that mr. caprio smoked had a surgeon general's 5 warning, warning him about the risk of lung 6 cancer, the risk of emphysema and advising him to 7 quit for his health. 8 so for all those three brands total, the 9 total reynolds' smoking history by mr. caprio, 10 again, at most, it is between four and a half to 11 six and a half pack years out of 80 to 100 pack 12 years. 13 plaintiff did not mention any of that 14 yesterday. all they said is reynolds somehow is 15 25 percent responsible. 16 given all the facts that i just laid out 17 to you, mr. caprio's limited smoking of reynolds' 18 cigarettes and his awareness of the risk prior to 19 smoking winston lights, you could justify taking 20 the 25 percent fault that mr. hammer suggested 21 goes to reynolds and you could give it all to 22 mr. caprio and give reynolds zero percent fault. 23 and if you do not agree, i respectfully 24 suggest, based on the facts, the proper percentage 25 is nowhere, nowhere near as high as the 25 percent 5472 1 mr. hammer suggested. 2 i want to turn to question 3 on the 3 verdict form and sort of go out of order a little 4 bit. this was the fraudulent concealment 5 question. 6 i've got a board here so you can look at 7 it while i'm talking about it. 8 as you know, it was talked about 9 yesterday, plaintiff has the burden to prove that 10 mr. caprio identified an actual statement made by 11 reynolds after may 5th, 1982, that he relied on. 12 any statement after may 5th, 1982, 13 again, you will have the verdict form back there. 14 you you will have the jury instructions back in the 15 jury room. 16 so he is got to identify an actual 17 statement made by reynolds, and he is got to do the 18 same for a statement by philip morris and 19 lorillard as well. 20 what were the actual statements 21 mr. caprio relied upon? 22 we are five full weeks into this trial, 23 ladies and gentlemen. if mr. caprio actually 24 relied on an actual statement, why are we all 25 still here trying to figure out what that 5473 1 statement was? how come we do not know what it 2 was? 3 mr. caprio sat right there, three, four 4 feet away from you, and testified for three full 5 hours. why did not he tell us what the actual 6 statement was? why are we left to guess, to 7 wonder, to speculate? 8 after all, the burden of proof on this 9 issue sits right here at this table, at 10 plaintiff's table. why are we guessing and 11 wondering? 12 in fact, it is interesting, there was 13 some interesting testimony when mr. hammer was 14 questioning mr. caprio, and i want to share it to 15 you because i think it speaks volumes on this 16 issue. 17 this is plaintiff's own lawyer asking 18 him questions. let us read it together. 19 question by mr. hammer: you mention 20 that it is still being sold. 21 this is to mr. caprio. 22 did you hear over the years the tobacco 23 companies say: hey, if it is proven to be 24 dangerous, we will stop making it? did you hear 25 comments like that throughout the years? 5474 1 answer: did i hear them say that 2 they -- 3 question: did you hear those kind of 4 comments throughout the years? 5 answer by mr. caprio: no. no. 6 ladies and gentlemen: no. no. that is 7 the very answer you ought to put on your verdict 8 form for the question of fraudulent concealment: 9 no. no. use mr. caprio's own words. 10 there is no real mystery here. there is 11 no identifiable statement, not for my client, 12 reynolds, not for any of the defendants. 13 for that reason alone as to questions 14 number 3 on the verdict form and the related 15 question, question number 4 as to each of the 16 defendants, you should check no on the verdict 17 form. 18 but even if you disagree, mr. caprio 19 still cannot prevail on these claims. there is 20 reasons that mr. cofer and others talked about 21 yesterday, but there is an additional reason. 22 for these claims -- i want to put the 23 question back up. 24 for these claims, mr. caprio also has to 25 prove that his reliance on actual statements was 5475 1 reasonable. 2 one of the questions you are going to 3 have to answer is: were the facts actually 4 available to mr. caprio? 5 remember a few minutes ago i asked you 6 to focus on the issue of available. not otherwise 7 known or available to him, it is right there. it is 8 part of that question. 9 of course the information was available 10 to mr. caprio. we talked about the warning 11 labels, but all the way back to 1964, mr. caprio 12 knew about the 1964 surgeon general's report. 13 of course that information was available 14 to him. you kept hearing yesterday about how 15 anyone could get the surgeon general's report. 16 so that is question 3 and question 4, as 17 to those questions, 3 and 4 on your verdict form, 18 i'd ask that you check no as to reynolds and the 19 other defendants. 20 so i want to spend my remaining time 21 talking about the conduct evidence plaintiff 22 offered through dr. proctor in connection with his 23 claim for punitive damages. 24 you remember dr. proctor was one of the 25 few witness that i questioned. i questioned him 5476 1 for about three hours. 2 yesterday you heard mr. cofer talk about 3 how there are two or maybe three sides to every 4 story, and i briefly talked about this during my 5 opening statement weeks ago. 6 i told you about the importance of 7 context, hearing both sides, hearing the whole 8 story. 9 and i suggested you would not hear the 10 whole story from plaintiff's experts, at least not 11 voluntarily, not on direct exam. 12 time and time again, dr. proctor only 13 told you half a story on direct exam. and it 14 was not until we had the opportunity to 15 cross-examine him that the full story was 16 revealed. 17 if you reach the question of whether 18 punitive damages should be awarded in this case, 19 we do not think you should ever get to that 20 question on the verdict form. 21 but if you do, i ask you to consider the 22 full story, not the half stories dr. proctor told 23 you on direct. 24 and i'd ask that you be mindful in your 25 consideration -- you will see this jury instruction 5477 1 back there, and, again, you will have the jury 2 instructions back there with you. 3 i ask that you be mindful in your 4 consideration of whether punitive damages are 5 warranted for defendants' conduct, that your 6 decision must be based only on the same or similar 7 conduct which has been shown by clear and 8 convincing evidence to have caused mr. caprio's 9 copd and lung cancer. 10 and dr. proctor's testimony simply was 11 not focused on conduct or similar conduct that had 12 any connection to mr. caprio. 13 let us take a look at a few examples. 14 on direct examination, dr. proctor told 15 you about the more doctors smoke camel ads, but on 16 cross you heard those ads backfired. 17 they did not provide reassurance. 18 instead they raised consumer awareness about the 19 risks of smoking. 20 regardless, mr. caprio never testified 21 that he saw those ads. they had nothing to do 22 with him. 23 let us talk about the frank statement. 24 on direct you heard about the frank statement. 25 all dr. proctor told you was it was the magna 5478 1 carta and that it was intended to reassure the 2 american public. 3 but on cross-examination of dr. proctor, 4 you learned that the frank statement frightened 5 people. 6 people quit smoking or cut back on the 7 number of cigarettes they smoked as a result of 8 the frank statement. 9 just like more doctors smoke camels, it 10 backfired. it did not reassure people, but on 11 direct exam, dr. proctor did not tell you any of 12 that. 13 and, regardless, in terms of its 14 connection to mr. caprio, you never heard 15 mr. caprio testify that he read the frank 16 statement. 17 on direct, you heard about tirc and ctr. 18 dr. proctor said it was just simple distraction 19 research, a smoke screen. 20 it took cross for you to find out 600 of 21 the articles that they funded have been relied 22 upon and cited in the u.s. surgeon general's 23 report. 24 and what did mr. schlesinger tell you 25 yesterday? he said before something goes in one 5479 1 of these books, before they sign an article, it is 2 heavily vetted. 3 and you heard about the expert review 4 committee reviews all those articles. 5 apparently, there is only one person who thinks 6 those 600 articles are of no value. 7 that one person is dr. proctor, and what 8 do we know about him? he cannot even tell you he is 9 read a single one of them. 10 imagine that. he is decided no value. 11 everyone else decides they are worthy of print in 12 here. 13 but dr. proctor can tell you they are no 14 value. how does that work? how is that evidence? 15 how is that reliable? how is that credible. 16 and regardless of all this in terms of 17 connection to mr. caprio, you never heard him say 18 he heard of tirc, ctr, the tobacco institute 19 before he filed this lawsuit. he did not. there is 20 no connection. 21 on direct you heard that reynolds hid 22 the truth about the dangers of smoking, but on 23 cross and only cross, you learned that 24 dr. rodgman, the reynolds' scientist, shared his 25 discovery regarding carcinogens he found in smoke 5480 1 with the surgeon general's expert committee in 2 advance of the '64 expert report. and the surgeon 3 general published it. they were available. 4 on cross you learned that reynolds' 5 scientists that published scientific literature 6 which the u.s. surgeon general cited to in ten 7 different reports from '64 to 2010. 8 go back to mr. schlesinger's own words 9 yesterday. this stuff is carefully vetted before 10 it goes in the surgeon general's report. 11 and they are relying on reynolds' 12 research. reynolds is disclosing it, and the 13 surgeon general is relying on it for state of the 14 art science. 15 regardless of any of that, in terms of 16 connection, mr. caprio never testified that he 17 heard any statement from dr. teague, dr. rodgman, 18 or any scientist or executive at rj reynolds or 19 any other defendant. 20 perhaps the greatest example at trial of 21 a partial story was project scum. dr. proctor 22 told you about it during direct exam. he did not 23 even tell you half a story. he told you fragments 24 of a story. 25 i want you to think back about how you 5481 1 felt about my client, reynolds, at the point in 2 time when dr. proctor finished testifying about it 3 on direct exam. 4 you knew part of the story, not like now 5 when you know the whole story. so think back. 6 were you mad? i get it. 7 i understood during openings when i was 8 telling you about it, trying to give you some 9 context, you did not know whether i was telling you 10 the truth, whether those facts would be borne out. 11 so you heard part of the story, and i 12 understand that you were mad. folks, that was not 13 by accident. it was intentional, and it was 14 designed. 15 dr. proctor is a professional witness. 16 he gets paid millions of dollars, and you know 17 what? he is charging even more now to do it. and 18 nothing, nothing, not a single thing dr. proctor 19 does at trial is by accident. 20 it was about telling a small part of a 21 half a story to get you mad. why did not he tell 22 you the full story about that or any of the other 23 things i'm talking about today? 24 and there is more examples. you have seen 25 them during my cross. i do not have time to cover 5482 1 them all now. 2 he did not do it because dr. proctor's 3 sole purpose his, quote, unquote, noble purpose, 4 his $3 million purpose is just to get you mad, 5 even if that means he tells you part of a story, 6 an incomplete story. 7 so i want to go back to project scum for 8 a minute. the full story -- 9 the court: you only have two minutes. 10 mr. seiden: the full story shows you it 11 was not what dr. proctor had you believe, not even 12 remotely. 13 on cross you learned it had no 14 connection to mr. caprio, and dr. proctor knew 15 that all the way back in his deposition. 16 you learned it only involved a few 17 mid-level employees in a company of 9,000 18 employees. you learned no executive officer ever 19 approved it. all facts he did not tell you. 20 you learned that he considered the 21 reprimand serious. and you learned the, quote, 22 unquote, plan that he never told you what it was 23 to sell cigarettes in stores that were already 24 selling cigarettes. 25 and finally on cross, you learned about 5483 1 certain of reynolds' company-wide policies and 2 practices related to sexual orientation around 3 2001, the time of the policy. 4 you saw the draft document dr. proctor 5 showed you was empathetical to the way reynolds 6 did business. 7 you know, it was interesting yesterday. 8 mr. schlesinger reflected on how "progressive," 9 his word, how progressive it was that in 2015 an 10 openly gay man could be here in court without any 11 prejudice. 12 and i agree it is progressive, but you 13 know what? in 2001, dr. proctor used that very 14 word, "progressive," to describe reynolds' 15 policies as related to sexual orientation. 16 i've got do try to wrap up. 17 if you get to the issue of punitive 18 damages and you think about deterrence and 19 punishment, i would submit that the master 20 settlement agreement that you heard about that 21 mr. cofer talked about provides deterrence, that 22 it constrains the way, it puts severe operating 23 restrictions on the companies today, and those 24 restrictions continue in perpetuity. 25 you heard about the fda. i'm not going 5484 1 to repeat that. but they have been regulating the 2 industry since 2009. 3 i went through the board of the faces. 4 you saw none of those folks are there any more. 5 they are all gone. many have passed away, but 6 they are all gone from the company. 7 dr. proctor maybe wanted to give you the 8 impression they are still controlling the company. 9 they are not. it is a new company now, but it is a 10 company that is inherited the legacy. 11 they have inherited the msa requirements. 12 they have inherited the fda regulation. they are 13 carefully watched and monitored now. it is not 14 like it was before. 15 the court: time is up, sir. 16 mr. seiden: can i have one minute to 17 wrap up, please? 18 the court: sure. 19 mr. seiden: plaintiff gets to go last. 20 defense counsel will not have a chance to respond, 21 so i want you, as you listen to plaintiff's 22 rebuttal, consider what mr. cofer, mr. bideau, 23 ms. ruiz, myself, if we had a chance to respond, 24 what is it we would say? 25 ask yourself: what is the full story? 5485 1 have i been told it, or are portions of a document 2 just being read to me out of context? does what 3 i'm being told have anything to do with 4 71-year-old mr. caprio? did mr. caprio testify 5 about it? 6 whether it is whispered to you, whether 7 it is yelled at you, whether it is wrapped up in a 8 song lyric, a book reference, a movie reference, i 9 ask you to consider all those things. 10 this may be my last chance to speak to 11 you. if we do not go to punitive damages and have 12 additional witnesses and argument next week, this 13 is it. this is my last chance. 14 so i think this is day 17 or 18 for many 15 of you. i know when -- 16 the court: nineteen. 17 mr. seiden: -- when you got that notice 18 in the mail, you did not know you would be here so 19 long. we all very much, plaintiff's, defendants', 20 and the court, we all very much appreciate your 21 service. 22 thank you all so much.