22 mr. chestnut: good afternoon, jurors. on behalf of the entire group of plaintiffs, on behalf of mrs. fanali, on behalf of mrs. cavalier -- who is on the back row there, sitting back there, gorgeous lady one over from the back -- we want to thank you. it is been almost three weeks. you have been very attentive. we just need a few more minutes of your time, perhaps one more day for punitive damages, to encapsulate all the evidence you have heard, because you have heard so much. but it all boils down to this, ladies and gentlemen. it is simple: lie, deny, and blame the smoker. lie about the harmful effects of smoking, deny that smoking is addictive, and blame the smoker. members of the jury, this is america. we love it. you can do anything. you can be jay z. you can be jay from around the corner. you can be beyoncé or you could be bea from the beauty salon. you could apply pressure, defy pressure. it is limitless. but as a company, there are limitations, because as a country, we have a conscience, and it is that conscience that separates us from the rest of the -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. it is improper, conscience of the community. the court: conscience of the community, just do not reference that. you are fine otherwise. that is fine. mr. persons: motion. may i approach? the court: okay. sure. of course, mr. persons. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. persons: this will save some time. the court: that is fine. yes. mr. persons: what i'd like to do so that i do not have to jump up here every time is when -- mr. gary: you do not have to scream the objection. the court: we are fine. mr. persons: well, instead of having to come up here and move for a mistrial, which is what i'm going to do now, i will simply say "motion." the court: okay. mr. persons: that way i do not have to come up here and do this. the court: okay. that is fine. okay. that is fine. is that acceptable to the plaintiff? mr. chestnut: that is great. mr. gary: yeah, that is good. mr. persons: and of course i'll move -- the court: at this point, i'm going to deny it, but i'll sustain your objection. mr. persons: thank you. in open court before the court and jury.) mr. chestnut: members of the jury, the rules for a company are simple. you can make all the money you want to make, a million, a billion, $10, but you cannot sacrifice the safety of americans for profit. a tobacco company, including rjr, must not intentionally produce a defective cigarette knowing that the toxin, the chemical compound in this cigarette, is toxic to humans and is likely to cause deadly disease in the americans that purchase that cigarette. mr. persons: objection; preemption. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: an industry, the tobacco industry, must not conspire amongst itself, plot to intentionally conceal from the american government and the american public the harmful effects of the cigarettes they sell and the addictive nature of the cigarettes that they sell. members of the jury, we are going to go through some evidence, and as we do that, i'd just ask you do one thing for me, and that is, remember that the reality of mr. cavalier is different. the reality of this case is different. this case is really set in the 1930s and '40s. when mr. cavalier was a teenager and was targeted by the tobacco companies, there was not the organization called truth. teenagers did not know about the harmful and deadly effects of smoking. in fact, tobacco companies were advertising that smoking was not only safe, it was healthy. mr. cavalier's reality in the 1930s and '40s, and '50s, the reality of the public in the 1930s and '40s and '50s, was wholly diametrically opposed to what we know today, and that was by design, because the tobacco company conspired, the tobacco industry conspired, to lie, deny, and blame the smoker. let us go to 1955, ladies and gentlemen. the plaza hotel, a group of tobacco executives get together. they are meeting about the future of their industry. they are meeting to plan on lie, deny, and blame the smoker. here's a document, ladies and gentlemen. it says: for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it -- they are talking about smoking -- advocating the public's right to smoke without actually urging them to take up the practice. on the litigation front, for which this strategy was designed, it has been successful. what are they conspiring to do, ladies and gentlemen? they are conspiring to make billions of dollars selling a drug. they say the future, the future, we have an emerging picture of a fast, highly pharmacological, effective and cheap drug -- this is their internal document, ladies and gentlemen -- drug called tobacco. now, why is it so important for them to lie and deny the addictive nature of tobacco? we will get to it in some slides later. ms. schneider: objection, your honor. may we approach? can you pull that down, please? the court: sure, ms. schneider. ms. schneider: that is not in evidence. the court: mr. acosta did not put that in evidence. chestnut: i think he is moving it into evidence. the court: is it coming in? ms. schneider: we still have argument on it, your honor. the court: that is denied. let us go. defendant's objection is denied. let us go. in open court before the court and jury.) mr. chestnut: before starting on the future scenario let us look at what we are currently selling and how it is developed. "a cigarette as a drug administration system for public use has a very, very significant advantage." here's, in essence, what they are trying to say, ladies and gentlemen. i'll sum it up for you. mr. persons: object to the interpretation of the document. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: it is argument. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: thank you. the cigarette companies are selling a drug. the drug is nicotine. in america, the government regulates drugs as either illegal or legal. you are either in the illegal drug trade or you are in the legal drug trade. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: if you are in the illegal drug trade, if you get caught, you are going to jail. if you are in the legal drug trade, ladies and gentlemen, you are regulated by the fda. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is what they were trying to avoid. the tobacco companies, although they are selling nicotine, they know it is addictive, they know it is going to freebase. it is addictive as crack. freebase is what pookie did in new jack city. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: it is freebase. it is a drug. drugs that are this strong, as strong as nicotine, are regulated by the federal drug administration. they do not want the government regulation, and so they conceal it. not only do they conceal it, they conspired to conceal it by putting it in tobacco seeds. it says: "tobacco is a relatively efficient nicotine delivery system." this is their documents, not me, it is them. "the effect of nicotine on the brain is to increase the level of arousal. different people smoke cigarettes for different reasons, but the primary reason is to deliver nicotine into their bodies. similar organic" -- this is them comparing the drug they are selling to other drugs. they say: "similar organic chemicals include nicotine, quinine, cocaine, atropine and morphine. while each of these substances can be used to affect human physiology, nicotine has a particularly broad range of influence." a cigarette -- ms. schneider: your honor, take that down, please. may we approach? the court: that is fine. objection sustained; the bottom portion of that document. i saw it. just the bottom portion. objection sustained. just crop the bottom portion. thank you. mr. chestnut: thank you. it is a tobacco document, internal, ladies and gentlemen, says: "a cigarette is the perfect pleasure. it is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied." this starts talking about addiction. "what more can one want? let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they," meaning the american public -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: -- the american public, "that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied" because, members of the jury, the more you remain unsatisfied, the more cigarettes you buy. kind of like when you buy four to six packs a day for 50 years like thomas cavalier, the more you are unsatisfied, the more you buy. "the attitude of men must directly deal with the industry is that is what is interesting and important for us to understand, that is why the notes of our four interviews and research are given at some length." here's where we get into addiction. one of the men, these are tobacco employees and execs saying, one of the men said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they," meaning the american public, "cannot break." another one said, "boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? what could we do to the competition?" members of the jury, all this time we are spending arguing about causation, they knew as an industry way, way back, as my grandma would say, way back yonder, that this causes cancer. they are thinking about how can we produce a cancer-free cigarette. they did not do it. suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. that would be maybe $40 billion a year. mr. persons: objection, your honor. misstates the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. that would maybe be $40 billion a year. mr. persons: same objection. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: the smokers seeks the subjective state that results from the introduction of nicotine into the bloodstream. ms. schneider: your honor, may we approach? court: sure. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) ms. schneider: this is not in evidence. it is not part of the conspiracy. it is hearsay. the court: okay. mr. chestnut, it is a pm document. mr. acosta? mr. chestnut: your honor, this goes to prove conspiracy. the court: wait, wait. ms. schneider: you only use what is in evidence in closing. the court: was there any objection to this one? mr. acosta: which one is this? mr. chestnut: your honor, i'll move on. the court: he will move on, okay. in open court before the court and jury.) the court: you may continue, mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: remember, ladies and gentlemen, these are tobacco documents. tobacco documents, not documents we made up, these are documents that the tobacco companies hid and concealed as part of the conspiracy. they never thought that you would see it. they never thought the public would see these internal documents. and so on a lot of them, you will see this, "confidential." now, the themes, i'm going to go through the slides, members of the jury, and if you will just go with me, all right. watch the themes. the first theme is this. tobacco, when you see a confidential document, they admit, you will see an admission in that document that tobacco is harmful and that it is addictive. when you see a public document or a document that is for release, it will say the opposite, that tobacco is not harmful, that it is not addictive. "we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." members of the jury, this is an ad from the '40s and '50s where they have doctors and advertising that doctors smoke. more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette. so what tobacco is telling the public, that their product must be safe, it must not be addictive because doctors are smoking it, but they know the opposite. you can count on cigarette companies who have obligated themselves to pour millions of dollars into cancer research to take anything out of your cigarette that is a health hazard. if our science ever really finds any such hazard in the wonderful tobacco leaf -- this is a public document. go back to the private document. "it has been our holding strategy to create doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." they do not admit anything. they just say, if we find that it is harmful, we will do something about it. that is not true. it is a lie. lie, deny, blame the smoker. here, ladies and gentlemen, the tobacco companies take on the surgeon general's report. clearly, the report issued by the surgeon general's office today is politically rather than scientifically motivated. now, is this déjà vu or what, because yesterday when dr. w flew all the way from santa monica -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: he is a witness who testified. they hired him. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: thank you. so he flew all the way from santa monica, california. he was the guy that testified in two tobacco trials the same day for tobacco. when i asked him -- remember he said, "i graduated from yale in 1977." when we asked him about the surgeon general's report, he said, "i do not rely on the surgeon general report. that is not authoritative." but, ladies and gentlemen, you know what is ironic about it? he testified, "that is a political question. that is not a scientific medical question. i do not rely on the surgeon general. they do not know what they are talking about." members of the jury, guess what? the surgeon general in the united states of america graduated from guess where? yale medical school, the school he was so proud of graduating from. "after years of well-funded research, it has not been established that cigarette smoking produces a physical dependence on nicotine." this is a public document. they are denying that it is addictive. meanwhile, inside company, they are trying to figure out how to make it more addictive. remember, we just read a document, is not it great that people do not know. we are happy they are unsatisfied because they are going to buy more cigarettes. the claim that there is a physical dependence for smoking is simply a desperate attempt to find some way to differentiate smoking from other habits. this is a public document. habit. the internal confidential documents will mainly say addiction. the surgeon general has repeatedly stated that his goal is a smokeless society, that he believes smoking is one of the most addictive drugs in society, and he has voiced his support of persons suing tobacco companies. consequently, it is not reasonable to expect that a report coming from his office would be objective in its view on the subject of cigarette smoking behavior. this is an internal document. they are taking on the surgeon general of the united states of america and basically calling him a politically motivated liar. we have the responsibility of guiding a research program through which a tobacco industry research committee already has provided $2.2 million in 1957, $2.2 million, for grants to independent scientists working in the field of cancer and other challenges of human survival. the research, thus far, has produced no evidence that cigarette smoking or other tobacco use contributes to the origin of lung cancer. many experiments on inhalation of cigarette smoke in animals have failed to produce a single cancer similar to the most prevalent type of lung cancer in humans. ladies and gentlemen, this is phase ii of the conspiracy. they went to universities. they commissioned committees. $2.2 million in 1957. they were paying. they gave $2.2 million in grants. they said "independent scientists." we are going to get to slides later; but, ladies and gentlemen, you will see another theme amongst these tobacco companies, when these committees that they commissioned for research, some of them are universities, some of them are independent, when they produce or find, make factual findings, that tobacco is addictive or is harmful, they terminate the grant. here's a confidential letter. there are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco. these are cancer-causing, cancer-promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful. members of the jury, 1957, they just said there is no evidence that cigarette smoking or other tobacco use contributes to the origin of lung cancer. and here we go, mr. little here confidentially saying it can cause cancer, promote cancer -- mr. persons: objection to that. mr. chestnut: we are moving on, your honor. the tobacco institute, one of these committees, claims that cigarettes -- "the claims that cigarettes are addictive is irresponsible and are scare tactics." again, this is a public document. and so they are saying to the public, this tobacco institute is telling the public, hey, the fact that these claims that cigarettes are addictive are scare tactics. let us look at what they are saying amongst themselves. sorry. this is another public document. here we go. it is part of their strategy, ladies and gentlemen. advocate the public's right to smoke without actually urging them to take up practice, but create doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. this is their strategy. this is their conspiracy. this is their document. here's another example of the committee. ladies and gentlemen, "the executive committee has letters of agreement to get journalism school studies of communication materials underway and have been negotiated with michigan state university, university of georgia and university of texas. the letters of agreement include confidentiality safeguards as discussed at our meeting." they have a confidentiality clause. so they are giving money to the schools. they are commissioning these communication materials about smoking, telling the public they are safe, but there is a confidentiality clause; meaning, if one of these, michigan state university, university of georgia, university of texas, discovers that tobacco is harmful or addictive, there is a confidentiality clause preventing them from, what, telling the public the truth. lie, deny, blame the smoker. here's a document. this is ctr. it is tobacco industry research that says, "someone could attempt to make a point regarding ctr that when research by its grantees appear to be" -- ms. schneider: your honor, may we approach? take that down, please. the court: sure. mr. chestnut: i'll move on. the court: mr. chestnut will take it down and will not discuss it. we will move to the next document. not a problem. mr. chestnut: let us go to the next one. thank you. here's the tobacco institute. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and may be subject to a finding, that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." this is a confidential document so they are admitting that there is a controversy. they are worried that the truth may come out. they are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes, ladies and gentlemen. they are putting profit over the safety of the american public. this is a tobacco document, ladies and gentlemen, the tobacco institute incorporated. that is the conspiracy of all the companies, that is part of what we have to prove. an admission by the industry that excessive cigarette smoking is bad for you is tantamount to an admission of guilt with regard to the lung cancer problem. this could open the door to legal suits in which the industry would have no defense. so we have been through lie about the harmful effects, through their documents, we have established deny the addictive nature. this is the beginning of the theme, blame the smoker, ladies and gentlemen. if we admit that excessive smoking is bad for you, it is tantamount to an admission of guilt. to suggest that coping techniques are not of his own choosing and are predetermined certainly does not constitute good faith on the part of the industry toward its consumers. ladies and gentlemen, that is a convoluted way of saying these cigarettes are addictive. they are addictive, choice, from their document way back. so, ladies and gentlemen, all these arguments we have been hearing for the last three weeks about it was mr. cavalier's choice, it was mr. cavalier's choice, it was never his choice. it was never america's choice. you know whose choice it was? tobacco. you know what they chose? money over the safety of the american public. they chose to lie to the american public. they chose to deny the truth to the american public. they chose to blame the public for becoming susceptible to the very marketing they are spending millions of dollars trying to convince the public. and then they throw it back on the public for smoking their product. again, ladies and gentlemen, they admit, their own document, 20 years, this was their strategy. three major fronts: litigation, politics, public opinion. public opinion. it is a smoker's choice. they choose to smoke. smoking is not addictive. it is not a chemical. nicotine does not affect your brain. there is no freebase. it is a choice. it is willpower. you cannot stop smoking, you are weak. that is not what they think, but that is what they tell the public. let us talk about addiction. addiction is a chronic relapsing brain disease. did they know? so the irony in this, it is 2015. one of the major issues in this litigation -- ms. schneider: your honor, may we approach? take it down, please. the clerk: you have 20 minutes. mr. chestnut: 20 minutes still. your honor, i'll just move on. that is fine. the court: he is going to move on. we are good. mr. chestnut: one of the major issues we have been arguing about is addiction. ladies and gentlemen, we are going to see a number of documents that say, what, the tobacco companies, plural, not only conspired to addiction, but they knew the cigarettes were addictive way back. cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people, whoever smoked. but we just spent the whole morning listening to a hired expert telling all of us that mr. cavalier is not addicted, that it is his choice, that he was weak because he chose to smoke. but their own people say, hooking two-thirds of people, whoever smoke, we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. this is their document. this is their theory in this case. mr. persons: objection, your honor. attacks the defense of the case. motion. the court: it is from the document. overruled. mr. chestnut: it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit the public cannot break. although more people talk about taste, it is likely a greater number smoke for the narcotic value that comes from the nicotine, addiction. ladies and gentlemen, a cigarette -- in 1969, a cigarette will even preempt food in times of scarcity on the smokers priority list. ladies and gentlemen, this is important, because in 1969, they are saying that a cigarette will preempt food in times of scarcity on the smokers priority list. well, let us -- let us think about mr. cavalier's priority list. think about the testimony we heard from the cavalier family. mr. persons: objection to that one. the court: sure. mr. chestnut: i'll move on. the court: he will move on. he will move on. mr. persons: i need a ruling on it. the court: yes. mr. persons: and there is -- ms. schneider: objection to this one, too. mr. persons: and there is a number of them like that, and they are not even on the plaintiffs' exhibit list, so when we move, they take it down. the court: he is okay. mr. chestnut: i'll tell you what -- the court: he will move on. that is fine. he is okay. we are good. we are good. we will move on. mr. chestnut: we have seen enough tobacco documents today. so what is it really, ladies and gentlemen, that this case is about? a lot of this has to do with credibility. and so i just want to plant some things in your mind so you can think about it as you hear our closing arguments. now, first and foremost, we have the burden of proof, we do, the greater weight of the evidence. we are the plaintiffs. members of the jury, we presented you with over two weeks of evidence. they did one day. mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: members of the jury, you will hear in the defense closing a lot of different theories about causation, because there is some things that you are going to have to determine. here's what i submit to you that this comes -- this case comes down to this regarding mr. cavalier. "a" versus "the." two words, ladies and gentlemen, that is what the case is about, "a" versus "the." let us take a look at -- now yesterday we heard from dr. w let us call him. and the doctor's primary contention was that copd was the cause of smoking. and he and i got into this big kind of spar over "a" versus "the." and ultimately he had to conclude that cigarette smoking is "a" cause of cardiovascular disease and that cardiovascular disease is "a" cause of death from smoking. so let us look at the difference between "a," ladies and gentlemen, and "the." the word "a" or letter, is an indefinite article. so it is not particular or certain of one class or a group. it is "a." so if mr. cavalier has copd, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and lung cancer, all we have to prove is that cardiovascular disease is "a," indefinite, one of, one of the causes of his death. what the defense will submit to you is that it is "the" cause. they are going to submit to you -- they are going to argue to you, ladies and gentlemen, that cardiovascular disease is "the" cause of death, which is why they have made such a huge deal out of the death certificate when they say that copd is "the" only cause of death. we will get to the death certificate. "the" is distinct from "a." "the" is a definite article used especially before a noun, with a specifying or particularized effect, as opposed to the indefinite or generalized force of the indefinite article "a." so "a" is the opposite of "the." why is that important for us, ladies and gentlemen, "a" versus "the"? we, as the plaintiffs, the court will instruct you, here's the first question you will have to answer on your verdict form. was smoking cigarettes "a" not "the," a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease? and, if so, was coronary artery disease "a" legal cause of his death, not "the" legal cause of his death. it has to be "a" legal cause of his death. so whether copd was a contributing factor, whether diabetes was a contributing factor, whether the lung cancer was a contributing factor, he had cardiovascular disease. it is one of the causes legally of his death. mr. persons: objection. misstates the law, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: that is our verdict. i submit to you we will make it. and it is in the jury instruction as well. and i do not want to go through it. but i'll just highlight it very quickly, ladies and gentlemen, that even in the jury instructions -- and i want to go through this with you because it is important. because it says, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of coronary artery disease, cigarette smoking need not be the only cause." this is the jury instruction. instruction 5, in order to be regarded as a legal cause cigarette smoking does not have to be the only cause. smoking cigarettes may be a legal cause of coronary artery disease even though it operates in, what, combination with some other cause if smoking cigarettes contributes substantially to producing coronary artery disease. let me go a little further. coronary artery disease is a legal cause of mr. cavalier's death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such death so that it can be said but for the coronary artery disease, the death would not have occurred. now, this is very important because this will make you think, wait now, wait now, it says but for the coronary artery disease, the death would not have occurred. in other words, plaintiffs must prove that but for the coronary artery disease, he would not have died. that is an important paragraph. you are going to hear a lot of argument on that. but i just submit to you, let us read the next paragraph that qualifies this one. the next paragraph says, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, coronary artery disease need not be the only cause. coronary artery disease may be a legal cause of death, even though it operates in combination with some other cause if coronary artery disease contributes substantially to the death." that is the jury instruction, ladies and gentlemen. it is just got to be one of them. it does not have to be the only one. that is what the argument has been about death certificate. before we get to the death certificate, can we go to 508157? so was mr. cavalier diagnosed with coronary artery disease? william ludwig, december 7th, 1990, writing to dr. cowen. thank you very much for the privilege of seeing mr. cavalier again -- then exchange of pleasantries. can we go down to the bottom? clinical impressions: evidence of atherosclerotic heart disease and underlying myocardial dysfunction. he is got heart dysfunction and evidence of atherosclerotic heart disease. now, you remember yesterday, i'll get to it a little later, but dr. w came in, and he was arguing down that heart disease -- or that copd was the only cause of death. but, ladies and gentlemen, dyspnea is a shortness of breath. it says it is probably multifactorial, which means there are many causes, copd, heart disease, and myocardial dysfunction. now, according to the jury instruction we just read and the verdict form that you will receive, that is sufficient for us to prevail and go to phase ii. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. that is a gross misstatement of the law -- the court: sustained. mr. persons: and move -- mr. hohnbaum: -- and move to strike it. the court: denied. mr. chestnut: we submit to you that this is evidence to prove that mr. cavalier had heart disease diagnosed in 1990. the doctor admitted yesterday that there is no other medical record demonstrating that mr. cavalier had or was diagnosed with heart disease prior to 1990. that is important, because there is a statute of limitations. so he has to be diagnosed with this after 1990. this is 12/7/1990, first document, first doctor to diagnose it. and moreover -- can we go back up top? because there is going to be argument about, well, we do not have all the medical records, a lot of the medical records are missing. but you know, this doctor says a lot for us. because he says that this is a consultation follow-up, which means dr. cowen referred mr. cavalier to dr. ludwig for a consultation, which means he is sending him to the -- to this doctor for an evaluation of what is wrong with his heart. this is further evidence that this is the diagnosis, that there is no prior treatment for the heart, no prior diagnosis of heart conditions. the clerk: counsel, you have 10 minutes. mr. chestnut: thank you, ma'am. let us go to the -- so the next question is: was mr. -- can we go to cavalier 33? was mr. cavalier addicted? now, we just heard testimony about that, right? how about let us start out -- now, dr. -- dr. feingold came in. we brought him in. he testified to you that there are basically two ways of determining addiction. but before we get into the complex cases on addiction, let us just go to common sense, ladies and gentlemen. ladies and gentlemen, you have heard testimony -- you have seen documentation that mr. cavalier smoked four to six packs a day. so that is over a 100 cigarettes a day for 50 years. a 100 packs a day, 50 years, and that he tried multiple times to quit, and he was never able to quit. and his daughter testified that the last couple days of his life he was on oxygen, and that is why he stopped smoking. so common sense says he was addicted. can we go to dr. feingold? you ready? so here's what is important about what you have heard. you have heard from dr. feingold. dr. feingold diagnosed mr. cavalier with the -- with being addicted to cigarettes based off of the fagerstrom. and he differentiated why he used this test and not the dsm-5 test which was used today. why is it? well, ladies and gentlemen, here's the dsm-5 test. guess what? you kind of need the person alive to answer these questions. "have you had unsuccessful efforts to quit?" they did not even ask mr. cavalier that. "cravings for tobacco." you need to ask mr. cavalier that. "failure to attend to responsibilities or obligations due to tobacco." you have got to ask mr. cavalier that. but he is been dead since 1993. it is 2015. members of the jury, the fagerstrom, which is dr. feingold used, does not require that. these are objective questions. "how soon after you wake do you crave smoking?" well, his daughter can observe that. "was it difficult for him to stop?" these are observations. well, let us just disregard all of that. the basics is this: over a 100 cigarettes a day. there is a deposition read in for mr. possidento yesterday that said he would buy two cartons at a time and bring them to work with him every night. two cartons. not the packets. two cartons. and there is an argument that he is not addicted? that is an argument that he is not addicted from the same folks who have internal documents saying that -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. ms. schneider: me, too. the court: that is okay. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. chestnut: so next, ladies and gentlemen, let us talk about dr. w. you know, it is kind of unfortunate -- can we go to the second slide? so this is -- ms. schneider: objection, your honor. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. ms. schneider: it is not in evidence. mr. chestnut: it is the -- hohnbaum: we specifically excluded it. mr. chestnut: it is the surgeon general report. the court: he is just using it as a demonstrative. it is not in evidence. mr. chestnut: so this is the surgeon general. he went to yale medical school. so did dr. w. let us talk about what the surgeon general -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: it is demonstrative. the court: tie it to proctor's testimony. ms. schneider: what? mr. hohnbaum: may we approach on that, your honor? the court: sure. mr. chestnut: your honor, i tell you what, we will move on. mr. hohnbaum: may we approach, your honor? the court: okay. no, because he moved on, mr. hohnbaum. mr. hohnbaum: i'll make a motion on that, your honor. the court: denied. mr. hohnbaum: thank you. mr. chestnut: can we pull this up on addiction? dr. w said he relied upon the death certificate in forming his conclusions. that is what he told you yesterday. now, he also said that he taught students, he teaches doctors, and that it is very important that -- and he stresses this to his students, that you be accurate in your diagnosis, that you verify the accuracy of documents, that you read the details, the devil's in the details. this is medicine. people's lives are at stake. they have a hippocratic oath to do no harm to a patient. ladies and gentlemen, we locked him in. he said, yeah, you have got to be accurate. yeah, i teach my students on it. you have got to read the document. the court: mr. chestnut, five minutes. mr. chestnut: five minutes. okay. i thought i had a pointer here. ladies and gentlemen, now we all know -- he said he reviewed, he did his homework. but he also said -- actually, he did say he did his homework, he said they did his powerpoint. but he said he reviewed the documents. we all know mr. cavalier could not read because he only went to the third grade. the death certificate says "12th grade." now, we are not knocking dr. cowen, i'm not challenging dr. cowen. i'm just looking at the document. and it is like an exercise of microsoft word because there is too many fonts on this document. you have got manuscripts, sans script, times new roman. i mean, so let us just look at this. so here's one signature. here's where dr. cowen signs, right? now, let us go back -- wait, wait, wait. now, dr. cohen -- dr. cowen -- look at this, right? look at that font. that is cursive. then he goes to print, allegedly, misspells his name. now, he is done (sic) had that since he was a kid, and this is a trained doctor. so now it is c-o-h-e-n, even though up here it is c-o-w-e-n. but it is cursive here. it is printed there. can we go down to the diagnosis? and then it is real loopy here like big p's. look at that circle on "o." that is totally different. that is a totally different font than before. are we knocking dr. cowen? no. are we saying he probably did not sign this death certificate? yes. he is a busy doctor. how do we know? here's a 2008 document. here's his signature. totally different from the signature here. and, look, even on this document they spell his name right. c-o-w-n (sic), not c-o-h-e-n. more important, here he diagnoses it as lung cancer. here's what we are saying, ladies and gentlemen, dr. w comes in and testified to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that the only cause of death is copd. and i say how did you get there? well, i'm relying on the death certificate. well, we can agree there are inaccuracies on the death certificate. we say, "well, i'm relying on dr. cowen." dr. cowen is relying on dr. cowen. in 1993, he says "copd." in 2008, he says "lung cancer." we are not saying either one of them are wrong. what are we saying? both of them will what, "a" cause, not "the," "a" cause. cardiovascular disease is a cause. now, there are lines here that could have been filled out. they could have put lung cancer here. they could have put cardiovascular disease here. they did not. the document is inaccurate. so you cannot rely just on this death certificate as a cause of death. but you know what we can rely on is the medical records. so dr. w kept saying well, the medical records said he was getting better, he was getting better, he was getting better. i said, okay, no problem. show us one medical record saying that. show us one medical record the last two weeks he was in -- that mr. cavalier was in the hospital showing that he got better. he did not show us one. you know why, ladies and gentlemen? because there is not one. he did not show us one medical record for the last two weeks that said -- of mr. cavalier's life, that mentioned copd. you know why? because there was not one, and there is not one. more importantly, ladies and gentlemen, can i have 50826 -- 272? so then dr. w says well, you know, he was getting better. he was feeling better. all right. but here we have an ejection fraction of 29 percent. i will not go into the diagrams on it. but if we recall, ejection fraction is -- is how much capacity the heart has to pump. and the normal -- dr. feingold told us and he showed us a graph. a normal ejection fraction is 55 percent. nine days before mr. cavalier dies, he is at 29 percent. dr. w told you, man, yeah, 29 percent, you are good. anything less than thirty percent is an industry standard severe. he says well, the patient was doing so good, he could go back to regular life. i said, okay, doctor, no problem. show us one record where he was discharged from the funeral home? i'm sorry. where he was discharged from the hospital, where he was sent home since he was getting better. he was not sent home. he was sent to dorsey funeral home nine days later. he never got better, ladies and gentlemen. the court: one minute, mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: thank you. and there is no document or diagnosis in the last nine days of mr. cavalier's life demonstrating anything other than heart complications. now, the judge has told you about credibility of witnesses, correct? and the medical records are in evidence. you can take them back with you. here's what i want to submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, there is no mention -- so they go through this elaborate presentation on symptoms of congestive heart failure. what is not on there, ladies and gentlemen? ejection fraction. these the most important, most repeated symptom of congestive heart failure. they did not leave it on there. because you know why? because that is what happened. because it demonstrates that there was -- that congestive heart failure was a cause of death. now i have to take my seat. but let me just share one other thing with you. mr. gary: he can use some of my time, your honor. mr. chestnut: i want to go over the factors with you, because dr. w started talking about factors of smoking, right? so here he said these are the factors of smoking: diabetes, family history, smoking. and then there was an objection to the surgeon general's report; is that correct? ms. schneider: yes. mr. chestnut: okay, cool. so i would submit to you that there is evidence out there, that there is medical evidence, medical publishings, medical treatises that -- ms. schneider: objection, your honor. mr. persons: objection. chestnut: i did not say -- the court: keep going. mr. chestnut: i did not say -- that relate smoking to causing -- ms. schneider: objection. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. this is exactly what we addressed yesterday. the court: no -- no -- no -- no speaking objections. mr. chestnut: your honor, i have not cited a specific source. the court: no, go ahead. mr. chestnut, let me hear -- let me hear the statement first. let me hear the statement first. you may continue, mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: that there is documentation out there, there are medical findings that infer that diabetes can be caused by smoking. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor, and move to strike. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: let us do this. they went through all these causes, right? if you recall they kind of glossed over smoking. they did the powerpoint, but they -- hohnbaum: motion, your honor, on that. i'm sorry. the court: okay. denied. mr. hohnbaum: thank you. mr. chestnut: they did the powerpoint, but they kind of glossed over this point of smoking. and here's what is interesting. members of the jury, they said these are mr. cavalier's risk factors for coronary artery disease, right? risk factors. i do not have it on here, so i'm going to show it to you on the elmo. and to support that, they showed you a medical record. now, mr. cavalier, we just saw, was diagnosed with cardiovascular disease in december of 1990. members of the jury, they showed you a document saying -- the doctor says, "i have begged him to begin exercising," from 1992. so, members of the jury, they want you to believe that no. 7 on their list of physical inactivity is a risk factor for mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease. here's the problem. the risk factor came two years after the diagnosis. how can there be a risk of something you already have, ladies and gentlemen? credibility of evidence. members of the jury, we have submitted a significant amount of evidence to you. we can prove or we have proved, to a reasonable -- to -- to -- by a greater weight of the evidence, our case. now, mr. acosta is going to come up and share some additional facts, research with you, mr. gary is going to come after that and share with you documents. we just ask your continued patience. but we also ask for accountability. ladies and gentlemen, hold both sides accountable. question the evidence. there were a lot of opinions up here, but they were based off powerpoints, a lot of records. our experts, they had records, and their records corroborated the powerpoints that we showed you. they taught you. they took you through how they came to their conclusions. dr. w could not explain how he got to his conclusions because the doctor he relied on had multiple findings. credibility of the evidence is important, ladies and gentlemen, credibility of the source. thank you for your attention. mr. acosta: good afternoon. i hope you had a nice lunch. i'm going to continue sort of where mr. chestnut left off, with the lying and the denying and the blaming. you know, mr. cavalier was a pretty typical smoker except that he smoked a lot more than most smokers smoke, five to six packs a day. but you now what? he was doing just what the cigarette companies wanted him to do. but the cigarette company wants you to think that mr. cavalier knew more than they did, that he should have known that they were not telling him the truth, that he should have just put down the cigarettes. but reynolds is the one that got him to do that, and he smoked their cigarettes exactly the way reynolds wanted him to smoke them. he bought a lot of cigarettes over the years and got caught in a big web. that web is a true-to-life conspiracy of the tobacco companies that all made an agreement to deny. and the reason they did that is because if one of them admitted it, one of them admitted it, the cat would be out of the bag. if that happened, the others would fall. the whole industry would have fallen. so they lied. so they lied. there really is no justification for that when it comes to human life. this is not about making a little more money selling wallpaper. this is about killing people. mr. persons: objection, your honor; inflammatory. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: so i'm going to show you some slides and talk a little bit, and then i'll sit down and then mr. gary will go and he will wrap it up. first thing we have got to do is we have got to prove that thomas cavalier was a member of the engle class. this is the definition of "class members." class members are florida smokers or residents, which he was, who suffered or died, he died, from a cigarette-related illness, which is coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, caused by an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. that is our burden. if we have proved that to you to your satisfaction -- you are the ones that decide that. we think we have put enough evidence on to prove it to you -- then you will be answering questions: was thomas cavalier addicted to rjr cigarettes containing nicotine? ms. schneider: your honor, that is a misstatement of the -- mr. acosta: well, i'm just paraphrasing. the court: he is -- ms. schneider: atherosclerotic heart disease is not the disease -- the court: okay. that is fine. okay. i'll sustain. that is fine. mr. acosta: well, okay. i just put atherosclerotic heart disease. it is coronary artery disease. it is chf. there is a number of different ways you can describe it, but it is heart disease. and then whether that was a legal cause of his death. a legal cause need not be the only cause. that is in the instruction, and it is important because there is two instructions on causation. and the second one talks about concurring cause. a legal cause is a substantial contributing cause. we call that instruction the concurring cause instruction, but all it means is that a legal cause is a substantial contributing cause. and if you think about it, there are lots of situations where things combine and can cause an injury or cause a death, any one of which might not be enough to cause the injury or death, but when they act together, they cause the injury or death. that is why we have this instruction, because it permits us to show causation and prove causation without having to prove but for the -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. that is a misstatement. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: this is the one that you can follow. a legal cause can be one of many causes. greater weight of the evidence shows thomas cavalier died from his addiction to several cigarette-related illnesses. he had three cigarette-related illnesses. he had lung cancer, he had copd, and he had congestive heart failure that backed up fluid into his lungs. "greater weight" means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence. so when you go back into the jury room, you will have to decide, well, which side, the plaintiff -- which is us -- or the defendants, had the more persuasive convincing force and effect of the entire evidence, the entire evidence that you have heard in the case. for class members -- it is kind of cut off at the top. for class members, the findings are going to be the law, and this is the first -- the first one i put up here is that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. there is no question about that. it is been -- it is admitted and it is part of the findings. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. now, if you think about it, there was a warning back in 1970 that said cigarettes are dangerous to your health. they did not say they were unreasonably dangerous. mr. persons: objection, your honor. preemption and we have got a stipulation. the court: sustained -- reference the preemption then. sustained. mr. acosta: so unreasonably dangerous is something that you cannot allow to happen because it is unreasonable. it is not just dangerous; it is unreasonable. and it dealt with, you know, an engle trial similar to this, but a lot bigger, it took a long time, and in that case, much of the same evidence -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. acosta: cigarette -- smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, and then i'm going to go through these findings again just so you will -- you might see something that you had not seen before. lung cancer, specifically adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, and squamous cell. those are different kinds of lung cancer; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd; and coronary heart disease. reynolds concealed or omitted material information. this is one of the findings, and it will be binding on us -- it is binding on everyone -- if he is a class member. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading. so that says they knew that the material that they were concealing or not telling them about, hiding, was important and it was false or misleading or they failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and you have to remember, they denied that it was addictive. if you remember that life magazine, which had the coffin nails on it, in that magazine it said cigarettes are not addictive or even habit-forming. that is what it said in that magazine. people -- there was a controversy created, and it was created by the tobacco industry to keep people smoking back then. it was a different time. you know, we sort of get locked into the way things are today and what we know today and it is hard to think back as to the way things were. and some of you are not as old as i am and -- most of you, all of you, are not as old as me -- and things were different. and we tried to show you some of that with some of the advertisements that were on early television. you know, we showed you the flintstones, barney and fred hiding behind a rock so that wilma and betty will not see them smoking winstons. i mean, that is how mundane cigarette smoking -- everybody smoked then. everybody smoked. then reynolds entered into an agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or the addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on that information. so how -- what is it that we do with corporations in this country, with companies that make products? we rely on them to tell us the truth about the product. it is common sense. you rely on a company to tell you the truth about its products, not to lie to you. and when you rely on them, you buy their product. that is what mr. cavalier did. reliance is buying cigarettes because that is exactly what they wanted him to do. mr. persons: objection, your honor. that is a misstatement. the court: sustained. mr. persons: motion. the court: denied. mr. acosta: reynolds was negligent. in that set of instructions, it defines "negligence." it is unreasonable conduct. you have a duty to do things right. they were wrong. it was unreasonable conduct. so let us talk about thomas cavalier's addiction to nicotine for a minute that caused him to die -- that caused him to die from those three diseases. i already mentioned that. what they did, those three diseases destroyed his ability to breathe. when he had lung cancer in 1989, they removed the upper lobe of one of his lungs. it is a big hunk of lung. so what does that do? that gives you less breathing capacity because you are missing part of your lung. the injury from that cancer was a reduction in his lung capacity. copd. you heard about emphysema and the cavities it causes in the lungs, so copd reduces your breathing capacity so that it makes it very difficult for you to breathe. you can breathe in, but you cannot get the air out. if you cannot get the air out, you cannot get more air in. the heart disease put fluid in his lungs, because his heart was weakened by his coronary artery disease. and when you weaken the heart, it cannot pump blood back in through your lungs. you have to get oxygen by having your heart pump blood through your lungs. it gives it oxygen, then it goes back to the heart and goes out the other side. but when you put fluid in the lungs and you are already missing some lung and you are already stricken with emphysema, the coronary artery disease was the straw that broke the camel's back, and that is exactly what happened to mr. cavalier. he had this situation happen in the hospital and he died. why so much talk about the death certificate? well, there was a may 5, 1990, cutoff for copd and lung cancer. back when the death certificate was signed and filled out, nobody thought about what the impact of that would be. you know, it was just a routine event for the doctor in the doctor's office. you know, somebody from the funeral home comes and gives him the death certificate and who signs it? was it somebody on the staff? did dr. cowen just say something like, you know, "go look at the intake form and see what he was admitted for and put it on there"? we do not know, but we know it is wrong. i put dr. cowen up there because it is a different writing. i do not want to dwell on it, but this death certificate, it is not really wrong; it just is not correct. it is not filled out completely. it does not have the other two diseases that combined to cause his death. all right. dr. cowen testified by deposition, and he testified thomas cavalier had evidence of congestive heart failure which contributed to his shortness of breath. he said so. dr. cowen said that congestive heart failure causes fluid to fill the lungs. he got fluid from his body into his lungs and it is not supposed to be there, and then he got an infection. dr. cowen again says mr. cavalier's heart failure prevented his heart from getting enough oxygen. part of his heart muscle died. this is key testimony from dr. cowen. dr. cowen said: and is there any way -- this is the question: "is there any way to tell from the medical records when there is a reference to shortness of breath that the shortness of breath is being caused by his congestive heart failure versus his copd?" what does he say? he says: "it is probably a combination of the two." so he is admitting that his heart failure combined with the copd to cause his death. mr. persons: objection, your honor. misstatement of the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: dr. cowen -- "doctor, was his cardiomyopathy ischemic cardiomyopathy or was it diabetic cardiomyopathy?" dr. cowen said it is ischemic, different from the type that is caused by diabetes. we have dr. feingold. dr. feingold is a pulmonologist down in south florida, miami, and you can -- i mean, just think about how he testified and what he said and the way he explained things. very intelligent man. he knows how to explain medicine. he knows the medicine very well. and lung doctors and heart doctors, they have to work together because the lungs are part of the cardiovascular testimony so that you can get oxygen to the rest of your body and your brain. he is asked: "what was the primary cause of thomas cavalier's death?" he answers: "ischemic cardiomyopathy." and that is kind of a fancy name for not enough blood getting to the heart. that is what damaged his heart. that is coronary artery disease. ischemia, he explained that when you -- the heart pumps oxygenated blood out, it goes back -- some of it goes back to the heart and all the little arteries in your heart that give the heart muscle the oxygen it needs to pump. so feingold says the same thing that dr. cowen said, it was ischemic, which means it was not from diabetes. you have seen that a couple times now, this ejection fraction. this is like eight days, nine days before he dies; and his heart is so weak that it only pumps 29 percent of what it is supposed to pump. and dr. feingold said anything below 30 means you are on the edge of death. dr. feingold concludes: "cigarette smoking was a major contributor to this man's congestive heart failure and a major component of what caused him to die. so it is a substantial contributing cause. that makes it a legal cause. that makes it a legal cause. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. that is a misstatement of the law as well. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: dr. feingold signed this board. "i certify to a reasonable degree of medical certainty the following findings: "was thomas cavalier addicted to nicotine? "yes." and i'm going to go through some of that in a minute. "was thomas cavalier's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a medical cause of his death? "yes. "did thomas cavalier die from heart disease caused by smoking? "yes." that is the proof, that is the proof that makes thomas cavalier a class member. i mean, think about it. how could this guy not be a class member? he is a poster child for a class member. and feingold talked about the three diseases, that he died from all three. thomas cavalier was addicted to five packs a day. it is a decision. it results in people smoking more than they would otherwise. that is what addiction does, it makes you smoke more than you would otherwise would have smoked. "addiction results in changes to the decision-making part of the brain. so it influences you. that is what an addiction is. you know, it is not a voluntary thing. it makes physical changes in your brain. you can make a choice to try to stop; but the problem is, hardly anybody stops. it is like 5 percent a year. and when you add that up over 40 years, 5 percent of so many smokers, you do get 60 million people that have stopped smoking; but those former smokers, if you think about it, if they were regular smokers, one out of two of them died from smoking. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: and that is even though they quit. this is feingold from his testimony: "so, yes, people who have a smoking rate of 100 cigarettes a day are addicted. there are no other possible explanations to a reasonable degree of certainty without evoking some weird thing maybe that i did not think of. but as a regular issue, people who smoke five packs or four packs or three packs of cigarettes a day are very addicted to nicotine, because they have a change in the brain and that brain change is influencing their behavior." dr. feingold testifies: "nicotine addiction was the cause of cigarette smoking and mr. cavalier's death was ischemic cardiomyopathy, copd, the loss of lung tissue from lung cancer, the diabetes, all put together," all put together. that is why we have the concurring cause instruction, because all we have to show is that his heart disease was a contributing cause of his death. mr. persons: objection. misstates the law. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: dr. benowitz, you may remember him. i'm going to show you a little film clip, and i do not know how to start that with this thing. (videotaped deposition of dr. benowitz played as follows:) q. why did not they take the nicotine out of the cigarette? a. "well, people do not smoke cigarettes without nicotine. they smoke cigarettes as a way to get nicotine. and so --" "things that are driven by these brain reward centers are ones that are more powerful than your logical reasoning." "without nicotine there, without addictive smoking to get nicotine, there would not be smoking-related cancer, heart disease, or lung disease." some people can quit pretty easily and some people have great difficulty quitting and some people never, ever manage to quit. the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and specialty reporting, inc. 941-468-2779 / nancy@specialtyreporting.com cocaine. and poly drug users, it means people who use multiple drugs, and you ask them which one is the hardest to quit, they will tell you that smoking is harder to quit than alcohol or heroin or cocaine use. without nicotine, people would not smoke. without smoking, they would not have those diseases. q. why do not you tell them which factor is the most important to determine if a person is addicted or has a nicotine addiction or is addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? a. the most important factor is the number of cigarettes smoked per day. q. the warnings that occurred in the mid-'60s, i want you to assume that most, if not all, of the plaintiffs in these cases started smoking prior -- regular smoking prior to the 1960s. would those warnings for a person who is addicted be much help? a. no. well, that is the stage where basically attitudes and beliefs are found, so that is the stage before a child begins to smoke cigarettes, but during which he is exposed to cigarettes in the environment, to friends who smoke, family who smoke, movies, advertisements, whatever they are exposed to, they are developing their -- their beliefs and their ideas about specialty reporting, inc. 941-468-2779 / nancy@specialtyreporting.com smoking. q. prior to 1994, did they inform smokers that it was an addictive drug? a. i do not believe they informed smokers that it was addictive. q. did they mislead smokers in that regard? a. yes, that is my opinion. fifty percent of people start -- start with their first cigarette by age 15. q. why is that important? a. earlier you smoke, the more highly addicted you are. q. do you consider youth when they start smoking to be informed smokers? a. no. q. the fact that cigarette companies denied that -- that nicotine was addictive, did that cause people to either start smoking or continue to smoke? a. well, it certainly undermined the informed decision about it. so if there is was any hope of making an informed decision about whether you should start based on the benefits and risks and -- and someone tells you who should know, well, you know, you can just quit if you want to, that is reassuring when you start smoking, that it is okay because you can minimize your specialty reporting, inc. 941-468-2779 / nancy@specialtyreporting.com risk and just quit, when, in fact, most people do not quit. q. what is the difference between a bad habit, going the mcdonald's, versus smoking cigarettes that contain nicotine? a. the difference is what is driving the behavior. everyone has to eat. if you are nicotine addicted, you have become dependent on a drug that you never, ever had to have. you are using the substance -- the cigarette, in this case -- to get nicotine. nicotine is producing changes in your brain and your body that makes you keep on using it. so your -- your behavior is not simply a matter of willpower or moral strength. it is a matter of a physiological physical addiction, and an addiction to something that you never, ever had to have, unlike food, which everyone has to eat." mr. acosta: dr. benowitz was the senior editor of one of those surgeon general's reports. he was the one that was editor of addiction, smoking and addiction, nicotine addiction. there is not anybody that knows more than him about nicotine addiction, and all those things that he said were said so that people like you would be informed about what nicotine really does. mr. persons: objection, your honor. court: sustained. mr. persons: and move to strike. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: he talked about the brain. this was his slide. he talked about all these hormones that get released, and then what happens when you get hooked on cigarettes? your brain does not release them anymore, so you feel bad. it is not a matter of releasing a whole bunch of stuff, like methamphetamine might. what happens is, it does not release them during normal activities, so you wind up smoking more and more and more so that you feel normal. that is how it works. so if you do not -- you do not smoke, the nicotine does not fill the receptors. when it does not fill the receptors but it is looking for them, you feel bad, you feel -- you can feel really pretty bad. so people have to overcome that to stop smoking. dr. benowitz says not everybody stops. i showed you the dsm, that statistical manual. not everybody stops. we have a document from reynolds that is called the nordine study, 1980, where one of their directors says most people are not able to stop. they knew it. they knew it, and they did everything they could to keep people smoking back then. you saw that. it shows how it affects receptors, but it also changes these neuro pathways. that is what dr. benowitz talked about. then what do they do? instead of taking the nicotine out, they intensify its effect. they make it more potent. they do it by additives, to change the form to freebase so that it will get to your brain faster. i mean, there is receptors all over your body. if you pinch yourself, you feel it at the same time you pinch yourself. it does not take eight seconds for that to get there. it is instantaneous. when the nicotine starts coming in, it is already telling your brain, here it is. eight seconds later, the actual drug is in your brain. that is what it does. and it is the speed that makes it so addictive. that is why people can wear a nicotine patch or take nicotine gum and not get addicted to them. that is called nicotine replacement therapy, which, for the most part, was not available for mr. cavalier. it came later. he died in 1993. this is another reynolds document, r.j.r. manipulates nicotine to addict and increase sales. mr. persons: objection, your honor, to the slide. the court: can you -- mr. acosta: well, there is evidence of this, your honor, increase in physiological satisfaction. the court: okay. that is fine. i'll overrule. that is fine. mr. acosta: that is their name for addiction. that is what they put the ammonia in there for. "satisfaction" is their code word for "addiction." you saw this. this was back a few years ago but 48 million smokers at that time, seventy percent want to quit. each year 17 million try to quit, but only 3 percent succeed. i mean, that is the statistic on it. this is not something that somebody just made up. those are the facts. now, i put this -- this is a medical record, mr. cavalier's medical record. and you heard from family members that he was still smoking. he was not smoking five packs a day after 1989, he was sneaking some cigarettes. he would tell his doctors that he stopped smoking, that he quit smoking. they are going to tell him every time he goes in, if he is smoking to not do it. and he is telling them, well, i'm not. so he is really trying hard, he is really trying hard; but he is still sneaking a few. the family members, when they are asked these things in their depositions -- you know, lots of questions get asked, and they get cherry-picked out in a trial. this says social history: he had been up to a five-pack-a-day smoker, which he has tried to give up. you do not say somebody "has tried to give it up" unless they are still doing it. they know, they know -- the cigarette industry knew back in 1980 that addicted smokers do not have a free choice, a free choice. this is their document, this is them saying it. okay? it is not me saying it. dr. proctor: "tobacco lies helped kill thomas cavalier." and that is true. mr. persons: objection, your honor. it is highly inflammatory, improper. the court: overruled. you can proceed. mr. acosta: let us play this short little clip, because this is what their lies had to do with thomas cavalier. 3 "the narrator: tobacco and its use, particularly in cigarettes. about heart disease, dr. seltzer: "dr. seltzer: i think where we stand now -- the best we can say -- is that we do not know whether or not there is a causal relationship between smoking and heart disease." (video clip stopped.) mr. acosta: so think about it, what would have happened if they had come out and said, look, it causes heart disease, you should be aware of that? this is 1972. now, he was about 50 years old at that point, been smoking since he was 15. you heard dr. barnett, that you have to admit that you do not start out smoking two packs a day. it takes a while to get up there. one of the records shows him at age 17 at two packs or more a day. you do not get there right away. he had to have started a lot earlier, and one of his friends remembered him starting at 15. mr. persons: objection, your honor, misstates the evidence. court: sustained. the clerk: 10 minutes, counsel. mr. acosta: thank you. they do it with billions of advertisements. you saw this: the proof is in the pudding here. the sales -- the sales of cigarettes keep climbing despite all this stuff you hear about, despite all these warnings, despite all these reader's digest articles, despite all that stuff, sales are going up because they are being overwhelmed by cigarette company messages and advertising. that is why sales go up. that proves it. that proves it. it proves it was working. it proves that what they did convinced a lot of people to keep on smoking. and, of course, if you are addicted, there is some hope that you are not going to -- that -- that your -- that the company is going to fix the problem. you keep smoking, hoping that maybe they will. but they do not, and they knew they could not. this was from 1953. this is dr. teague, he did that survey. look at all the cancer that he found. so they conspire. in this statement, they told the world that they agreed and they told people that it did not cause cancer, that it was not hazardous, and they were going to do some research on the subject, just to make sure everybody would know the true facts. it was a lie. it was a total lie. they -- this is 1959. they knew that they could not take it all out. reynolds did. this is a reynolds document. they could not take the bad stuff out of the tobacco, but they kept telling people they were going to work on it. let us play this one. 15 "hugh cullman: so when we have today 60 percent of the business in the whole field compared to 3 percent ten years ago, i think we need a little more research. i'm convinced that eventually they will find some element, through a filter or through leaf growing or a special type of seed that is growing, that will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking for. we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general or the ama. speaker: are you saying then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco that is removable by a filter? hugh cullman: obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god, and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. at this point we do not know. i do not think the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the conclusions. harry reasoner: $70 million a year is spent to advertise cigarettes in all possible ways, including radio and television. so far in the developing concern about smoking and health, the national reaction has been to keep smoking. through the lifetimes of a lot of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages, have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. in a case like that, you give the old friend every chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then, you give him a chance to reform. (video clip stopped.) mr. acosta: this is 1968. 1968. 5 mike wallace: good evening, i'm mike wallace. the question of whether to smoke or not to smoke is one of the most hotly debated controversies in the country. narrator: the cbs news national smoking test. mike wallace: smokers tend to believe statements which say the case is not proven. the tobacco institute, an industry association, says there is no biological proof, either experimental or clinical, that smoking is the cause of diseases. speaker: smokers tend to go along with the tobacco institute, which says that certain chemicals which may be harmful are more prevalent in some polluted air than in cigarette smoke. mike wallace: but the tobacco institute believes that obesity, not cigarettes, is a major factor in heart disease. it says several studies have not shown any association between smoking and heart disease. speaker: finally, that you run a greater risk crossing busy streets every day than smoking a pack of cigarettes every day. the tobacco institute says there just is not documentation available and they add: "until we know of any way in which cigarette smoking is, in fact, harmful to health, there is no way for us to say whether this statement is anything more than just speculation." (video clip stopped.) 9 narrator: from cbs washington in color, face the nation, an unrehearsed news interview with joseph cullman, iii, chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. mr. cullman: we have no program that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. and that this industry can face the future with confidence because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident we can eliminate that ingredient. (video clip stopped.) mr. acosta: that was their story. and they keep on with more and more and more of this on tv, newspapers. i cannot show it all to you all over again but there is a lot of it, and they kept up with that thing until they get to 1994 and the ceos raise their hand and say it is not addictive. by the way, it does not cause any disease either. the clerk: five minutes, counsel. mr. acosta: all right. thank you. so we talked about this a little bit in the opening: reynolds had choices too, you know? do not blame it all on mr. cavalier. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: motion. the court: denied. mr. acosta: blame them. they are the ones that set this up. they are the ones that wanted people to buy their products. they are the ones that knew what was in them. they are the ones that knew what it would do to people. they are the ones that made it more addictive. they denied the truth, they manipulated nicotine, and they chose ammonia to freebase the nicotine. and what do they do? this one is back when thomas cavalier is a little boy, but it is the beginning document that we have on this. it shows them marketing to kids, and they continued to do that. they continued to market to kids. that was how they replaced smokers. you will see in the evidence that we put in, there is a lot of documents that you have not seen that are in evidence. that means you will get to see them back there in the room if you want to, but there is a lot of documents from the mid 1970s that talk about products for the youth market. they wanted to replace -- get youth to smoke, to induce them to smoke through psychological means so that they would start smoking and then get hooked. it is in the documents. here's this letter. in 1990, they are writing schoolkids telling them that smoking does not cause disease. remember bill farone -- i'm going to go real fast through this -- not all his opinions but he worked at philip morris, but he knew what the whole industry did. in fact, he is studied it since. he is testified at the fda for the government. he is an insider. he told you what they did and what they knew, both about these nitrosamines, which got a lot worse. by the way, they were curing with propane gas just to save a nickel, but it made the cigarette a lot more -- he said twice as carcinogenic. it is disgusting. these people should be punished -- not these lawyers, but the company. the company should be punished for what it did, because you know what punishment does? it acts as a deterrent because, if the company knows that another company got punished for lying to people and doing bad things to them, then maybe they will not do it. that is what it is for. that is exactly what it is for. he talked about these key problems, that they could have -- even philip morris knew how to take stuff like this out but they did not do it. they did not want to change anything because they would lose money. the cigarette company defendants long had firsthand knowledge of unreasonable cigarette dangers while they were publicly denying it. the cigarette company defendants knew how addicting cigarettes are and exploited addiction for profits. the designs and methods that cigarette company defendants use to make cigarettes were developed to addict and to maintain the addiction of smokers despite the unreasonable danger. each of the cigarette companies agreed with the others that their cigarettes did not cause cancer and were not addictive. the cigarette industry knew how to remove or to reduce harmful agents in cigarette smoke but refused to do it. and you might remember, farone talked about a couple of cigarette brands that were relatively safe or safe. they did not take the addictive ones off the market. they did not take the nicotine out of the addictive ones. if the industry had done that across the board, people would have a choice. people would have a choice then. people have a choice whether to smoke a pipe or to smoke a cigar. but when it comes to cigarettes that you inhale that they made inhaleable to do this, that is wrong. the cigarette companies continue to conceal and hide cigarette science and technology to make it appear that what was available to them for years is like new today, you know, like, oh, we are discovering some new things. well, they knew how to fix a cigarette a long, long time ago by making it either uninhaleable or taking the nicotine out of it. they could have done either one and people would have had a choice. if you want to smoke tobacco, great, but they are not going to be addicted to it. so at the end, you are going to be asked to fill out a verdict form and, obviously, we think that you should fill out the form in our favor, and that you should decide that punitive damages are warranted. if you do that, we will have a very, very short -- with maybe one witness -- evidentiary hearing, a continuation of the trial that will be done, most likely, tomorrow afternoon if you finish -- if you have a verdict tonight. if you do not have a verdict tonight -- and i'm certainly not trying to suggest that you should do anything other than fully deliberate until you decide -- until you decide -- what you have here. it is your decision. our job is just to give you the information the best way we can so that you can make that decision. thank you very much. mr. gary: good afternoon, members of the jury. i want to take this moment to -- and i do not have much time, but i do want to say thank you. you all have gone beyond the call of duty on this case. you have been here day in and day out, and you have shown a lot of interest in the case. so on behalf of my client, ms. ann cavalier -- will you stand, ms. cavalier, please? -- i want to say thank you. members of the jury, you know, this -- but for your service, the system would not work. nobody would get justice. and no matter what you do, do what you feel you have to do. do what you feel is right, and we can live with that, because i know, and i believe, that our system of justice is one of the best anywhere in the world. anywhere. and ms. ann cavalier has been waiting on this system for a long time. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: years and years and years, and members of the jury, it is time now -- you know, and i think about all the time that has passed and what she has been through and what she is going through, and maybe by some of the defendant's standard, they talked about him in a way where -- i know he was just a truck driver, but he was an american citizen, members of the jury, and he fought in the war for this country. and he did not just fight for this country. he stood up for his country under gun fire. he put a fellow soldier on his back and walked miles and miles and miles. now, let me just say this: with a third grade education, that really did not matter, he wanted to serve his country. you heard the testimony about him trying to get in the navy, and he did not have the education to do that. so he went to the army and he got in and he served four years -- world war ii -- and those were tough times, members of the jury. so i'm calling on you for him, because you owe it to him. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: justice, that is all. do not give him nothing, just justice. give him a fair shot. and members of the jury, i want to just say to you that these people may get away with this. mr. persons: objection, your honor, inflammatory. the court: referring to the defendants? mr. gary: defendants. the court: that is fine. mr. gary: because as demonstrated in the case, they have the money, they have the power, they have the resource. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: members of the jury, they took someone's deposition. this is one deposition. one deposition. this is one statement. hundreds and almost 600, 700 pages, in a deposition. that is what they can do. and then they come in the courtroom, because they know that all they have to do is get you to say one word. mr. persons: objection, your honor. inappropriate. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. gary: on page so and so and so, you did not say this, you did not say that. mr. persons: same objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: gotcha. mr. persons: same objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: members of the jury, they knew they had these ingredients in smoke in that cigarette. now, i'm a big boy. if i make my choice, i live with it. anybody got a right to know what is in your product because ain't no way you will know but for whoever is selling to you tell you the truth. and they lied. and i'm not talking about the lawyers, i'm talking about reynolds. they lied and they lied and they lied, and you know they lied. and it is not right. and they want to get away with it. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: why could not they just tell you? because otherwise you are going to say -- and it is right to say it -- if you smoke, it is your choice, you made it, live with it. do not lie and promise something that you know you cannot deliver, a safe cigarette, when they knew -- their own documents, members of the jury, their own documents. their documents that were private, that they had put under lock and key, their documents say -- tell the story. they never thought we would get these documents. these ain't my documents. what do they say? destroy documents when you are finished reading it. now why would you say something like that? mr. persons: objection. may we -- the court: sure, approach, mr. persons. the judge wants to see them. let me take a look. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) ms. schneider: there is nothing in evidence that says this. there is no documents on this -- mr. gary: they did -- the court: the only one i'm concerned about, number 4. that is the only one. mr. gary: it was in there. it was in there. ms. schneider: yeah -- the court: mr. acosta, number 4, that is the only one i'm concerned about. which documents does that relate to? acosta: this is the -- the court: switzerland. that is fine. so objection is overruled then, that is fine. counsel, if you want to go over to this side, you are welcome to do that as well. in open court before the court and jury.) the court: objection is overruled. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. members of the jury -- the court: hold on, hold on. let me look at it. not a problem, i'm happy to look. that is my job. mr. persons: we want you to look at it. the court: not a problem. that is the only one. that is the only one, take out 27. that is fine. ms. schneider: there is no dollar sign. it is 40 million cigarettes. the court: okay. that is fine. can we just -- just the last two, just cross those out. otherwise, it is fine. okay? mr. gary: take out what, 40, 50? the court: the dollar sign. that is a typo. ms. schneider: it is 40 million cigarettes. acosta: this has to come out. she is ruled on that. the court: but otherwise, it is fine. mr. acosta: we will get it straight. mr. gary: you do that one. thank you, your honor. in open court before the court and jury.) mr. gary: may i continue? the court: of course. you may continue. mr. gary: members of the jury, you take a peek. look at some of the stuff that they did, and they want you, they want you, to say to this man, no justice. that ain't right. it is not right, members of the jury, and they know about it. you look at it. this is what they were doing. they were -- this is what -- i'm not talking about the lawyers, they are good people, but these people, these tobacco people, bad people, what they are. 480,000 people die every year from their foolishness. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: you heard dr. farone say, they can make a safer cigarette. i'm saying, you can say, well, you buy anything i sell, but you are going to sell me some poison and not tell me? it is not right. members of the jury, that is not right. and they know it. that is why in this case, i'm going to tell you right now, i told you-all when we were picking the jury in this case, the damages was going to be -- $10 million is what we are going to be seeking in damages, $10 million, and you may decide that is not enough and you can do more, $10 million. and it may not be enough. members of the jury, why do they put the lady, nice lady, i got nothing against her, up there today and say this was not -- there was no addiction? mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. persons: attacked the defense's case. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: your honor, can i have an objection to speaking objections? the court: sustained. mr. gary: why did they have her say -- now, that is playing on your intelligence. mr. persons: objection. court: overruled. mr. gary: ladies and gentlemen, how can anybody smoke 100 cigarettes a day and not be addicted? dr. feingold told you, these people ain't stupid. president kennedy was smoking cigarettes. they did not know because these people were lying to them. they are liars, bald-faced liars. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. persons: inflammatory. mr. gary: if punitive damages were ever warranted in a case, it is this case. bragging about it. it is not right, members of the jury. it is not right. and let me tell you where the big fight is with me. there is our kids over there in a foxhole fighting for their country, and they give them rations, 16 cigarettes every single day. mr. persons: objection, no evidence. the court: overruled. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. 16 a day. they can run but they cannot hide. 16 a day. do you know how old these kids were? they were 18 and 19 years old, fighting for their country, and i'm going to show you some letters where they wrote to reynolds after they got out saying, "look, why y'all tricked us? gave us all these cigarettes? we did not even want to smoke. and you said they were safe. you said they was okay. we trusted you." well, guess what? reynolds did not even answer their letter. all the veterans got together; would not even answer their letter, members of the jury, would not do it. you know this is addiction. even if you blame him for it, it is addiction. they got up there under oath and said it was not addiction. now, that is not right, tell the truth, and we will live with the truth. if it says nothing, that is okay, we will live with that, but tell the truth. do not get up here and tell one lie after another. how can anybody on god's earth smoke 100 cigarettes a day and not be addicted? that is totally impossible. members of the jury, this is the engle finding. it ain't one of gary's findings. this is an engle finding. and some of you said, well, where did it come from? how did it happen? this is a court finding. this is -- once you find out they are a member of the class, this is the law. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. well, what did they say about it? they knew it was addictive, members of the jury. play the tape, judge, real quick, play the tape, washington, d.c., where they went to d.c., took the oath, swore to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, so help them god, and they lied. they lied. and only thing i'm saying, i'm a big boy, i own up to my own doings, but you cannot lie and get away with it. 13 mr. wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. wyden: mr. johnston. mr. j. johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. mr. wyden: we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short. i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, and we just would like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine products are addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe nicotine is not addictive. mr. tisch: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. d. johnston: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip stopped.) mr. gary: now, you want to know where the conspiracy comes from, do not you? members of the jury, that is why they got busted. they teamed up, they teamed up, and told lies. do not take my word for it. read the engle finding. just read it briefly. just read it. and i'm coming down to you. but, members of the jury, we did not drum this up. the defendants, they ain't just talking about reynolds, they are talking about all of them, they all got busted. mr. persons: objection, your honor, criminal activity. the court: overruled. mr. gary: the defendants agreed to conceal. now, members of the jury, that is bad, and you know it is. why would you conceal going to sell somebody something and conceal something, information about a product that could kill somebody? just because you think you can get away with it. what does this one say? same thing. they omitted material information otherwise known. i told you this was a case about fraud and false -- knowing that the material was false or misleading, they misled this young boy, and it ain't right, and you know it is not. they misled him. all they had to do was tell him the truth, and then if he wanted to smoke, it was his choice, let him smoke, that is all right. but he is dead and he is gone. 480,000 people every year going down because of their actions. members of the jury, you got the power to stop this. you could put your foot down. mr. persons: objection, your honor, jury nullification. the court: sustained. mr. persons: motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: let me just tell you something. you have a lot of power, and do not you underestimate it. you have the power to see the wrong and make it right. you can see suffering and you can stop it. mr. persons: objection. injecting religion into the case. the court: sustained. mr. gary: ain't no religion. mr. persons: objection. the court: that is okay. we will just move forward. mr. gary: you have the power to do that, members of the jury. let me talk about something that is really near and dear to me, real near and dear to me. no matter what you do, this will still be near and dear to me. my children. mr. persons: objection, your honor, conscienceless. the court: overruled. mr. gary: thank you. this case is about fraud. it is about lying. they did not just lie to adults, but they lied to children. they lied, members of the jury, and they knew they lied. school days. ms. schneider: your honor, this is opening, and it is a problem. mr. persons: we had the same issue. the court: it is overruled now. this is closing. mr. gary: now, members of the jury, bear with me for a second. put it back up. school days. either one of them. it is okay. now, members of the jury, let me -- you know, just put one of the school days up again. because i want you to see the date. you are talking about mr. cavalier, he did this, and he was 35 years old when he first did this. that is hogwash, okay? you got it? okay. do not look at just the kids, look at the date on it. what does it say? 1927. y'all see that? well, that is just -- you know how old little tommy was then? he was four years old. he was just four years old, members of the jury, and they out there, school days are here, and that means big tobacco business for somebody. let us get it. let us go to the next one. attached is a list of the most important prep schools. members of the jury, they got -- it is a fair fight with me, if i decide to smoke, it is my fault, let me live with it or go -- he was only four years old when they tracking down schools. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and move. the court: denied. mr. gary: it is not a fair fight. next clip, please. youth and student magazines. now, these are the same people, right when we had some young boys and girls from the school out in california somewhere, we will get to it in a second, but they said to reynolds, you know, "why are you-all letting the candy people use your cigarette packs and your colors and your logos and all of this here?" these are little students writing him. and, guess what, they wrote the students back and said, "we do not do that." they were lying through their teeth. these were children calling them on the carpet. it ain't right, members of the jury, and you know it is not. that is not a fair fight. that is like putting a lightweight in with a heavyweight. you may decide $10 million is not enough, and not a dime less, and i'm going to go over the verdict form with you in a minute, members of the jury, but they are using student magazines. now, why would they go buy ads and try to get -- go to the next clip for me, please, real quick. give every school a good working just as quick as possible. as soon as the doors open, get in there and get them, children. and then they wanted you to sit up there and agree with them on that kind of mess. he was four years old. do not let them tell you about he could make his choice. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. gary: he was born in 1923. here they are, they are like gangbusters in 1927. you do the math. mr. persons: objection, "gangbusters." the court: overruled. mr. gary: we are gangbusters. mr. persons: objection to the editorial. the court: that is okay. we are going to keep moving. mr. persons: i better get over there where i can see it. mr. gary: now, members of the jury, you know what they were doing -- the court: you need to go to the bathroom? okay. i'm sorry. restroom break. so let us take a quick five-minute restroom break, everyone. our poor deputy has got to run around. he is getting his exercise. (the jury exited the courtroom at 3:29 p.m.) (discussion off the record.) (recess from 3:29 p.m. until 3:37 p.m.) the court: mr. gary, are you ready? you need a few more minutes? mr. gary: we are ready. court: okay. let us bring the jurors back in, please. the bailiff: jurors entering. (the jury entered the courtroom at 3:38 p.m.) the court: all right. welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. thank you so much. ladies and gentlemen, please make yourselves comfortable, and we are going to continue with mr. gary. mr. gary: may it please the court. the court: yes. mr. gary: members of the jury, i want to just say that when it comes to the kids, that is a special matter. i just think about the defendant telling its people to sell -- try to sell more, but first find out who you and your men find that is not already smoking, in essence. why would you go to schools like that and do that? do they have the right to do that? and then they are going to get up here and tell you, "well, what does that have to do with mr. cavalier?" well, he was not mr. cavalier then, he was tommy. he was little tommy. see, they are going to fast-forward you like he had all this right to make this decision. but members of the jury, when people get addicted, it is easy to say "just stop. just stop." but that is not like -- it ain't that easy. a lot of people try over and over and over again, and they just cannot. and then they want to kick them. they got a drug habit. they are selling the drug. then they want to blame the people who cannot kick the habit. then you told them all of their life that it is safe. it is all right. there is no nicotine. and you will not get addicted. and they believe you. and then you call them crazy and stupid for believing you. and it is your fault. you made the choice. they do not have the right to do that, members of the jury, and then go seek, search and find our children? and here -- and when we are talking -- look, do not go for this thing, well, it ain't -- it is just reynolds. it ain't the other companies. they are all in it together. it is a conspiracy. that is what it says, "a conspiracy." they got cited for conspiring to lie to people about their product, about how safe it was. they did not tell the truth. and all they had to do was just tell the truth. and then if you make a choice, it is your choice. but you cannot blame me for making a choice when i'm misled or you are withholding information. look here, they got his children. fast-forward. the cigarette people, they are all in it together, members of the jury, it is a conspiracy. do not go for this "well, it ain't -- it is not reynolds. it is someone else." no, no, no, no, no. that is conspiracy, and from the engle findings, are for all of them together. now, look at -- you tell about kids in training, and it gets worse than that. these are -- they give these kids these gift packs with -- real cigarette packs, got them with them in their mouths. look at the two young ladies, the sisters, they are back here in the courtroom. you started them early. they knew what they were doing. they got the money. they do the advertising. they do the focus groups. they do all that stuff. they knew what they were doing. now, before i go there, let me just -- let me just -- you are talking about in training. help me out here so i can move a little faster. this is real. this is real. he did not have a chance. because he started back here. they get you. they get you. and then they want to say "you made the choice. you made the choice. you did not have to do it." real packs. real packs. i mean they shared their -- their -- their private secrets with them in terms of the -- the makeup of their packs and the cigarettes and all that. you had the little tip that look just like a cigarette. and some of them like you could blow the smoke out of them. i mean, they were going after these kids. and members of the jury, you are going to see and i may not get to it, but i've got boards from their own documents, from their own archives, from their own cabinets, where they are saying we need -- if we do not get the kids, we are going to go out -- we are going to lose a lot of money. we have got to get them. these are -- put them in training, because guess what, the others are going to die. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. gary: tobacco is a relatively efficient nicotine delivery system. nicotine is a drug, members of the jury. how do they get away with it, you tell me, without telling the truth? the government never agreed to let you do it with -- and lie about it. they agreed to let you do it, but you had to tell the truth. they lied to the government. where do we go from here? our obvious route is to give people more nicotine if the tar is reduced. one way or the other, we are going to get you. you are going to get hooked. think about those young boys coming back from the war, wrote them, asking them to say -- to tell them why all our people are dying from cancer. members of the jury, some of them stayed over there and they fought, dodging bombs and bullets, ducking bombs and bullets, come back to die a dishonor -- they got an honorable discharge, and they came back to die a dishonorable death. mr. persons: objection, your honor, no evidence. the court: sustained. mr. gary: increase the nicotine. now they are talking about, in snowing you, "well, it is already in the tobacco. we take it out and we just put it back in." but does this say increase here? they are talking about increasing the nicotine. and that is what -- and they already increased it. they want to increase it more. these are their documents. see, because members of the jury, i want you all to know one thing, all these documents we are showing you, we did not go out and find them. they had to give them up by law. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: sustained. i'll deny the motion. mr. gary: their documents, can you believe that? 10 seconds. you do not even have a chance. if you are some young boy, 12 or 13 years old smoking -- mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. you do not even have a chance. if you are in middle school, just happen to get a cigarette, you did not even have a chance. and back then -- and then they want to get up and say well, he was 35 years old when he -- and then they tell you, "use these medical records, they are the best evidence." well, the medical records showed he had been smoking for 50 years, which would put him back in his low teens. mr. persons: objection; misstates the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. gary: which would be maybe 14, 15, or 16 when they got him. and if you -- members of the jury, if you say little tommy, who was 14 or 15 years old made his choice and he should have to live with it, then we all go home, and there ain't no justice. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. persons: nullification. and move -- the court: deny motion. mr. chestnut: your honor, may we ask, assuming that counsel is trying to save time, perhaps he can just -- no speaking objections. the court: okay. mr. chestnut: object to court rules, and then if mr. gary requires it -- the court: we are both doing great. so let us keep on going. mr. gary: i'm doing great now, your honor? the court: you are keeping it up. mr. gary: within 10 seconds of starting to smoke nicotine is available in your brain. think about it. 10 seconds. and you are doing 100 of these a day. and that -- the expert lady came in here and said, "oh, he was not addicted." now, that should have been the point where you should say, "hey, wait a minute. we ain't stupid." because that is playing on your intelligence. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: let us look at what we are currently -- now, members of the jury, this is one of their records -- one of their records. they -- you heard me talk about they did not want to go through -- they went and started a research company all the way over in -- what -- what -- country was that? germany. and guess why they did it? they said because we do not want them to be able to subpoena our records. they knew what they was doing. they knew what they were doing. before starting on any future scenario, the marketing scenario, let us look at what we are currently selling and where and how it has developed. a cigarette as a drug administration system for public use has very, very significant advantages. this is what we are dealing with, members of the jury. these are their records they never thought would see the light of day. different people smoke cigarettes for different reasons. ms. schneider: objection, your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: okay. let us move forward. mr. gary: now, here they are giving impression -- members of the jury, dr. proctor told you about how they paid people off, the politicians. oh, they had the power, and they could get done what they needed to get done. mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: they paid doctors. the court: you can continue. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. they got doctors. the nerve of them putting out information that is saying that it -- if you smoke this type cigarette, it is safer for you if you are pregnant for your baby. now, that is a flat-out lie, and they knew they was lying to sell cigarettes -- to sell cigarettes. unborn baby. mr. persons: objection, your honor, no evidence. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: i've been talking about choice, right? we have been talking about doing -- ms. schneider: your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: that is okay. move forward. ms. schneider: not in evidence, your honor. the court: that is okay. move forward. ms. schneider: would you sustain my objection? the court: sustained. mr. gary: now, after they had -- ms. schneider: not -- okay. i'm sorry. mr. gary: after they had their secret meeting in new york at the plaza, the plaza hotel, all the owners went to new york, private meeting, and they got their thoughts together. they said, "look, we may fight during the week. we may fight to get business. but one thing we cannot fight about is this lie we got to tell about there is no nicotine, it is not addictive, we do not sell nicotine," and all of them agreed to do it. "and we also got to tell people that it is safer, we got cigarettes that is really" -- they were telling people that if you smoke our cigarettes, it will kill you. if you had an ailment, it would make you well. i mean, they had people buying cigarettes for all kinds of reasons. and it is okay, members of the jury, if you buy the product because you are informed and you know what it is and you are an adult, that is okay. you buy this, it is your fault because they told you the truth. and, members of the jury, you see commercials on television. right now they will tell you everything that can happen with that product. they -- because they want to you make an informed decision. you cannot have somebody taking a drug that you do not tell them about that it is a drug and you do not tell what is in it. they was not telling nobody. even back then, i'm talking about back in the '40s, '50s, and '60s, and even the '70s. and just remember this: there was no warning, because they stand behind the warning. now, one that they did not even want, they fought against it, they said they did not need it, but now they stand behind it. "aha, we had a warning." mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: and members of the jury, they did not get a warning until 1965. by this time, mr. cavalier had been smoking 20-plus, 35 years. sad to say, but this war veteran was -- was sick. dr. proctor said it, and dr. feingold said it, and dr. farone said it, and even -- even -- even some of their witnesses said, "heart disease, smoking; liver disease, smoking; copd, smoking." and, members of the jury, that smoke, you saw what was in it. it is like a train wreck inside of your body. you think it is just going to hit one organ and stop. it is like a train wreck. it -- it spares nothing. it gets all in your system. mr. persons: objection, your honor, misstatement of the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. gary: you can count on us. after that meeting, "do not worry about a thing. we have got your back. you can count on us. if we find anything in it that is not good, we will tell you about it." and they already knew it was cancerous. they knew it had carcinogens in it. they knew it when they were telling this bald-faced lie. that came from their documents. ms. schneider: no, your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: okay. let us move forward. it is sustained. ms. schneider: no, your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: sustained. ms. schneider: no, your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: it is a demonstrative. mr. hohnbaum: objection to the previous document. the court: okay. that is fine. sustain the previous one. this is fine. this is fine. mr. gary: say what now? the court: you can proceed. i'm sorry, mr. gary. mr. gary: oh, okay. members of the jury, they are talking about all the poisons that are later discovered in a cigarette. let me ask you this: how does anybody get a chance to get away with having a product that is got poison in it and not tell you about it and you buy it and they blame you for believing them? mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: you heard of all the poisons. what is a poison? it kills. 480,000 deaths every year to smoke, 480,000, and they just want you to take it like it is a grain of salt. it is not a big deal. mr. persons: objection, your honor. court: overruled. mr. gary: now, why would you hide all this? you want to talk about you want people to make a choice, an informed choice, why would you hide all of this? ms. schneider: your honor, this is not in evidence. this is the one we actually had the huge argument about. the court: sustained. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: they wrote them the letter, to reynolds, said, "why did y'all do it to us? you gave us 16 cigarettes a day." i mean, why did they have to give them so many a day? why did not they just, for that matter, one or two? they were trying to get them hooked because they wanted customers when they got back home. now, these young men and woman fought and they -- some died for their country, and that is what they got. but these defendants took the position, "oh, yeah, we will go in and litigate it." mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: motion. court: denied. mr. gary: there are the rations, breakfast, lunch, and dinner. mr. persons: objection, your honor. no evidence. no foundation for it. the court: overruled. mr. gary: that is what they were doing. the truth hurts. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: here is the letter: "veterans of foreign affairs. we all remember that during world war ii, we were given all the cigarettes we needed, and many young men and women started the smoking habit who had never smoked before who never ever intended to smoke." they got them. they got them. the court: mr. gary, eight minutes. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. right after the war, when we got home, in essence, members of the jury, they found out that something was wrong. they had been conversing with them, selling them cigarettes, doing all kinds of stuff. then when they got called on the carpet about the lies they had told these young men and women, they lied to us about the doctor said it was okay, and then they found -- reynolds -- let me tell you something. what reynolds did, what these people did, when they first found out -- they were given -- see, part of -- part of their -- how they were going to snow people, they said -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: they said, "we are going to give you grants to do research." that is what they said, and they told the public that. but they got certain people to do it. and then when these people started finding -- started discovering that these cigarettes were causing cancer, man, they fired those people so fast your head would swim. "get out of here. we ain't looking for no truth." mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: we got -- these kids said, "we thought you said your doctors said it was okay. we would like to have a full report from research men of the tobacco companies who were familiar with testing and examining" -- look. you test and why you examine your own product because they still wanted to believe the lies, the lies, they wanted to believe them. but now they are getting concerned because they found out there was cancer in this stuff. "trusting you will favor us with a reply." they did not even answer these kids. mr. persons: objection; "kids." the court: overruled. mr. gary: did not even answer them. the court: five minutes, mr. gary. mr. gary: how many, your honor? ms. schneider: your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: okay. sustained. mr. gary: members of the jury, there are going to be two phases, but the second phase is going to be short. ms. schneider: object, your honor; "two phases. " the court: overruled. mr. gary: the first question you got to answer: "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of thomas cavalier's coronary heart disease, and if so" -- "and if so, was coronary heart disease a legal cause of his death." members of the jury, you have heard -- i'm not going to go over all the testimony again. you heard their own witness say -- she said this morning, heart disease, copd, and liver disease, so you can check that "yes." then after checking that "yes," you will go on to number 2: "was thomas cavalier addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" now, you know we have proven that. you know we have proven it and ain't nothing they can say about that. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: "did thomas cavalier reasonably rely to his detriment" -- now, you wanted me -- do i have to go through the engle findings again, where they trumped up stuff, they lied, they withheld information that was detrimental? "detriment" means to your detriment, withholding information that could lead to your death, and they still would not give it up. "did thomas cavalier reasonably rely to his detriment on either a statement or omission of material" -- you know they were running around talking -- they are in congress, on -- on every air wave in the world lying about nicotine was not addictive, and that their cigarettes were safe. they were lying all over the place. he does not have a voice now because he is dead and he is gone. mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: but you can be the voice. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: "did thomas cavalier reasonably rely to his detriment" -- he is dead -- "on either a statement or omission made in furtherance of r.j. reynolds," and there were many others, "agreement to conceal material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary heart disease?" members of the jury, you heard from the family. they knew a lot of things, but they did not know that this smoke had all these chemicals in it. they did not know that this smoke could kill you like it is killing 400 -- you think 480,000 people would just go out and use a product every year? these people are dying now because they started 30 years ago. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary, one minute. would you like to use more time from your rebuttal? mr. gary: yeah. the court: okay. that is fine. mr. persons: and motion. the court: that is fine. deny the motion. mr. gary: see, that is the thing, members of the jury. you were told by one of the doctors, and i cannot remember his name, but it is -- it is -- once that smoke, and it is powerful, and they make it so they -- menthol, so you can get it down in your body, deep down in your body real easy. it goes to your brain in 10 seconds. they get you. they get you hooked, and you know they get you hooked. that is why punitive damages is -- should be awarded in this case. they cannot get away with it. and i do not care how fancy they talk. mr. persons: objection, your honor. court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: put the next one. members of the jury, you may decide that $10 million is not enough. that is your decision. i suggest that. and let me say this, members of the jury, one thing, i got to give my client credit for. up here, please -- let me just make sure -- glen, you are taller than i am. "was there any fault on the part of thomas cavalier that was a cause of his coronary heart disease and death?" yes. let us play by the rules. give him some responsibility. we said that day one in this trial. they are the one that came in here kicking and screaming talking about they did not do nothing wrong but knew they had told all these lies. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: members of the jury, when they started this on the -- this attack on kids in school system and you saw it, that was reynolds. he was only four years old then. was he four? he was four years old. so we give him -- even if we gave him ten percent, ninety percent there and 10 percent there, and the foreperson will sign. now, members of the jury, let me close by saying this. we get a chance to talk to you a little bit more, that is the system. we have the burden of proof. we have the burden of proof. and my partner, mr. chestnut, will close it out. i want to thank you for your time. do whatever you think is right. but before i leave, i want to talk about a lady. her name is lady justice. some of you may have seen her in the courtroom, maybe on tv or whatever, but she is a lady that stands with the scales in her hand. when i think about her, i think about judgment, because sometimes you have to realize that there is going to be a judgment day. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: lady justice do not even want to see who you are. she is blindfolded. and you know why she does not want to see? and she is got the scales that are even, y'all remember we talked about that when we were picking the jury, and she is got a sword in the other hand, and she is blindfolded. do you know why she is blindfolded? she is blindfolded because she does not even want to see who you are if you are seeking justice. your color does not matter. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: she does not want to see who you are. she just wants to know that it is about justice. so in years to come, because you are going to build some relationships here that is going to last, that is going to withstand the test of time. oh, yeah. this ain't all about mr. cavalier. this is about a whole lot here, this is about making a difference. this is about -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and motion. the court: denied. gary: members of the jury, i mean, i've seen the bonding, you know, and it is great. it is just real -- it really is. i mean, the closeness. you-all will be friends for life. it is not this -- so this is a good thing for you, and that is why i say, you know, just do what is in your heart, do the right thing, and we -- that is all anybody can ask for. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: motion. the court: denied. mr. gary: when it comes to justice, just do what you feel is fair and what is right. and then, members of the jury, when it is all said and done, be proud. you be proud of your verdict. mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: be proud because this is america, the home of the brave and the free. this is america, and only in america, only in america, can a truckdriver, a truckdriver, did not have any education, maybe two, three years, but you heard the testimony about thomas cavalier. even witness today said that he was a hard worker. he worked every day, members of the jury. he was not -- every single day he worked. even sometimes 7:00 -- early in the morning, come back as late as 7:00 at night, and then they are going to get up and say, well, he was watching tv and... another thing about this, did he have knowledge of what was going on. reader's digest, they had 400 pages, they probably had one paragraph about smoking. reader's digest. it was in the newspaper. they keep talking about, well, you are in new york where all the stuff goes down, you should have known about smoking, you should have known this, known that. what was reynolds doing? let them show you one ad that they put in the papers telling people about these chemicals that were in cigarettes. when they get up here and talk to you, say show me one ad, do not tell me about what somebody's put in the paper, what was in the local news, what was in the local newspaper, show me what you did to say to people, they talk about oh, it is a cancer stick, they knew this from 100 years ago and all that stuff, and they have not put one article in the paper yet, they have not said one thing, and they are going to have you believe they should have known because it was in the local paper, it was on the legal news, it was on this, it was on that. but what did reynolds do? and when they come up here with that, you ask that question to yourself and see what kind of answer that you get, other than the fact that they lied and said they were going to put money in research and as soon as they got research they did not like, they fired everybody. they even killed the rats. mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. gary: justice. justice. justice. justice, that is the heart and saul of the american jury system. if anybody should question you, it may be years to come, about this trial, i want you to say i was there? our courtroom in west palm beach, florida, and i gave little tommy, little tommy, the war veteran that went half a mile with his friend on his back with a soldier on his back, fighting for his country, that is right. i want you to say i was there and i tried to do the right thing, i gave him justice that was the heart and soul of the american dream. mr. persons: objection 124689 overruled. gary: thank you, thank you. mr. chestnut: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. as the judge said, we are in the home stretch, so i'll try to summarize everything up real quick. so i'm tasked with giving a rebuttal to some of the things you heard in closing arguments, ladies and gentlemen. and there was so much misinformation, it was difficult for me, obviously, to know where to start. so let us just start with r.j. reynolds. but i think, you know, this picture of the plaza hotel probably sums it up best, ladies and gentlemen. because, in 1955, when the execs are meeting, in the penthouse of the plaza hotel there is a 22-year-old truck driver who is making deliveries in the city of new york, smoking the cigarettes, a victim of the very conspiracy this industry is perpetuating, that r.j. reynolds was a participant in. r.j. reynolds, these are old school players, but you know what the problem with old school players is? this is the dotcom age. old school players do not accept the evidence. you catch somebody speeding back in the day, they say, oh, no, officer, that was not me. but i clocked you. no, that was not me. i clocked you with a laser and there is nobody else on the road. or somebody is cheating on their girlfriend and say, oh, it was not me. what do they do? old school players do three things: lie, deny, then blame the victim. that was not me. in 2015 -- that might work in '55, but in 2015, what happens? no, no, this is an instagram picture and that is your tattoo and that is the shirt i bought you. ladies and gentlemen, that is what is happening today. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: i have a motion. the court: denied. mr. chestnut: i'm talking about r.j. reynolds, not the attorneys. i'm talking about r.j. reynolds, the company. r.j. reynolds whoever he is, that person. members of the jury, let us just go through. now, these are self-prescribed lies. they told us in '55 during that conspiracy that they were developing a conspiracy for what? litigation, politics, and public opinion. what are they doing? our basic position is: cigarette controversy. here's what important, that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. this is an internal r.j.r. -- i'm sorry, this is a tobacco institute document, confidential, where they are calling themselves liars. we do not have to do it. they are doing it. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. chestnut: -- documents internal or that belong to the tobacco industry. let us ask this, ladies and gentlemen: let us look at how come none of their experts explained to you any of these documents from any of the tobacco companies? running -- their documents were running from the documents. mr. persons: objection. the court: denied. mr. chestnut: let us go through and let us talk about addiction. so we will do a credibility of witnesses first, ladies and gentlemen. dr. -- i tell you what, 508192, there was a question if mr. cavalier was addicted. here's a document, ladies and gentlemen, regardless of what test you want to employ, here is a document by james w. lea where it says "social history. 192. thank you. five pack a day, which he has tried to give up. he tried to quit, he could not quit. how about 133, brian. he is a -- he is a heavy nicotine abuse smoker, five packs a day. this is another doctor, dr. lea, saying he has nicotine abuse. now, they brought in a psychiatrist to -- can we go to the slides. -- to talk to you about addiction, to testify to you, ladies and gentlemen, that mr. cavalier was not addicted. first of all, let us talk about credibility of witnesses. they did not produce a witness to you that was not on their payroll. the two people they put in front of you, they paid. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: now, five packs a day, 100 cigarettes per day, for a 160 pack-years. in mr. cavalier's life, he had 7,340 cigarettes times 160 years; 1.6 8 million cigarettes, 11.68 puffs, and she is saying he is not addicted. can we go to the slides? 1439. now, the psychiatrist they brought in did -- did not speak at all to their documents. we will come back to it. mr. gary: there it is. ms. schneider: your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: here's a memo from the planning committee. "it is unfortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." this is a tobacco document. they brought in an expert to say tobacco is not addictive, mr. cavalier did is not addicted. why did not they explain this document? it is their document. nobody's ever become -- ms. schneider: this document is not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: "cigarette is more addictive than using heroin." ms. schneider: your honor, this is not in evidence. mr. acosta: i think this one was. mr. chestnut: narcotic value that -- ms. schneider: your honor, this is not in evidence. the court: sustained. ms. schneider: this is not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: two slides back was in evidence, "structure of creativity group." mr. chestnut: your honor, is the death certificate in evidence? mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: just wanted to confirm before i publish it. can i have c 1? now, members of the jury, let us just be consistent. the question ultimately is -- and you have been over the verdict form a number of times -- it is "a" versus "the." when we look at the definition of both of these, "a" means it has to be one of many causes. "the" means it is the only cause. indefinite, definite. the jury instruction -- every instruction says "a," that smoking was a cause -- mr. hohnbaum: a legal cause. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: your honor. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: that smoking was a cause of coronary artery disease. mr. persons: objection, your honor, a legal. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: your honor -- the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: so we know here, so when you go back in the jury room and you are reviewing this death certificate, it is most important, ladies and gentlemen, is that there are two other lines here that were not, but in 2008, the doctor attributes lung cancer as a cause of death as well. so we know at least dr. cowen has copd and lung cancer. the medical records corroborate congestive heart failure -- congestive heart disease as -- coronary artery disease as a cause of death as well. the issue is this, ladies and gentlemen: the documents, the medical records, they will be in evidence, you can review them. it is a multifactorial cause. "multifactorial" means many. the evidence that there are many causes, smoking-related causes, to mr. cavalier's death, copd, lung cancer, coronary -- these are all engel diseases. coronary artery disease -- okay, thank you. thank you. -- diabetes, and lung cancer. credibility of witnesses, ladies and gentlemen. now, they brought in a doctor, dr. w, from california, who testified on a number of issues, ladies and gentlemen. the clerk: 10 minutes, counsel. mr. chestnut: thank you. before we go to dr. w, why do not we go to dr. feingold. can i go through the feingold slides? this is testimony. "can smoking cause lung cancer?" "yes." "people who smoke, more than one million. number one additional cause beyond lipid and development of coronary artery disease is smoking." "is diabetes a significant or primary contributing fact to his ischemia?" "no, sir." "is smoking typically a problem caused by ischemic cardiomyopathy?" "in a patient who has diabetes that smokes, the risk of getting diabetic ischemia is enormous." atherosclerotic heart disease. "heart dysfunction shows up by 1990 in his medical records," meaning he is diagnosed with heart disease in 1990, which is within the statute. this is all testimony. i'm showing you the testimony, but if you recall, dr. feingold spent the time to walk through -- walk you through a powerpoint where he corroborated his conclusions with medical evidence and this patient's medical history. he did his own. he signed off on his opinions. we jump to 1993. he has cardiomyopathy. he is suffering from cardiomyopathy. he has myocardial infarction, a heart attack, death of the heart muscle. he is treated with dopamine. dopamine is treated only for ef, which is a heart disease. there is abundant evidence that he has congestive heart failure. now, members of the jury, their expert, dr. w., came in all the way from california. let us just talk a minute. all right? let us just pause. you know, earlier you heard the term, "it defies common sense." well, let us just take common sense. we have a doctor, who is a cardiologist, a heart doctor, who claims to specialize in what? preventive, which means he prevents heart disease, and intervention, which means he intervenes on people's sick hearts to fix them, who for $9,000 comes all the way from california to florida to testify twice in one day, two trials in one day, for the same industry, tobacco, that their products the supreme court of florida says causes these diseases, to include heart disease. did not cause heart disease. so the very thing that he allegedly stands for, "i protect people's heart, i believe in preventive medicine," but yet he is testifying for a company that produces a product that is one of the leading causes of heart disease -- mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: -- in america. moreover, ladies and gentlemen, let us just think about what he does. he said, "well, seventy percent of my time is spent for plaintiffs. i sue doctors for medical malpractice." he spends his time singling out doctors. for $9,000, he basically sold his soul, ladies and gentlemen. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: it goes to credibility, your honor. mr. persons: and a motion. mr. chestnut: he says -- he says he is preventive medicine -- mr. persons: i have a motion. the court: deny the motion. you may continue, mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: members of the jury, you went through the résumé of this doctor. he has not published, has not printed, has not dedicated any time to tobacco-related diseases, unlike our doctor, who came in and has extensive history in the effects of smoking on the heart. this doctor has no publishing. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. that does misstate the evidence. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: i'd invite you to review his résumé. credibility of evidence, ladies and gentlemen. if you recall, when the doctor started, dr. w., he says, first of all, most importantly, he does not even -- he did not even do his powerpoint. the attorneys did it. which is why there were so many conflicts when we started going through slides, if you recall. first he was adamant that copd was the only cause of death for mr. cavalier. by the end of his cross-examination, he had to agree that there were other causes of death for mr. cavalier. mr. persons: objection, your honor. that misstates. mr. chestnut: he did agree, your honor. he specifically listed other causes. the court: i'll overrule the objection. it is an inference. go ahead. mr. chestnut: he alleges that -- the doctor says that mr. cavalier was getting better, that his ef, ejection fraction, had been resolved. then he had to retreat from that word "resolved." he said it got better. yesterday they presented in their argument ejection fractions, saying that it was the same. they are in conflict with their own doctor because their doctor did not do his own homework. they produced the powerpoints for him, which is why he could not back it up. so when we presented him with a discrepancy, "was it lung cancer or copd, because you said your opinion that the only cause of death is copd," and it is based off the death certificate, and we showed him inaccuracies in the death certificate, and he said, "well, it is based off of dr. cowen." dr. cowen, in 2008, said lung cancer is too. so he would agree that dr. cowen also concurs that there are multi issues, that there are many issues causing mr. cavalier's death. all this time, he does not even call and talk to dr. cowen to corroborate it, but he comes here wanting you to accept his opinions as true, but he did not validate them. he did not do his homework. he did not do his research. he just gave the script. ladies and gentlemen, that is not credible. the clerk: five minutes, counsel. mr. chestnut: thank you. let us go to 3. members of the jury, lie, deny, and blame the smoker. so you have heard a lot of testimony about choice, that mr. cavalier chose not to quit. well, what about r.j.r.'s choices? what could they have chosen to do? could they have chosen to take some of these poisonous, toxic cigarettes out of their cigarette? could they have chosen to take the nicotine out? they presented you with warnings, ladies and gentlemen. defies common sense for them to put a board up with warnings that they say mr. cavalier would have when it is been well-established throughout, ladies and gentlemen, he could not read. they could have informed the public of these issues, and so now, they say, well, now today smoking is down 66 percent, smoking is the lowest in florida. it is, because now people know what they are signing up for, but in the 1930s and '40s, in the 1920s, they did not know. when mr. cavalier was a youth, a teenager, they were targeting him to addict him for life. we showed those documents. when he went to war, r.j.r. reynolds -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. no evidence. mr. chestnut: there is no evidence he went to war, sir? the court: no. overruled. you may continue, mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: when he went to war, r.j. reynolds did not go to war, r.j. sent cigarettes to the soldiers. he did not pick up a gun. he provided them cigarettes to get the solders addicted so when they came back they would be clients. mr. persons: objection, your honor. there is no evidence. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: choice. we showed you the documents. choice is part of their strategy from day one. so when they tell you this case is not about -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: when r.j. reynolds represents -- mr. persons: attacking the defense. the court: denied -- i'll sustain that objection, but mr. chestnut clarified it, so you may proceed, mr. chestnut. mr. persons: motion, your honor. the court: denied. mr. chestnut: may i continue? the court: yes, of course, mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: okay. members of the jury, the choice is yours. the entire defense, the entire assault on mr. cavalier's choice to quit, defies common sense. we have shown, doctors have testified, he was chemically addicted. nicotine is designed to freebase to your brain. some people are immune to it. some people cannot beat it. he is one of these people. the choice is yours to sift through all of the distractions and get down to the one thing that really matters. the one issue is "a" versus "the," and that jury instruction, did coronary artery disease -- is that a legal cause of mr. cavalier's death? absolutely. did cigarettes cause it? well, all the evidence shows that it did. they did not produce you any studies -- they did not produce you one study or any medical evidence or any doctor that says smoking does not cause coronary artery disease. they did not show you one study that says coronary artery disease is not fatal. it can be, but they did not show you anything that says definitively it is not. so if we have the greater weight of the evidence, which we do, that coronary artery disease was a cause of death for mr. cavalier, in 1993, we prevail, ladies and gentlemen, and we go to the second phase of this trial. here's -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. that is a misstatement of law. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: here's the testimony of dr. w. there was no autopsy or no pathology, which means there was no autopsy on mr. cavalier. "now, we can agree that the date of death mr. cavalier had lung cancer, correct?" dr. w.: "yes." "not only did he have lung cancer, but he had cardiovascular decease, correct?" dr. w.: "correct." "all right. so those could have been put there, correct?" "yes." which means they could -- could we publish c-1? so their doctor, their expert, agrees -- the court: mr. chestnut, you need to wrap up. i'll give you a few minutes if you need to. mr. chestnut: -- that cardiovascular disease should have been here, that copd is here, cardiovascular disease and lung cancer should be here. he says that. i just read the testimony, he says, "correct." "what does that mean?" mr. persons: objection. mr. hohnbaum: if he is going to read, we will read the whole thing. the court: that is fine. we are getting close to wrapping up. mr. chestnut: so here's the point, ladies and gentlemen. the irony that they would spend so much time on dr. w., because i doubt they would ever hire him again because he -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: he gave up the case here, ladies and gentlemen, because he said that cardiovascular disease, if this were filled out correctly, should be here on line 2. mr. hohnbaum: objection. that completely misstates the evidence. mr. chestnut: it did not. i read the -- the court: that is fine. why do not you just read the transcript and then draw the inference. mr. persons: that is not the transcript. mr. hohnbaum: that is not what he said, not what he testified. the court: no speaking objections. no speaking objections. mr. chestnut: they are confused. they are always confused. so here we go. "okay. now, we can agree that the date of death of mr. cavalier he had lung cancer, correct?" "yes." "and not only did he have lung cancer, he had cardiovascular disease, correct?" "correct." "all right. so those could have been" -- c-1- "those could have been put here, correct?" c-1. at that time, i was pointing here. we all saw it. the jury instruction, ladies and gentleman, does not say "the cause," it says "a cause," so although they spent a lot of time parading this death certificate, their own expert says cardiovascular disease should have been there, which means it is a cause of death, which means on the verdict form the check is yes -- the court: all right. thank you, mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: -- that this is the cause. the court: all right. mr. chestnut, you are out of time. mr. chestnut: lies, deny, and blame the victim, that is their strategy. it is been their strategy since 1955 at the plaza hotel -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: -- r.j. reynolds. thank you.