25 mr. hohnbaum: counsel. good afternoon, members of the jury. i want to add my word of thanks for your commitment, your attention, and your devotion to your job as jurors has been obvious to anybody that is been in the courtroom, and we appreciate that. let me get right to it, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. lest there be any doubt, this is a case about thomas cavalier. now, that sounds rather straightforward, right? thomas cavalier is the deceased in this case. but what has happened in the weeks that we have been here is that you have seen very little evidence about thomas cavalier, and lots of evidence that the plaintiff simply has not connected to mr. cavalier. they have not connected, and frankly, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, there has been very little attempt to even connect a lot of what you just saw, if not all of what you just saw, to mr. cavalier himself. and you have the verdict form in this case. and every single question on the verdict form, every single question asks questions about thomas cavalier, not some other smoker, not some other person that may have smoked, but thomas cavalier. every single solitary question on the verdict form. now, let us talk a little bit about what evidence you have heard in this case. the plaintiff's case is a red herring. you have heard what we call generic evidence. evidence that anybody can come in and talk about that is not even attempted to be connected to thomas cavalier. you have heard about addiction design, somehow that the cigarettes are designed to promote addiction. red herring. misdirection. youth marketing. now, i'm going to go through this, youth marketing; misdirection. what have they proved to you youth marketing has to do with mr. cavalier? what evidence? what facts from that witness stand have they connected to thomas cavalier? and then advertising, you have heard testimony about advertising. again, ask yourself, and i'm going to go through the analysis, but ask yourself what evidence do we have about thomas cavalier and advertising? the plaintiffs have the burden to prove their case to you with facts. facts from that witness stand. so what happened in this trial? think about it. we have dr. benowitz who testified via videotaped deposition. did dr. benowitz know anything about mr. cavalier? nope, not a single fact, did not even know who he was. what about dr. proctor? at least he came and testified and looked you in the eye. at least dr. proctor, what did he say? i do not know anything about mr. cavalier. i do not know what he saw. i do not know what he relied on. i do not know what he experienced. what does dr. proctor's testimony do to help you decide the issues in the case? he does not even know who mr. cavalier was. and then we spent seven hours listening to mr. farone -- dr. farone, an employee of another cigarette company, philip morris. and we will talk about that as well. but ask yourself, what does that testimony have to do, what is the connection, what have the plaintiffs proved to you the connection is between what they talked about and thomas cavalier? 22 hours in this case, 22 hours of testimony, not just time in the courtroom, but testimony from witnesses who know nothing about thomas cavalier, absolutely nothing. do not even know that he existed on the planet. zero. nothing. let us talk about what we call generic evidence. evidence in a box, evidence that you can move from courthouse to courthouse to courthouse and it does not matter who the plaintiff is. it does not matter. but their job, their -- what they have to do is prove by facts what happened to thomas cavalier, not what happened to somebody else, not what could have happened to somebody else, but what happened to him. look. there is no evidence that mr. cavalier started smoking because of advertising, none. there is no evidence, none, zero, that mr. cavalier relied on statements by any tobacco company or any tobacco-company related organization. think about it. is there one shred of evidence, testimony, from that stand, some document, that ties advertising, that ties company statements to mr. cavalier? there is none. and this, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, is an important point, because there is no evidence that the dangers and addictiveness of cigarettes were unknown. and you will have your verdict form -- you will have your jury instructions, you will have them, and we will go through them. but the standard is whether or not it was unknown or unavailable to mr. cavalier, that is the standard. mr. acosta: objection, your honor, that misstates the law. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: there is no evidence that the dangers of addictiveness -- that the dangers and addictiveness of cigarettes were unknown or unavailable to mr. cavalier. we watched a video of dr. farone, hour after hour, talking about the design of cigarettes. and the fact of the matter is inhalation of tobacco and cigarettes dates back hundreds, hundreds, hundreds of years. r.j. reynolds did not invent the inhalable cigarette. cigarettes were inhaled long before r.j. reynolds was on the earth. and cigarettes, it is definitional, right? a cigarette by definition means it is inhalable. that is what it is. importantly, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, cigarettes today, their own witnesses, every single one of them, there are a couple of places where we have unanimity, and this is one of them. cigarettes today are no more dangerous or addictive than cigarettes from the 1800s. they want to spend time telling you that somehow the cigarettes, the manufacturing process somehow makes cigarettes more dangerous, more addictive. but listen to their own witnesses. cigarettes today are no more dangerous or addictive than cigarettes from the 1800s, and ask yourself why, why you heard all that testimony about the manufacture and design of cigarettes when the evidence from their own witnesses is that cigarettes are no more dangerous and addictive today than they were hundreds of years ago. ask yourself, members of the jury, ask yourself. the discussion about additives, the repetitive testimony about additives. licorice, you heard licorice. what does that have to do with this case? because their own witnesses acknowledged that additive-free cigarettes take all those additives out, take them out. they are no less dangerous and addictive than cigarettes with additives. the truth is that cigarettes are dangerous and they are addictive by nature. by nature, not by design. dr. proctor, dr. benowitz, dr. farone, all agree to that. that is what they said, from 1933 to 1993, a no less dangerous or addictive conventional cigarette than the one mr. cavalier smoked existed. there was not a less dangerous cigarette. by nature they are addictive and dangerous, not by design. follow the evidence. follow what you heard from that witness stand from the testimony of witnesses. their own witnesses. youth marketing. how much time did the plaintiff spend trying to get you angry? mr. acosta: your honor, objection. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, anger does not help you do your job. and we will talk about that, too. but there is zero evidence, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, zero evidence that mr. cavalier started smoking because of advertising. did you hear anything from that witness stand -- did you hear anything from that witness stand that said he saw an ad and that is why he smoked? according to their version of events, he could not read. he was not opening books or magazines to look at advertising. but there is zero evidence. they have failed to come into this courtroom and carry their burden of proof because there is no evidence that any marketing to youth, any advertising, anything like that impacted mr. cavalier. we just saw -- we just saw up there a 1927 document, a 1927 document. it is in evidence. go look at it. prep schools and high schools. now, think about what people knew in 1927, but put that aside and then ask yourself what does that have to do with thomas cavalier? what -- what does it have to do with him? he was not in prep school. he was not in high school. where is the connection? and then ask yourself why you heard so much about it. and we will talk about that. no witness from this witness stand had firsthand knowledge of mr. cavalier's smoking before he was 36 years old. now, look, we are not -- he started smoking before that. he started smoking -- the evidence would suggest he started smoking sometime in his late teens. nobody is running from that fact. that is the fact of the case. but nobody can tell you about his smoking from firsthand knowledge until he was 36 years old. folks, you heard all this rhetoric, and all the evidence about youth marketing. did you see any evidence that kool cigarettes were marketed to youth when mr. cavalier was growing up? any evidence? think. the answer is there was not any. we saw candy cigarettes. is there any evidence that candy cigarettes had anything to do with mr. cavalier? there is no evidence, zero. what does their own witness, dr. benowitz, say about why people start smoking? what does he say? does he say it is youth marketing? does he say it is something else? what does he say? what does their own witness say? can you play that, jesse, please? (videotaped deposition of dr. benowitz played as follows:) a. well, currently the biggest factor for why children start to smoke is their peers and their social environment. so if you have a close friend who smokes, or you have a brother or sister who smokes, you are much more likely to smoke than someone who does not. (videotaped deposition of dr. benowitz stopped.) mr. hohnbaum: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that is what we know. that is what we know about mr. cavalier, is that his dad smoked and his brother smoked. that is what we know about mr. cavalier. you are not permitted, and it will be in there, to speculate or guess. you have to make your decision based on facts from that witness stand, facts and evidence. this is just a summary of what the witnesses who did come in and say. those witnesses did not know when he started smoking, they did not know why he started smoking. they do not know what his first brand was. they do not know if it was an r.j. reynolds brands. they do not know anything about that. there is simply no proof. and the plaintiff has that burden of proof. everything is a red herring, advertising, anything, any witness at all, anybody? no. there is no evidence that advertising, there is no evidence that youth market, whatever we talked about with respect to that, there is no evidence that advertising influenced mr. cavalier's smoking decision, not just when he started, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, not just when he started, but at any point in his life -- at any point in his life. plaintiff has the burden to prove facts. they are sticky, and we will talk about that. the truth is sticky, and we will talk about that. look, dr. proctor, dr. benowitz, dr. farone, 22 hours of generic testimony that go to the engle findings, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. mr. gary put that up, the engle findings. another jury has already found those, right? they have already found them. mr. gary told you in opening, 365 days. it is already happened. why spend all this time trying to reprove the engle findings when they are already done. and the engle -- mr. acosta: objection, your honor. mr. hohnbaum: -- findings are not -- mr. acosta: that is improper. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: the engle findings are not going to help you make a decision about whether or not mr. cavalier is a member of the engle class, because you cannot even consider those. you cannot even consider those findings when you are analyzing whether or not he is a member of the engle class, and we will talk about that, too. this is not going to be the last time i'm going to say it, because the plaintiff has the burden of proof, but there has not been evidence about mr. cavalier. take what the plaintiffs say, put it in any courthouse in the country, it is not going to help you make the decision about mr. cavalier. that is their burden. here's what we know: everything -- everything we knew at the start of the case, when you were sitting there listening to opening statements, right when that started, what did you know at the start of this case about thomas cavalier's smoking decisions? why he did what he did? what drove him? what was in his mind? what was motivating him? what did we know at the beginning of the case? zero. and what do we know now? what do we know now? did dr. farone, did dr. proctor, did dr. benowitz help you make the decision that you have to make about thomas cavalier in this case? no. this is an interesting fact. the number of family members who believed mr. cavalier died of coronary artery disease before trial, they came in here and they are telling you that coronary artery disease caused mr. cavalier's death. mr. acosta: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: that misstates the evidence. it is a cause. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: fair enough. i'll be very precise about this, because we will go through -- we will go through the instructions. we will pull them out, and we will go through it. how many of the family members believe that coronary artery disease was even in the picture before trial? zero. this is what his daughters believe. they believe he died from lung cancer. that was their testimony. that was what they believed, was that he died of lung cancer. you did not hear anybody from that witness stand, any of his daughters testify that they thought coronary artery disease caused his death. now, look. you have heard this now a couple times. the court has already determined that the plaintiff cannot recover money damages for lung cancer or copd. that is the law in this case. that is the law. we are going to talk about that and the challenges that that law presents to you as jurors. the age when any witness in this case of mr. cavalier saw him smoking, he was 36 years old. 36. that is not to say he was not smoking before then. we are not saying he was not. of course he was. but what do we know about that? what do we know about that? here's the age when anybody says he was smoking an r.j.r. brand of cigarettes: 38. no one knows before 1961, or at least nobody testified as to why he smoked what he smoked, the brands he smoked, before 1961. now, here's -- you have got to pay attention, and you have been. we have been watching. you are paying attention. but listen to me. how many witnesses told you mr. cavalier said, not that he -- somebody said, oh, he looked like he wanted to quit; my dad wanted to quit; he wanted to quit. how many witnesses said mr. cavalier told them he wanted to quit or he was motivated to quit? mr. acosta: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: how many witnesses on that witness stand said that mr. cavalier told them he wanted to quit and was motivated -- acosta: same objection. the court: just slightly rephrase it, mr. hohnbaum. mr. hohnbaum: i'll move on. the point is made. how many witnesses said mr. cavalier relied on any statement or omission from r.j. reynolds or the tobacco industry? think about it. did anybody from the witness stand say he relied on something he was told or not told? anybody? any fact, any fact? the answer is nobody. think about this, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. if you spend your whole life doing something every day, smoking five packs of cigarettes a day, and somebody tells you that you have a disease, lung cancer that is caused by smoking, you lived your whole life thinking this is not bad, it is not going to hurt me, and some doctor comes in and he told you smoking has caused cancer, what would you expect to see? you would expect to see, i do not know, the tobacco companies did not tell me, the tobacco companies hid things from me, i did not know this. diagnosed in 1989, passed away in 1993. nothing, nothing about that, absolutely nothing. you have the photographs. you have the photographs. go look at the photographs. we showed you some photographs. how many photographs -- of all of the photographs that they showed you and all of the photographs that are in evidence, how many of them show mr. cavalier smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes? zero. kool, that is the brand manufactured by r.j. reynolds cigarettes. marlboro, other testimony that he smoked marlboro, manufactured by philip morris. parliament cigarettes, manufactured by philip morris. no photos -- how many photos have we seen? how many photos have we seen of him smoking cigarettes? every photo they put up, almost every photo had him with a cigarette in his hand. how many r.j. reynolds cigarettes? none. these are some of the photos. you have seen these. you go look. none. the plaintiff has the burden to prove her case with evidence. what does not prove the case is rhetoric. argument does not prove the case. assumptions, speculation, what may have happened, what could have happened, what might have happened, that is not evidence. and generic allegations, allegations that could be put anywhere do not help the plaintiff sustain her burden to prove her case. i do not know, we have heard -- and we are going to talk about this, but remember how this evidence came in. we are going to talk about dr. cowen, we are going to talk about ms. cavalier and mr. possidento. who played their depositions in this case? the plaintiff put those depositions in evidence. if it was not credible, if it was not believable, why would the plaintiff put them in the case? why would they read their depositions? i want to also make one thing clear, members of the jury, because you are going to see -- and you have heard some argument about this point. let us make this point very clear at the outset. these are all the warnings that appeared on packs of cigarettes starting in 1966. the plaintiff admits -- it is not disputed, we are not fighting over it, we are not fussing over it, we are not guessing at it. we know that the plaintiff admits that the warnings were adequate, adequate as a matter of law. and the plaintiff, a stipulation, folks, agreed to, does not dispute their adequacy. these warnings starting in 1966, they were adequate. they have already stipulated to that. why all the rhetoric, why all the arguments, why everything else are they telling you about this, what was said, what was not said, what could have been said, what might have been said, and sometimes what should have been said? because they admit that the warnings were adequate, and they do not dispute that they were adequate. i showed you this slide at the beginning of the case. it is what i ended my opening statement on, was what are the facts that are actually going to help you make the decision in this case? what are the facts? number 1, mr. cavalier did not die from coronary artery disease caused by smoking. we will go through that. we talk about this: there is no evidence that he smoked r.j. reynolds cigarettes before 1961 when he was 38 years old. we also know that he continued to smoke for decades despite repeated specific warnings, including those on the pack of cigarettes, about the dangers, starting before we even know he smoked an r.j.r. brand -- r.j.r. cigarette. look, we have unanimity on this as well, and we will talk about this. mr. cavalier always had the ability to quit, always. their witnesses, their expert witnesses, every single one of them: everybody, every single person has the ability to quit. and the fact of the matter, until he decided in 1989, he was not motivated to quit. when he was motivated, he quit. if he was motivated in the '50s, '60s, '70s, he would have quit, too. why would we think anything else? why would we guess about anything else? he quit. he can quit. and finally, mr. cavalier's smoking decisions were not influenced by anything r.j. reynolds said or did. now, i'm going to cover some of these topics; and then mr. persons is going to finish and deal with some of the other ones. the plaintiff failed to prove mr. cavalier as a class member. i'm going to handle that part of the argument. failed to prove mr. cavalier died because information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were unknown or unavailable. and failed to prove that mrs. fanali, on behalf of the estate of thomas cavalier, is entitled to recover money damages on behalf of her mother, ann cavalier, when she, herself, admits that it was her father's own decision, her words, own decision to quit or not to quit. all right. look familiar? hopefully it does. this is what we showed you in opening statement. for class membership, for the first two questions on the verdict form, the plaintiff has to clear three hurdles. first, they must prove that mr. cavalier died from coronary artery disease and that that coronary artery disease was caused by smoking. second: if they clear that hurdle, they have to establish that mr. cavalier was addicted to nicotine. i'll talk about that. and if they clear those two hurdles, they also have to prove that addiction to r.j. reynolds cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. cavalier's death. and "legal cause," it is in your instruction booklet. we will talk about what "legal cause" means, was a legal cause of mr. cavalier's death. so here's the first question on the verdict form: "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease..." so there are two parts to this right, right? that is the first part, "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease and...was coronary artery disease a legal cause of his death?" that is the medical causation component. two components, right? did it cause, was it a legal cause of the coronary artery disease; and if so, did the coronary artery disease, was it a legal cause of his death. now, look, we talked about this before; and it makes your job challenging, even more difficult than otherwise, because the judge has already instructed you that the plaintiff cannot recover money damages for lung cancer or copd and you are sitting there and you know, even according to their theory, that copd was a cause of death. and this is where this instruction is so critical. does anger help you make your decision in this case? does sympathy help you make your decision in this case? justice, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, is following the law. taking the facts as you find them and following the law, that is justice in this country. i agree with mr. gary, lady justice is blind. it is not a popularity contest. it is not have you done bad things. that is not justice. justice is looking at the facts, deciding what you have heard from that witness stand, what the truth is. and then it is about you have got it, justice is following the law, plain and simple. that is the way it is in america. we do not let prejudice, we do not let sympathy, we do not let bias decide things in a court of law. we do not let anger decide things in a court of law. we let the facts decide, and we let following the law decide. that is justice in the united states of america; and everybody, everybody is entitled to that justice. all right. five times, five sustained objections, talking about what -- mr. acosta: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: and move to have it stricken. the court: sustained. gary: thank you. mr. hohnbaum: let us look -- you have this in your instructions. it is not complicated. it is not a complicated concept. on the first question of whether smoking was a legal cause of coronary artery disease, it is a legal cause "if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such coronary artery disease --" here's the point -- "so that it can be said that, but for smoking cigarettes, the coronary artery disease would not have occurred." then, lest we miss the point, the jury instruction looks at it just from the other side of the coin, right? mr. acosta: i have an objection to this slide. it is not the whole jury instruction. mr. hohnbaum: neither did they put up -- the court: that is fine. it is overruled. mr. hohnbaum: in other words, the plaintiff must prove that, but for mr. cavalier's cigarette smoking, he would not have developed coronary artery disease. if he developed it from something else, regardless of his smoking, then they have failed to prove to you that smoking was the cause as opposed to something else. now, look, i've been here a long time. at the end of the day, quite simply, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, this fact, and this fact alone, is determinative of this case, because what we know is that during mr. cavalier's life, diabetes, diabetes caused coronary artery disease. it caused it 100 percent of the time. put smoking on the moon, put it on some other planet. assume he never smoked any cigarette in his life, not one. the fact of the matter is mr. cavalier was going to get diabetes -- was going to get coronary artery disease because he had diabetes. it was not caused by smoking. it has to be but for, but for the smoking, he would not have got it. he got it and was going to get it from diabetes alone. did anybody challenge that proposition? dr. feingold looked at that. nobody. diabetes caused the coronary artery disease, and it caused damage. smoking could not be the "but for" cause, because even if he did not smoke, he was going to get it. look, this is -- at this point in time, you have got this, i know you have it. he had diabetes since 1974. you know that. nobody is fussing about that, no one is disputing that, no one is jumping up and down and saying, "that ain't true." it is the truth. he was on it since 1974 and he had problems controlling it. 1974, had diabetes. we know that diabetes ran in mr. cavalier's family. his mother, you remember that, his mother died from complications of diabetes in 1968. his daughter has diabetes. neither one of them are smokers. dr. cowen, i'm going to talk a lot about him. so another way of saying that is even if he never smoked, he may very well have had coronary artery disease anyway, correct? yes. the diabetes alone, whether he smoked a cigarette or not, is that a significant enough risk factor to have caused the coronary artery disease? and the answer to that question is yes. dr. cowen agrees. dr. cowen agrees with dr. wohlgelernter, who says at that time, when he was alive -- things have improved, but when he was alive, diabetes equalled coronary artery disease. that is how it worked. dr. feingold, we will talk a little bit about him. diabetes, the most important risk factor in the development of coronary artery disease? yes, he says. and then, of course, we have got dr. wohlgelernter. "in your patients who have diabetes in the '70s, '80s, and early '90s, what percentage of those patients who had diabetes also had coronary artery disease?" and what does he say? what does he say? what percentage? every single one of them, every single one of them, and that is because it is established at that point in time, scientific fact, that diabetes causes coronary artery disease one hundred percent of the time. how can they meet their burden of proving to you that but for smoking, he would not have coronary artery disease? of course, he would have had coronary artery disease. he had it because of the diabetes. they cannot meet even the first threshold question of whether or not smoking was a legal cause of the coronary artery disease because, of course, it was not. he was going to have diabetes, no matter what. let us just be very clear about this. the long list of engle diseases that you heard, i think it is in your jury instructions, is diabetes on that list? of course, it is not. it is not an engle disease. and nobody told you from that witness stand, and that is because they cannot tell you from that witness stand, that diabetes is caused by smoking. that is because it is not. it is not caused by smoking. diabetes caused mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease. but, look, he had other risk factors. right? i mean, this is -- you have this. he had family history, tolinase, gender, age, and lack of physical activity. once again, there is unanimity, everyone agrees that those are risk factors for coronary artery disease. let us talk about family history. father had a heart attack, positive family history. father died at 83 of coronary artery disease. those are notes, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, from cardiologists. why are they asking this question of him? why is it important to them? what does "positive" mean? it means that mr. cavalier had a family history of heart disease, and that is a significant risk factor for developing that disease. dr. wohlgelernter, after five years, and we know that he developed coronary artery disease, according to the evidence, sometime in 1990, right, 1990? he had diabetes since 1974. is that over five years? yes, it is well over five years. 100 percent of the people. let us go to the elmo, jesse. is this the button i'm supposed to push? all right. so you will have the verdict form, right? boy, that is slow. this late in the day, we will have to switch this up. let me just do this. all right. verdict form, the first question, right, has two parts to it: was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of thomas cavalier's coronary artery disease? that is the first prong of that. was it a legal cause, and it is not a legal cause if you take smoking out of the picture, and he still would have gotten coronary artery disease, and that is the evidence in this case. the plaintiff cannot meet her burden to prove the very first -- the very first thing that they are -- have to prove to you. no, on the verdict form. first question. facts, facts, evidence, facts, and following the law. now, you can go ahead and shut that down, jesse. here's what the evidence showed, that mr. cavalier died from severe copd. coronary artery disease was not a legal cause of mr. cavalier's death. this is not complicated. i said in opening, "where would you go and who would you trust? where would you go to determine what caused somebody's death?" you go to the death certificate. that is where you would go, and i want to just make it very clear to you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that the same instruction, the same language you have for whether or not smoking was a legal cause of coronary artery disease is the same one you have with respect to whether or not coronary artery disease caused mr. cavalier's death. they must prove that but for mr. cavalier's cigarette smoking, he would not have -- do you have the other one up? mr. acosta: objection, your honor, that is not the whole thing. the court: overruled. mr. hohnbaum: let us clear the air on that. can we just clear the air? ladies and gentlemen of the jury, of course, two things can combine and cause somebody's death. of course. is that novel? that is not novel. of course, two things can cause somebody's death. the fact is they have to prove that coronary artery disease was a legal cause of his death, that if coronary artery disease was not in the picture, if you put it up on the moon, they have to prove he would not die. mr. acosta: objection, your honor. mr. hohnbaum: that is exactly the standard. the court: overruled. mr. hohnbaum: that is exactly the standard. mr. acosta: same objection. the court: overruled. mr. hohnbaum: do not get the concurring cause instruction, come up here and tell you there is concurring cause. nobody -- the judge is not going to let them tell you that it is anything that "but for." "but for" did the coronary artery disease cause his death? if it was not in the picture, he still would have died anyway. mr. acosta: objection, your honor, same objection. court: overruled. mr. hohnbaum: all right. so you pull that instruction out. pull it out. when you get back in the jury room, you pull it out, and you read it. it is not complicated. it is not difficult to understand. so what does the death certificate say? we have heard a lot of talk about the death certificate. but what everybody agrees to, what dr. feingold agrees to, what dr. cowen agrees to, what dr. wohlgelernter agrees to, is death certificates are important legal documents. it is the standard of care. every single witness told you it is the standard of care of medical professionals throughout the country to fill out the death certificate accurately and completely. nobody said anything different. nobody said that somehow this is something nobody pays any attention to. it is the death certificate, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. and what we know from dr. cowen is he knew what the requirements were. he knew it was an important legal document, and we know from dr. cowen that he filled it out, and he filled it out accurately. so let us just recap. did mr. cavalier have extensive and severe copd? did he have extensive copd? nobody is -- he did. record after record after record after record show that not only did he have it, but that it was getting worse, and it was getting worse, and it was getting worse, and what happens with somebody who has copd, what happens is that they start getting infections, and they start getting pneumonia, and they start having fevers, and they have to go to the hospital more frequently. and, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, what happened to mr. cavalier? that is what happened to mr. cavalier. that is exactly what happened to him. let us talk about the final hospitalization, because no one is going to come up here and tell you that he did not have severe life-threatening copd. the last hospitalization, what is he admitted for? he is admitted for copd and congestive heart failure. the only records that we have for the last 10 days -- today that we have for the last 10 days of his life are reports, not the films, but reports of portable chest x-rays. what we saw from dr. wohlgelernter yesterday is that mr. cavalier's heart failure was treated, and it improved. that is what the evidence shows. and at the same time that the congestive heart failure was improving, the copd was worsening, and the severe copd caused his death. look, maybe you remember dr. feingold. dr. feingold did not take you through each of these x-rays, reports of x-rays, that dr. wohlgelernter did. dr. wohlgelernter did not run from the evidence in the case. he went through it in painstaking detail. why would we do that? because those records establish that the congestive heart failure was being treated, it was improving, and it did not cause his death. what do we know about congestive heart failure? i know that is a lot of medical concepts being thrown at you, but what we know from their own witnesses is that it can get better from day to day, right? we know that one day you can have an episode of congestive heart failure, and the next day, you can improve and be fine. the congestive heart failure will have been remedied, and that is not to say you will not have another episode of congestive heart failure, but it is that variable. it can vary day to day, middle of the day to end of the day. that is what we know. we do not have to go any farther than their own witness for that. now, look, very important piece of information. in may of 1990, we talked about the ejection fraction, and the ejection fraction, as dr. wohlgelernter said, is not -- did not tell you that he had congestive heart failure. it says that he is got a weakened heart muscle, and sometimes that can lead to congestive heart failure and sometimes it does not, right? we know that in may of 1990, although we do not have an echocardiogram, we have a record that refers to it that says he had an ejection fraction of 30 to 35 percent. think may 1990. we know from the records that in july of 1993, in the last couple weeks of his life, the last ejection fraction reading we have shows that his ejection fraction was -- what was it? 29 percent. essentially the same reading as he had three years earlier; yet, they want you to believe that this somehow, this 29 percent, would have caused his death. would have caused his death? he had essentially the same thing three years ago. ask yourself whether that makes any sense at all. what do we know from dr. feingold? we know that a person can live with and function with an ejection fraction of 29 percent. that is what he had. i asked him the specific question. i wanted to know what he was going to say. can somebody live? we know that is true. how do we know it is true? we know it is true because he was living with an ejection fraction of around 29 percent three years before, and what was he doing when he had the ejection fraction of 30 to 35 percent in 1990, what was he doing? he was taking long trips, deadheading hard trips, on death's door? significant enough to cause death? he was driving, deadheading it up to connecticut and back. it makes no sense. you have seen this before. reasonable degree of medical certainty, reasonable degree of medical certainty. reasonable degree of medical probability. that is the standard, right? that is the magic words that the lawyers use and the witnesses say, "oh, yeah, reasonable degree of medical certainty, that is what i'm testifying to you about." what does dr. feingold not have that dr. cowen who filled out the death certificate had? all of these, every single one. there is no dispute that these documents would have existed at the time. there is no doubt about that. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you also heard that congestive heart failure is not complicated. it is not one of those things that you need to get some advanced degree in. it is like medical school 101. and what they want you to believe is that dr. cowen, on these records, saw evidence that congestive heart failure caused his death. they want you to think that he saw all of this, and all of that must have said the congestive heart failure was so bad, so much of a problem, that it caused his death. but of course, he did not. it is fair to ask yourself this question: why would dr. cowen, who had all of this information, why would dr. cowen put down that the only cause of his death -- and then he affirmed it just a little while ago, a month or so ago at his deposition -- that copd was the only cause of his death? and the only reasonable conclusion that can be drawn from that is that none of this evidence that he had but that dr. feingold does not have and we do not have today, that that evidence supported that the only cause of death was copd. i asked dr. wohlgelenter -- last question last night -- did anybody on the planet know more about mr. cavalier's medical condition than dr. peter cowen. did dr. feingold? of course not. dr. cowen had all the information. we have heard lots of things about dr. cowen. maybe he was not paying attention. maybe he was not taking his job seriously. what do we know from dr. feingold, who reviewed all the records? what did dr. feingold say about dr. cowen? did he say he looked sloppy. did he say he was not -- did not know what was going on? did he say he would not have been able to determine whether or not congestive heart failure caused a man's death? did he say any of those things? he did not. what he said, by contrast, was that dr. cowen was, in quotation marks, qualified, capable, and competent. that is dr. cowen from dr. feingold's perspective. not sloppy, not not paying attention, not not doing his job, not being cavalier about filling out a legal document. dr. feingold himself, qualified, competent, and capable. all right. so i do not know, what do you do if you are the plaintiff? what do you do with that? well, you try to kick up some dust. right? so all the testimony about is that dr. cowen's signature? well, it does not look like signature 15 years later. is that really his signature? is that really an h and a w. is that really all of that? i do not -- who would we ask? they played his -- they had his deposition. what did dr. cowen say? dr. cowen, as recently as two months ago, said, it is my signature. why have some discussion, why have somebody suggest that somehow it is not his signature? that is the very definition of a red herring. the man, under oath, said it is his signature. the court: let me just ask, any jurors need a break? everybody okay? i just wanted to make sure everybody is okay. anybody need a break? jurors: yes. mr. hohnbaum: dr. cowen, it is not just that, back in 1993, he thought -- it is not just back in 1993 that he thought that copd was the only cause of death. because his deposition was read and he is saying, yes, i certify, by signing this death certificate, that copd was the only cause of mr. cavalier's death, the only cause. and ladies and gentlemen of the jury, think about it: he treated mr. cavalier. he treated mrs. cavalier. he treated one of the daughters, jeanne, maybe one of the daughters. remember, that was the testimony, he was my doctor and i gave him the letter and all that stuff. he was a family physician. if he had something to say that would be helpful -- if he had something to say that would be helpful to the plaintiff's case -- you heard in his deposition, would you go to trial? i asked him: "did they ask you to go to trial?" he does not have anything helpful to say. what he has to say is that copd was the only cause of death and he stuck with that even after he had been shown medical records prior to his deposition. and you see in the -- you heard in the reading of his deposition that a lawyer for the plaintiff was there, did not ask any questions. he had met with mr. cavalier prior to the deposition. remember that? 30 minutes, 40 minutes, phone call, they actually met, sat down, talked to him. had every opportunity to try to figure out whether dr. cowen could say something other than "copd caused his death," and the answer was he could not because that is the truth. copd is what caused his death. now, look, think about it. dr. feingold was a pulmonologist, a lung doctor. that is his training, that is his experience, he is a pulmonologist. they brought a pulmonologist to talk to you about coronary artery disease. they brought -- they brought a pulmonologist to talk to you about coronary artery disease, not a cardiologist. they brought a pulmonologist to talk to you about addiction, not a psychiatrist. dr. feingold, $40 million, $40 million testifying. that is what he does. that is how he earns his money. $40 million. that is who they brought to tell you that something other than copd caused this man's death. ladies and gentlemen, there are cardiologists in florida. there are cardiologists right down the street. there are cardiologists that could have come in and testified for the plaintiff. instead, they bring in the $40-million-man. now, look, you know the saying, "a picture is worth a thousand words." yeah, i thought i stumbled on that. look, take a look at that and think about this for a second. just think about this slide. this was dr. feingold's own slide. he prepared it. you have seen it before. does anything jump out at you about this slide? his clinical practice, do you see "cardiology" on there? it is his own slide. did you see "addiction" on there, clinical practice? he is not a cardiologist, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, and he is not a psychiatrist. and according to his own document that he prepared that he probably uses in all kind of cases, what does he say? cardiology is not his expertise, and neither is addiction. i think it is also interesting in this particular case, under these particular facts, that -- what is he looking into? a microscope. do we have any pathology in this case? do we have any slides to help determine what happened to mr. cavalier? they existed at one point in time, but do we have any now? no. what is in the background here? what do you see in the background here? actual x-rays, the films. not reports of the x-rays, but the films. do we have any films? we do not have a single film. you know who had access to pathology? dr. cowen did. do you know who had access, and undoubtedly saw films, x-ray films? dr. cowen, the doctor who, under oath, said copd was the only cause of death. now, to dr. feingold's credit, he acknowledged -- as he had to, he would look silly if he did not -- that the fact that there was no discharge summary -- remember, if somebody is in the hospital, they leave the hospital, they pass away, there is a death summary. there is a discharge summary. the fact that we do not have it, the fact that we do not have it, it limited what he could ultimately decide. that is his own words and it has to be the case because he is trying to come in here and tell you, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, what happened to this man when he does not have the information necessary to make that determination and dr. cowen did. all right. this is -- so we have -- maybe dr. cowen did not sign the death certificate. maybe it is somebody else's signature. that does not work. right? we have this, the ultimate red herring in the case. so this is 2008. this is 15 years after he passes away, and dr. cowen is asked by somebody in mr. cavalier's family to do a letter for him. there is only one thing you need to know about this letter, and that that is dr. cowen acknowledged both that he signed it and that it is wrong. that is all you need to know. right? he signed it and it is wrong. he did not have his records. the family thought it was lung cancer that caused his death. he filled out the form, the letter, and he moved it along. did he go and amend the death certificate to say something else? no. why not? because he knows, as he said in this case under oath, that copd was the only cause of death. the only doctor specializing in cardiology, specializing in the disease of coronary artery disease, the only doctor who has devoted his entire practice of medicine to cardiac issues, dr. wohlgelenter, told you he did not die from coronary artery disease. but for -- put coronary artery disease on the moon, and mr. cavalier is going to die anyway because he died from copd. that is the second part of the first question, which we contend you should not get to, just so we are clear. we have to be thorough, we have to go through everything, but the first question of whether or not thomas cavalier -- was smoking a legal cause of thomas cavalier's coronary artery disease? we have already talked about that. the answer is no because diabetes caused it, does 100 percent of the time. but they also have to prove that coronary artery disease was a legal cause of his death. but for coronary artery disease, he would not have died. mr. acosta: objection, your honor, that is not right. mr. hohnbaum: that is indeed the standard. the court: overruled. mr. hohnbaum: even if they -- first check mark, second check mark, they do not -- did not meet their burden to prove to you that smoking was a legal cause of coronary artery disease or that coronary artery disease caused his death. the answer to the first question on the verdict form is no. but as i talked about, we have to go through the rest of the verdict form. unfortunately for you at 10 to 6:00, that is what we have to do. we appreciate you staying with us as we talk to you. here's the second question on the verdict form: was thomas cavalier addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was an addiction to cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds a legal cause -- legal cause, a but for cause -- of coronary artery disease and death? this is what we talked about. we showed that before. that is the hurdle, right, addiction. the dsm-5. you heard a lot about addiction in this case. let me see if i cannot straighten some things out. what is the state of the art as it relates to nicotine addiction in this country? not stuff from 2010, not stuff from 2008. 2015, today, what is the state of the art? the state of the art is the dsm-5. studies come out, people get more knowledgeable, more information comes out, things are updated. the dsm-5 does not stay stale. there were reiterations of the dsm-iv and they came out with the dsm-5. who came out with it? the american psychiatric association. that document from dr. barnett, the dsm-5: half of all daily smokers are addicted. half. let us just start from there. we are not saying that people were not addicted to cigarettes, ladies and gentlemen. of course they are. of course they are. but the evidence, the facts, not guess work, not speculation, the facts are that half of daily smokers are not addicted. we know, look, say all you want about dr. barnett. dr. barnett agrees with dr. benowitz that there are reasons other than nicotine addiction for why people smoke. taste, smell, enjoyment, relaxation, ritual. that is undeniable. their own expert says it. we do not have to guess. we are not fussing about that. there are reasons other than nicotine for why people smoke, and that makes perfect sense. i have an app on my phone, it is a calculator. you can get on the app store and get a calculator. what it comes down to is that the plaintiff's witnesses are saying that all you need is a calculator to diagnose someone with addiction, that is all you need. why did the $40-million-man come in and testify from that stand when all you need, all you need is just to add up the cigarettes? we will just add them up. that is addiction, we will just add. one, two, three, four, we will get to the point. that is how we are going to determine whether somebody is addicted or not. it is really dr. benowitz's point. dr. barnett, what did she do? she said, look, i put my faith in the american psychiatric association. i put my faith in the dsm-5. so i am going to use that and apply actual diagnostic criteria to determine whether or not this man was addicted. [#deleted recess#] [#deleted council discussion#] mr. hohnbaum: first, let me say thank you for the 10 o'clock start time. we appreciate it ourselves. indulge me for just a moment and let me go over, if i could, very briefly just to reorient ourselves about where we were. we had the three hurdles. the first two questions on the verdict form deal with class membership. all the information that you heard in this trial about conspiracies and concealment, what was said and what was not said, are not to be considered when you decide the first two questions on the verdict forms. you have to put those out of your mind and you have to focus on the questions -- the first two questions on the verdict form. the rest of the stuff does not matter to those questions. medical causation, addiction, addiction causation. we spent a lot of time yesterday talking about medical causation. smoking was not a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease. he was going to get it any way because of diabetes. one hundred percent, one hundred percent certainty. and coronary artery disease was not a legal cause of mr. cavalier's death. he died from copd. if he did not have coronary artery disease, he was going to die anyway. that is the fact. this is just a brief summary. he had diabetes since 1974, was poorly controlled. diabetes caused the coronary artery disease. his congestive heart failure, dr. wohlgelenter went through it painstakingly, x-ray by x-ray. it was treated and under control. the ejection fraction he had in 1990 was the same ejection fraction he had two weeks before he passed away. and they are claiming that caused his death. and severe copd. there is no doubt he had severe copd. exacerbations, in the hospital, infections, there is no question he had copd. the plaintiff has the burden here, folks, to prove medical causation to you, and as i did yesterday with the verdict form -- of course, when you give lawyers more time to do something, they will do it. all right. so two components to that verdict form: was smoking a cause of the coronary artery disease? no. was coronary artery disease a legal cause of his death? no. all right. let me move on to where i was starting yesterday. even if they prove to you those two things -- smoking caused the coronary artery disease, and coronary artery disease caused his death -- they still have to prove to you that mr. cavalier was addicted. as with every question, you need to decide in this case, where do you go to determine what the law is? you go to the instructions, and here's what the instruction says. i've got to tell you, you are -- you can look through those as hard as you want to, and as carefully as you want to and you will not see the term "addiction" defined. you will not see it defined. and so one of the things you are going to have to decide as a jury is what does the term "addiction" mean, and who are -- what are you going to use to help you decide that. well, i talked a little bit about the dsm-5. we are going to talk about that in a second. half of all daily smokers -- current, state of the art knowledge of addiction -- are not addicted. smokers smoke for reasons other than addiction. right? if half the people are addicted and half the people are not addicted, those are daily smokers, some people are smoking for reasons other than addiction to nicotine. and we talked about some of those reasons with dr. barnett. we talked about some of that with dr. feingold. i think dr. benowitz also answered questions about that. and then dr. barnett talked about the half-life nicotine and peak saturation. and i want to do it this way, ladies and gentlemen of the jury: a sponge can only absorb so much water. think about it. if you take a daily vitamin, one vitamin. do you take 10 vitamins in the morning? no. because your body cannot absorb all of those vitamins. so you take one, just like a sponge. just like a sponge. the fact of the matter is mr. cavalier smoking a cigarette every 10 minutes, every 12 minutes, cannot be -- nicotine cannot be the reason he is doing that. why? because the nicotine is staying at a peak level, it never goes down. if people smoke and they smoke one cigarette every 30 minutes, the nicotine level goes down a little bit. they can have some feeling of withdrawal and they want the nicotine again to get that level of nicotine back up. but somebody who smokes as much as mr. cavalier was not doing it solely for the nicotine. he could not be. it never went down. he was saturated. there was no more. there had to be other reasons, and there were other reasons. taste, smell, enjoyment, relaxation, boredom. driving was his vocation, was his job. so here's what it comes down to: if you define "addiction" by just the number of cigarettes, right -- so we heard five cigarettes in this trial. if you smoke five cigarettes a day, you are addicted. some people said 10 cigarettes and you are addicted. some people said a pack a day and you are addicted. if you just define "addiction" by the number of cigarettes, then, okay, he is addicted. right? it is circular. if that is the definition, then he meets that definition. or you can choose to apply some actual diagnostic criterion besides a calculator. on the one hand, they say it is a serious medical condition, and on the other, all they say you need to define it is a calculator. right? one hundred percent of smokers. every smoker gets a smoking-related disease was addicted. $40 million, $40 million to come in and tell you it is just one cigarette after another. that is all it takes -- mr. gary: i'm going to object. he did not get paid no $40 million. the court: overruled. mr. gary: that is ridiculous. mr. hohnbaum: $40 million. the fagerstrom test, that is what they used. that is what dr. feingold said on the stand is used to determine whether or not somebody is addicted. the fact of the matter is that test can be gotten off the internet. you can fill it out in five minutes. there was some discussion about, well, dsm -- mr. chestnut, the dsm, you have to be alive. what is this? after you wake up. i mean, that test is designed to be pulled off the internet and filled out, and it can be done in five minutes. anyone can apply and administer it, and there is no expertise, no judgment no clinical analysis, no learning, no education, no judgment whatsoever. and then even the plaintiff's experts disagree about this. so dr. feingold -- that is what doctors typically use, they use the fagerstrom. what did dr. benowitz say? it is not typically used as a test to determine whether or not somebody is addicted, because the test assumes you are addicted and then determines what sort of severity that addiction is. that is the fagerstrom test. let me put to rest this concept of brain changes somehow impacting this analysis. it is another red herring. all right? for 100 years, it is been known that nicotine affects the body's receptors. we all have nicotine receptors in our body. after a smoker quits, a period of time, different for each smoker, but not a long period of time, the receptors go back to normal after a few weeks. everybody says to the extent those increased brain receptors that go back to normal, to the extent that is occurring in somebody, it does not prevent that smoker from quitting. everybody can quit. and of course, it does not affect -- it is not like intoxication, right? it does not affect anybody's ability to understand and appreciate the risks of smoking. and you remember the dopamine slide. we did not put it back up here. we had the methamphetamine off the charts, and then we had cocaine, and then we had nicotine and caffeine. the amount of dopamine that is released from nicotine is just about equivalent to the amount of dopamine that is released with caffeine. but let me be clear: nicotine is addictive. it can be addictive in certain people. no one is running from that. no one is denying that. no one is suggesting otherwise. the issue is not whether it is addictive. the issue is whether or not mr. cavalier was addicted. so what -- what do we have? we have the dsm-5. again, do you want to use the internet tool as a test for addiction, or do you want clinical analysis? the dsm-5 is the gold standard. nobody denied that. dr. benowitz, their own witness, what did he say about the dsm-5? he said that the dsm-5 is the bible. the bible in the u.s. for the diagnosis of substance abuse and other psychiatric disorders. they cannot have it both ways. is it a substance abuse disorder or not? if it is, the way you go about diagnosing it is to use a tool that requires clinical analysis and judgment. and that is exactly what dr. barnett did. she walked through it. why did not dr. feingold walk through the dsm-5? he did not want walk to through the dsm-5 because he knew what the answer was. he knew what the answer was that if you went through the dsm-5, there was not going to be a finding of addiction, so he went back to fagerstrom, he went back to the calculator. and the dsm-5 requires clinically significant impairment or distress. that is what it requires. it requires that your life is impaired or you are distressed because of your smoking. evidence, evidence beyond number of cigarettes is required under the dsm-5. you assess the evidence you heard in the case under the construct of the dsm-5. listen to dr. barnett. you can see the criteria. he was able to quit. he quit the first time he was motivated to do so, and there was no evidence when he quit that he suffered some serious withdrawal, that he had some serious problem, that he somehow could not function in life because he had stopped smoking. was there any evidence of withdrawal? you had some witnesses say, well, maybe he went down to two cigarettes or snuck a cigarette here or there after 1989. did anybody say -- think about it? he is smoking five packs of cigarettes a day. if he goes down to one or two cigarettes, people, a, they are going to notice it. they are going to notice it, and then they are going to notice if it is causing him any problems. and did anybody say it caused him any problems? no. the fact of the matter is some people can quit, and they can quit easily. and that is exactly the case for mr. cavalier. that is not to say that people do not struggle with quitting, some people do. but the evidence in this case is that he did not. evidence. facts. mr. cavalier was not addicted. but, look, even if they convince you of the medical causation, even if they convince you -- even if they carry their burden of proof on addiction, they still have to prove that addiction to cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds was a legal cause of his death. where do you go first to determine what the answer to that question is? the law, what you have to follow in this case. but for the addiction to cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds, the coronary artery disease and death would not have occurred. because if you get to this point, you have already determined that the coronary artery disease was caused by smoking and it caused his death. they have to prove to you that but for the addiction to r.j. reynolds cigarettes, he would not have had the disease and died. this is the first date any witness claims to have seen mr. cavalier smoke r.j. reynolds cigarettes, 1961, one of the daughters. the first time. we talked about this a little bit yesterday. every single picture in this case has him smoking cigarettes other than cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds. they have to prove to you that addiction to r.j. reynolds cigarettes, not somebody else's cigarettes, not some other packs of cigarettes, not somebody else's cigarettes caused the disease. and smoking a pack or two of kools or -- there is no suggestion that a pack or two or even a carton of kools over the course of his life would do it. they have to prove to you that addiction to r.j. reynolds cigarettes was the legal cause of his coronary artery disease and death. pictures. even if they prove to you that r.j. reynolds cigarettes were in the mix, the issue is did mr. cavalier have the ability to quit but chose to continue to smoke, or was he rendered powerless? did the nicotine -- the addiction to nicotine drive him, was it so powerful that he could not quit? because if he could quit, then it was not the addiction that caused a disease, it was his choice not to quit. yesterday mr. gary stood up here for the first time in this case -- for the first time in this case and said that plaintiff conceded mr. cavalier was at fault. none of the witnesses said that. dr. feingold did not say that. none of the plaintiff's witnesses said that. but think about that. what does that mean in this context? what does it mean? it means that it was his -- look, if he was -- ladies and gentlemen of the jury, if he was powerless, nicotine made him powerless, then he was not at fault. right? how could he be at fault, if it was the nicotine? the admission means that he chose to begin smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes despite knowing the risks. he knew that smoking was dangerous. he was not confused about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. was there any testimony at any point in time? he said, "well i did not know that. i did not know that. i did not think that." there was not. it says that he was responsible for quitting smoking. and that if he was not able to quit smoking, how could he be at fault? how could he be at fault for anything if he was not able to quit smoking? of course he was able to quit smoking, and he was able to quit smoking at any time. we have talked about this before. nicotine addiction does not rob smokers of free will or as dr. benowitz says, somehow change them into robots. it does not do that. addicted smokers, even if they are addicted, are responsible for their own actions, and decisions to quit or not to quit. where do we have more agreement in this case than on this point? every single expert, whatever their opinion is about what the definition of addiction is says any smoker can quit, every single one of them. and it is not just people who smoke a little bit, people who smoke a pack a day. let us hear what dr. benowitz has to say. do we have that, jesse? 12 "question: and most of the people who quit smoking, the 60 million that we talked about just a second ago, and most of those 60 million people would have met your criteria for being highly addicted to cigarettes, correct? "answer: a fair number. i do not know what -- a fair number, yes." (video clip stopped.) mr. hohnbaum: that is dr. benowitz. it is not just folks who smoke a pack a day, half a pack a day, two packs a day. it is highly addicted smokers. dr. proctor and the people who quit were not just light smokers, it included heavy smokers as well. and then he says it did. many people were smoking, one, two, three, four, or even more packs a day. absolute agreement on this point. mr. cavalier, a five-pack-a-day smoker could, in fact, quit. we know millions and millions and millions and millions of people were quitting smoking in the '50s, '60s, and '70s. millions of people chose to quit smoking. their choice. they chose. and many of them were heavy addicted smokers like mr. cavalier. 60 million. then you can ask yourself was mr. cavalier different? was there anything about mr. cavalier that made him different from 60 million other smokers who quit? were his cigarettes more addictive? was his brain affected differently? was he exposed to advertising different from somebody else? did he smoke for longer than the smokers who quit? we just know from dr. benowitz and dr. proctor that there were millions of people who quit smoking who were heavy smokers, or did he make the choice to continue to smoke until 1989, when he quit for the first time and he was motivated to quit? motivation. another place where we have consensus. motivation is the key to quitting. let me go to dr. benowitz. 5 "question: we alluded to a few of those a amount ago, but you agree that being motivated, being motivated to quit is essential to successfully quitting smoking, right? "answer: yes. "question: now, you would agree that sometimes people say "i want to quit," but they do not really mean it. "answer: i'm sure that happens. "question: and if someone does not want to quit, they are not going to quit, right? "answer: that is true. "question: motivation and commitment are essential elements of the ability to quit smoking, correct? "answer: yes. "question: people can say they want to quit but that does not necessarily mean that they are committed to doing so, right? "answer: yes." (video clip stopped.) mr. hohnbaum: that is clear as a bell. their own witness. we did talk about his personality in this case, right? because that is important to understand the issues in this case as it relates to whether or not he had the internal constitution, the personality that would allow him to quit smoking if he wanted to. he was intelligent, he was hardworking, of course he was. he was resilient. dr. barnett talked about that. he was responsible. he made his own decisions about smoking. and, frankly, the testimony was no one could really tell him anything. he was his own man. he was his own man. and the fact of the matter, he was not motivated to quit. so we have all the experts saying every smoker can quit. even his own family said since the 1960s, when they encouraged him to quit, "we know you can do it." they knew what kind of man he was. he was the kind of man that if he set his mind to something, he was going to do it. he was not rendered powerless by nicotine. that is not mr. cavalier. he was not rendered powerless. he made his own decisions. from mrs. fanali's own mouth, whether or not he was going to quit was his own decision. his own decision. do not let facts that have nothing to do with this question or any of these other questions related to class membership get you stumbled up. he could make his own decision to quit. if you think about the plaintiff's theory, it is that mr. cavalier had no idea that smoking was dangerous, and he never quit. he had no idea that smoking was dangerous. that could not be any clearer. that is their testimony. that is what they are trying to prove, he did not know. and they are saying if he had known, if somehow he had been told information, and mr. persons will address this, he would have made a different decision. there is no way he would have done something that he knew was going to harm him. right? that is their theory. but look -- and this is what -- sometimes when we are putting on evidence, it is not clear, and it cannot be until we get to this point to explain to you why it matters. right? and mr. cavalier's handling of his diabetes is not a knock on mr. cavalier, it is not impugning his character, it is not suggesting he was a bad person. it has nothing to do with that. what it has to do with is he knew that diabetes was harmful because his mom had died of diabetes. he had been treated since 1974. he knew what a wicked disease diabetes was. and then we know, and look at the records, mouth sores. let us go chase that rabbit all you want and look at those medical records, and you tell me whether any of those medical records suggest that he was eating his ice cream for mouth sores, or whether there was any evidence around that time that he had mouth sores. and that is -- that is the ultimate red herring. the fact of the matter is he made his choice. he knew it could harm him. he wanted to do it. it debunks the notion that somehow if he would have known smoking was harmful, he would never do anything to harm his body. and this suggestion about physical activity, look at the pictures and determine whether or not -- you whether you heard any testimony about his physical inactivity before this time period. he was a truck driver and a limo driver. there was no testimony that he was going to the gym. there was no testimony that he was going for strolls. there was no testimony about that. facts, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. not speculation, not guesswork. facts. we -- this has been beaten to death, right? throughout this time period, his glucose levels were off the charts. and it was not because he was not being treated. he was being treated. it was because he had made a decision, knowing that it could harm him, knowing that it could kill him, knowing that it could cause hospitalization, because he was hospitalized. he made the decision to continue to engage in behavior that was harming his health. what did not he do? what do we know he did not do. if he was motivated to quit, if he had a persistent desire, if he was committed, what would be the first thing you would do? what would be the first thing you would you do? you would throw away your cigarettes. you would get them out of your sight. you would throw away your ashtrays, if he was motivated. he was seeing doctors. is there any evidence that he went to a doctor and said, "please help me stop smoking"? no evidence that he went to a stop smoke cessation clinic. and you can weigh the evidence on whether he actually tried to quit, but let me tell you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, if he actually tried to quit and did so for half a day, a day, two days, he is smoking five packs a day, that would be monumental. no one would miss it. no one would think, oh -- it would be big news in that household. did anybody say anything about that? the answer is no. to the extent he had some desire to do it, it was to appease his wife who we know did not like his smoking. finally, on this point, the best evidence he could quit is it dr. benowitz? is it dr. proctor? is it dr. feingold? is it dr. barnett? no. the best evidence is that he did. the clerk: 10 minutes counsel. mr. hohnbaum: that is the best evidence. when he was motivated to quit, he quit. and you look at the records. he quit smoking prior to his lung cancer diagnosis. the lung cancer diagnosis did not cause him to quit. he quit with his brother before he was diagnosed. he decided he was going to quit and he did. now, look, the number of medical records that document that he quit permanently in 1989, 34. you saw this in opening. right? you will have all these records. 34 records. why are they spending all of this time trying to convince you that mr. cavalier never stopped smoking until he could not smoke any more? why? why not say on memories, it is back a little bit, i'm not exactly sure. i mean, i cannot be confident. i do not remember. why this clinging to "he quit" in the face of 34 medical records, doctor after doctor, hospital visit after hospital visit, doctor visit after doctor visit. folks, if you are smoking and i'm this far away from you, we know it. look at the medical records. there is no reference in the medical records to "he says he is not smoking but i can smell that he is smoking," or anything to suggest that, in fact, he actually quit smoking. the reason they are trying so hard to persuade you that mr. cavalier never quit smoking is because they know, just like we know, that if he quit smoking in 1989, they cannot meet their burden to prove that addiction to r.j. reynolds cigarettes caused any disease. that is why they -- that is why. that is why we are doing this dance. what is this? well, is not it true -- who went to doctors' visits with mr. cavalier? mrs. fanali did. she accompanied her dad. she is a good daughter helping out her father. went to the doctors' visits. "well, is not it true that neither you nor your father were ever trying to mislead your father's doctors or nurses by giving them wrong information?" what is the information that the doctors had? that he quit. and what is the answer? he either did or he did not, folks. he either quit smoking or he did not. the answer was: no. no, sir. he might have. who knows? he might have quit. who knows if they did not get that wrong, because i can prove that he did not quit smoking. getting caught up in the facts of the case, the facts are he quit; we cannot say he quit, because if we say he quit, we cannot prove that addiction caused the disease. cannot both be true, right? the medical records cannot be true if he did not quit smoking. "you never heard him lie to the doctors or the nurses about his medical history, did you?" "not that -- no." ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the plaintiffs have failed to prove to you that mr. cavalier was addicted or that addiction to r.j. reynolds cigarettes was a legal cause of any disease. the answer to this question, if you get to it, and you should not get to it, let me make that very clear, is no. thank you for your attention. i'm going to turn things over to mr. persons. mr. persons: counsel, mrs. fanali, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. we have been together for three weeks now, and i want to add my voice to the chorus and thank you for your patience, your indulgence, your dedication to this process. without you, obviously it would not function, and you have been most attentive, and we all greatly, greatly appreciate it. i'm going to talk to you about the last five questions on the verdict form, and i will not spend a lot of time doing it. we will move through it as efficiently as we can, but they are very, very, like all the questions, they are very important questions. when we started this process, i told you that it was my objective to bring you the evidence that would help you answer the questions on the verdict form. and i submit we have done that, and i'll go through some of that at this time. the questions 3 and 4: "did thomas cavalier reasonably rely to his detriment on either a statement or omission of material fact made by r.j. reynolds that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease and death?" if you answer no to question 3, you skip to question 4 and proceed to question 5. i submit to you the answer will be no. we will talk about why. number 4. "did thomas cavalier reasonably rely to his detriment on either a statement or omission made in furtherance of r.j. reynolds' agreement to conceal information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease?" again, it is no. and then we look at the jury instructions, because they provide us guidance in making this determination. the issue for your determination on plaintiff's claim for fraudulent concealment against r.j. reynolds is whether mr. cavalier reasonably relied to his detriment on either a statement or an omission made by r.j. reynolds that concealed or omitted material information, information that was not otherwise known or available, regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and whether such reliance was a legal cause of his coronary artery disease and death. and then the law helps us. it provides us guidance in terms of telling us what that means. in this case, a material fact is one that is of such importance that mr. cavalier would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. in other words, it would be a game-changer. it is that kind of fact. it is a material fact. not just any fact, but a material fact. and in order to meet their burden, the plaintiff has to show that there is a connection between concealment and agreement to conceal and mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease that they contend was the cause of death and they failed to prove that mr. cavalier died because of the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were unknown or unavailable to you. you cannot conceal what is already known, and we are going to demonstrate what was already known. reasonable reliance on either a statement or omission by r.j. reynolds that concealed or omitted information, material information, was a legal cause if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence caused the death so that it can reasonably be said that but for the reliance the coronary artery disease and death would not have occurred. this means that plaintiff must prove that but for mr. cavalier's reasonable reliance on either a statement or an omission made by r.j. reynolds that concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available, mr. cavalier would have acted differently, and he would have acted differently in such a way that he would have avoided coronary artery disease and death. now, mr. cavalier did not die because the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were unknown or unavailable. again, you cannot conceal what is already known. we started this case, we showed you an article from reader's digest, i believe it was 1923, that talked about the dangers of smoking. they had the reader's digest in the home. plaintiff contends that mr. cavalier could not read or write, but other members of the family could, and when you have a member of the family that cannot read and write, oftentimes you read to that person. if there is information that you have encountered that might be helpful to that person, you feel incumbent upon yourself to share it with them, to tell them about it. even though they cannot read and write, you provide it to them. you do that for them. and the information was out there. what we do know is for over 100 years it is been known, and dr. benowitz, their expert, dr. proctor, their expert, both said that it is been known for over 100 years that nicotine is in tobacco. that it is in tobacco. nicotine has a pharmacological effect on the human body. now, what does that mean? pharmacological. the root word is pharmacology, which is the science of the composition, the uses, and the effects of drugs. that is what pharmacology means. so if you have known that for 100 years, you have known about the makeup of nicotine, the composition, you have known about its uses, and you have known about its effects, nicotine affects the body's receptors. that is been known for over 100 years. did not need somebody to come along in the 1970s or somebody to come on the witness stand and say that, well, you know, upregulation of the acetylcholine nicotine receptors occurs with the use of nicotine. that is been known that it affects the receptors for over 100 years. that is their experts. it is also been known that it is difficult to quit. that is been known for over 100 years. what we do know is that the first time anybody places a reynolds product in mr. cavalier's hand was in 1961, but we know that back in the '50s, this was the testimony in front of congress. here is leroy barney, who was the surgeon general of the united states, he said in front of congress: "the public health community had done an excellent job at warning the public about the dangers of smoking." what does the national cancer institute, the head of the national cancer institute, what does he say? "the powerful and frightening information coming out about the dangers -- i'm sorry. that is dr. proctor. "the powerful and frightening" -- i got that. let me get back to it. this is dr. proctor, robert proctor. he said: "the powerful and frightening information coming out about the dangers of smoking scared millions of people into quitting." and we showed you those mouse skin-painting studies where they were in life magazine, and they showed the tumors on the backs of the mice. very graphic information about the dangers of smoking. the tar that they painted on the backs of the mice was the same tar that is in cigarette smoke. so do you need to know that polonium is in it, do you need to know that acetone is in, to know that it causes cancer? is not it sufficient to know that the tar in cigarette smoke caused cancer on the backs of those mice? and they used the backs of the mice because the tissue on the backs of the mice is comparable to the tissue in the human lung. it was known and available. here's what dr. proctor also tells us. he told us: "the publicity around those studies in the early 1950s made a significant portion of people fear for their lives and it stimulated quitting in this country." that was the question. "exactly. it is when the first great wave of quitting becomes. it is when you get the first significant self-help manuals to help people quit." "question: all right. it scared millions of people into quitting in the early 1950s, did not it?" "answer: it did." "and then this quitting was driven by people's fears and concerns about the dangers of smoking?" he said: "yes, it was." he talks about the self-help manuals. i did not say that. those are his words. self-help manuals that came out during that time to help people quit, those who were motivated to quit. millions were motivated to quit. that was back in the 1950s when this research first started coming out. mr. cavalier was not one of them. am i faulting mr. cavalier? no, absolutely not, because it was a person's choice whether they wanted to continue in the activity or they wanted to take steps to discontinue it for their health. this question was put to donna fanali about whether her father knew about addiction and that smoking was addictive. question: "also in the 1950s and '60s, based on what you knew about your father, you believe your father understood that smoking was addictive, correct?" "yes, i think he knew smoking was addictive." now, this is before he ever was first seen smoking a reynolds cigarette in 1961. she says going back into the 1950s, using her exact words, "when i was a kid, my father knew smoking was addictive." so do you need the 1988 surgeon general's report to tell you that smoking is addictive if you already know? it cannot be concealed from you if you already know. it cannot be a secret if you already know. the information was known and available. in the early 1960s, jeanne would tell her father, "you are addicted to cigarettes," and his response was he knew he was addicted. we talked about the epidemiology studies that came out in the 1950s showing a strong correlation between smoking and lung cancer. dr. proctor testified about the wynder and graham study. he testified about the mouse skin-painting study. he testified about the surgeon general's report. he testified about the 1966 warning label. all of these were big news stories. these things led to millions of people being scared of smoking and they quit. it was big news. and what do we know about big news? we know that this is the kind of thing that mr. cavalier watched on tv. question: "when he came home early enough to watch the nightly news, he did watch the nightly news?" answer: "yes, if the news was on, he will watch it." question: "all right. when it came to being informed or being aware of current events, your father was certainly aware of the big news events of the day, correct?" "the bigger ones, yes." question: "things that would be considered, quote, 'big news,' right?" the answer: "yes." and of course this was big news. dr. proctor tells us the highest rate of quitting is in that period after the surgeon general's report when nearly 3 million people were quitting every year. that is really the turning point. in the public health history of the united states of america as it relates to cigarette news, that was the turning point, 1964, because you will recall he said at that point there was the three pillars of the consensus, forum, and the scientific community, public health community, told the american public smoking causes lung cancer, smoking causes emphysema. 1964. turning point. can we play this? (videotaped deposition played as follows:) q. now, it was known in 1964 that cigarette smokers engaged in highly compulsive use of cigarettes, right? a. yes. q. it was known in 1964 that cigarette smoking had psychoactive effects, right? a. yes. q. and it was known in 1964 that cigarette smoking led to drug reinforced behavior, correct? a. yes. q. all of those things were known in 1964? a. yes. q. it was not some secret that anybody was keeping under wraps, right? a. correct. q. well-known to the medical and scientific community, correct? a. yes. q. as you told us, you know, within the last 30 or 40 minutes, many of these things were known 100 years ago? a. yes. (videotaped deposition was concluded.) mr. persons: known and available. no secret. in fact, the criteria that were just set out in that question that was put to dr. benowitz, it was same criteria that appeared in the 2010 surgeon general's report. what was known and available back in 1964. it was no secret. here's what cheryl lupo said on the stand: "i wish they would have told him years ago that it was bad for him, that it would -- the chemicals." and dr. robert proctor told you that r.j. reynolds disclosed all of the compounds identified in cigarette smoke, including new and previously unknown ones, to the surgeon general's advisory committee in 1964, and the surgeon general's committee published them as carcinogens in smoke in the 1964 surgeon general's report. now, dr. proctor also said, well, they did not point out to the scientists in the surgeon general's office that many of these were carcinogens. well, if you are pointing it out to scientists, they knew, and when they wrote the report, they published them as carcinogens, cancer-causing chemicals. do i need to go through and point out each one of the cancer-causing chemicals if you are a smoker or use shorthand and say, "this will kill you"? what is going to be more useful to you as a consumer, knowing that the product could kill you, or going through and telling you that it contains all these glycerines and all these other compounds? in short, it kills. you saw the psas. it kills. you saw sanford and son. "pop, those things will kill you." 1966, dr. proctor said congress required the cigarette makers to make the label. the warning label had to be prominent. it had to be prominent. and of course it was. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." the plaintiff has stipulated in this case that the warning was adequate, that it was adequate, that it was sufficient. that is what adequacy means. it is sufficient to put the consumer on notice. sufficient to put the smoker on notice of the dangerous nature of this product. it is hazardous to your health. in other words, it is bad for you. it is bad for you. and so she said, "i wish they would have told him years ago that it was bad for you." they did. they told him in the '50s and they told him in 1964 in the surgeon general's report. and, again, for 140,000 times, at least if you are smoking five packs a day, this information was available. now, whether you paid attention to it or not, that is your own business, but it was there. if you do not pay attention to something that is on the product that you are using 100 times a day, what makes you think that he would have paid attention to a memo from r.j. reynolds that said, well, nicotine is addictive? or that there are chemicals in cigarette smoke? no. we know from jeanne dupuis' testimony, she remembers a psa about the warning on the side of the cigarette packs. and this is a psa about the warning on the side of the cigarette packs. would you play that. 6 speaker: we receive many warnings in our life, and sometimes they can save our life. this message is brought to you by the american cancer society. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: the sponsor of the message alone, the name of that organization tells you everything you need to know. if it does not cause cancer, why is the american cancer society telling you that this is a dangerous product? that this is a dangerous activity? but you are an adult, be free to make your own choices but it is a dangerous, dangerous activity. and this kind of information was so widespread, it was so widely known, that the head of the organization, dr. horn, daniel horn, who was with hammond and horn, they did the epidemiological studies in the 1950s. and in the 1960s, daniel horn has become head of what was called the national clearinghouse on smoking and health, a federal agency that was charged with getting out the information to the american public about the dangers of cigarette smoking. and he said in 1968 that you could stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. whether they chose to continue in the activity was their own business, but the public knew. the public had been warned. in 1970, again, labels required to be prominent. this was the warning label: warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. again, there is no dispute in the case that this was an adequate warning, that it was adequate, it was sufficient to put the smoker on notice that this activity is dangerous to your health. it is not good for you. this warning was available to mr. cavalier at least 500,000 times between 1970 and 1985, when the rotating warnings began. over the 15-year period, that warning would have been available to him 500,000 times, and yet he never heeded it. now, there has been a lot of talk about, well, if somebody had told the public about additives, flavorants, in cigarettes, different choices would have been made. now, you heard dr. william farone testify about, in 1972, r.j. reynolds published a book about the ingredients in its cigarettes. it was known in 1972 the tobacco companies were using sugar and licorice and cocoa and chocolate syrup in cigarettes. this book lists hundreds of various flavorants that have been used historically in cigarette products. and in the words of dr. william farone, "comprehensive reference to a number of flavor materials useful for flavoring tobacco and a guide to the current state of the art," and they are all listed here. and it is in evidence. you will have it back there with you. but i submit to you there is page after page after page after page after page after page after page after page, and this is small print. mr. chestnut: you missed one. mr. persons: after page, and it just goes on. these are things that are in the cigarette, and you heard dr. farone said that, yes, it would be available in a public library or medical school library, known and available. known and available. and it goes on and talks about glycerines and things like that, muriatic acid and those kind of things. it is all in there. this is the warning that came out in 1985 and very explicit: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy. i will not go through each of them but the warning is adequate. the plaintiff has admitted that. it is adequate. as a matter of law, it is adequate, and at least more than 140,000 times, it was available to mr. cavalier. in short, mr. cavalier did not need any more information to make an informed choice about smoking or quitting. he chose to continue to smoke. the number of witnesses who said mr. cavalier relied on advertisements for his smoking decisions is zero. you heard a lot of talk about advertising. there will be a lot of ads in evidence. but there is no evidence -- there is no testimony or other evidence that it had anything to do with mr. cavalier's smoking decisions. zero. you heard talk about filter fraud. dr. proctor was saying, well, it was a gimmick or an illusion. there are no r.j. reynolds documents using phrases like "gimmick" or "illusion" to describe filtered cigarettes. there are no documents from the '60s, '70s, or the '80s, where reynolds scientists said they believe smokers are getting just as much tar and nicotine as smokers of nonfiltered cigarettes. there are no documents from the '60s, '70s, or the '80s in which reynolds scientists state that filters are ineffective. in fact, what the internal documents show is that the reynolds scientists expressed that they genuinely believed that filtered cigarettes were better for health. that was their firmly held and genuine belief. none of the witnesses, the family, they did not tell you that mr. cavalier relied on any tobacco company or tobacco industry organization in making his decisions about smoking. he never said he heard any statements from any tobacco company or tobacco industry organization. and that stands to reason. remember, the instruction says reasonable reliance. a story came out a couple weeks ago from the world health organization about bacon causing cancer. i did not see anything from oscar mayer coming out and saying anything about it. but i'm not going to look to oscar mayer or the pork producers for health information about eating pork. who looks to the beef council to tell them anything except beef is what is for dinner? they do not tell you that is bad for you. your doctor tells you, but you do not look to the livestock makers to tell you that the product is bad for you. this is a product that does tell you it is bad for it. it is on the pack it tells you it is bad for you. there is nothing on a pack of bacon that says it causes cancer, but you would not look to oscar mayer to tell you that anyway, or budweiser to tell you that the product can make you intoxicated. now, the frank statement, he had not heard of it. no. mr. cavalier did not rely on the ctr statements? no. the tobacco industry research committee statements? no. tobacco institute statements? no, he did not. tobacco industry press releases? no. he said he did not read the paper. tobacco industry white papers? no. tobacco industry interviews or statements. no evidence that he ever relied on any of these things. tobacco company statements about smoking and health? no evidence. tobacco company statements about smoking and addiction? no. and the case has to be decided on evidence. no evidence of any of these things. no evidence of reliance. all right. i submit to you, based on the evidence in this case, the answer to number 3, did thomas cavalier reasonably rely to his detriment on either a statement or omission of material fact made by r.j. reynolds that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available concerning health effects and that such reliance was a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease and death? no. (off the record discussion.) ms. schneider: there you go. mr. persons: thank you, ms. schneider. ms. schneider: got it. mr. persons: get it even. thank you, ma'am. and then the same thing for number 4. and we go to number 5: was there any fault on the part of thomas cavalier that was a cause of his coronary artery disease and death? we know the answer to that. in light of plaintiff's admission yesterday when mr. gary was before you. so we know that there was fault on part of thomas cavalier. so the answer to that is yes. we do not have to spend any time on that. we know the answer to that is yes. they have admitted that. "please state what percentage of any fault for thomas cavalier's coronary artery disease and death that you charge to r.j. reynolds and thomas cavalier." let us talk about that at this time. we talked yesterday, plaintiff conceded mr. cavalier's fault. ms. fanali admits it was her father's own decision to quit. he could have quit sooner and avoided getting a disease. and what does the admission of fault really mean? it means that mr. cavalier chose to begin smoking despite knowing the risks. that he knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke. that he was not confused about the dangers and addictiveness of smoke, because if you are confused about it, then you cannot have any fault for doing it. you are absolved of fault if you are confused. or if are you a victim of misinformation by the tobacco industry, then you have no fault because you are confused. responsible for quitting smoking. we know that. that is what the admission means. and that he was able to quit smoking at any time. he could have quit soon enough to have avoided the adverse health effects of smoking. that is what the admission means. mr. cavalier never blamed the tobacco companies for his decision to smoke and not quit before he did. in all those years, in conversations with his daughters and with friends, at no time did he ever blame the tobacco companies for the decisions that he made, the decision he made to continue smoking. despite all the information he was provided, despite warnings from his own body. "the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease and death." the but for cause that mr. hohnbaum discussed with you all yesterday. "r.j. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease and death." it is not a comparison of whose choices were worse, r.j. reynolds employees who chose to write stupid things in memos and those papers that were shown to you. but what did that have to do with causing mr. cavalier's coronary artery disease? it was one hundred percent attributable to diabetes. those documents had absolutely nothing to do with it. reynolds' fault starts at zero percent. plaintiff has the burden to prove by the greater weight of the evidence each and every percentage point of reynolds' fault. every bit of it, they have to prove to you, and i submit to you they have absolutely not. "per the court, you may not assign fault to reynolds for mr. cavalier's lung cancer or his copd." that is not reynolds' fault. you cannot assign any fault to reynolds for the lung cancer or copd that mr. cavalier had. that is out. now, we know that mr. cavalier was responsible for his own smoking, that smokers are responsible for it because even the plaintiff's own expert, dr. neal benowitz, was asked this question: and smoking cigarettes does not cause the smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions, correct? correct. responsible. mr. cavalier ignored repeated, specific, personalized warnings for decades. we know that, in the '50s and '60s, he knew that cigarettes were addictive. his daughters told us that. starting in the 1960s, mrs. cavalier was always hollering at mr. cavalier to quit. that came from joseph possidento. he is the man with lou gehrig's disease out in arizona, cousin to mr. cavalier. he said that he could remember back in connecticut, growing up in connecticut, that mrs. cavalier was always hollering at mr. cavalier to quit. and in the early 1960s, jeanne was always complaining that she hated her father's smoking and telling him he was addicted. and he would respond, "yes, i'm addicted." jeanne told her father, "you got to stop smoking," and it is difficult enough being a teenager, but it is especially difficult being a teenage girl. not that i've been one but i raised one. and imagine going to school with smoke on your clothes and being teased by other students about smoke being on your clothes. do you think your father might pick up the phone and call the smoking cessation clinic? you think he might throw out his ashtrays? you think he might refrain from smoking in the house and just go outside to smoke? this is somebody who obviously enjoyed indulging in this activity. no matter how offensive it was to other members of his family, no matter how much it yellowed the walls in his house and soiled the furniture and carpets in his house, and caused his children's clothes to smell of smoke. mr. cavalier developed a cough, he connected it to smoking. the family constantly warned him, from 1974 on, to quit because it was harming his health. now, this is very interesting because joseph possidento is in the throes of lou gehrig's disease, but he remembered to the year when it was that mr. cavalier developed his cough. that is over 40 years ago, but he remembered it distinctly. he did not say in the mid '70s, early '70s. he said 1974. and he also said that he was coughing to the point he was choking. that is a warning from your own body. so you have got a warning from the surgeon general, you have got a warning from the public health community, you have got a warning from your own body. but the plaintiffs want you to believe that, if he got something from r.j. reynolds, that that might change his behavior. the daughter is complaining about smoke in clothes; the wife is hollering at you about quitting smoking; you are coughing to the point that you are choking. but no, if they told him that cigarettes contained polonium, yeah, that will do the trick. that will get him to stop smoking. that will get him to put the cigarettes down. it defies logic. it defies all logic. jeanne told her father, you have got to stop smoking. once he developed this bad cough, possidento told us that the family got on him even more about the need to quit. and the question was asked of possidento, did he associate the cough -- this severe cough with smoking? and the answer was yes. so he knew. he got plenty of warning. he knew. that is the most personal warning you can get, is one from your own body. and then he starts treating for copd. under a doctor's care, a pulmonologist's care for copd. obviously the state of -- standard of care at that time, according to dr. cowen, is that you would tell the patient that, you have got to stop smoking. it is going to make the copd even worse, the more you smoke. a personal warning. mr. cavalier's family and friends developed smoking-related diseases and they died from them. we know that his brother developed bladder cancer that was caused by smoking. we know that mrs. mary yvancek, very close friends, another couple, of the cavalier's, mary yvancek was a smoker, developed lung cancer, was battling lung cancer. and mr. cavalier was aware of this, but he did not quit. the number of witnesses who told you mr. cavalier made any attempts to quit in response to all of these warnings? zero. here's the testimony of donna fanali about mrs. mary yvancek. "question: do you recall your father ever making an effort to quit -- to stop smoking because mary had died of lung cancer from smoking? "answer: no, i do not think so." "did i read that correctly?" "answer: it said, no, i do not think so because of the fact that she had lung cancer. i do not think that he -- it resonated with him. oh, my god, i've got to stop smoking. that is what i mean." well, if this did not resonate with him, what would have? a close personal friend dying of lung cancer from smoking. and you do not even have a conversation about -- about quitting. no, i do not think it resonated with him. the warning labels did not resonate with him, warnings from family members did not resonate with him. developing a horrible cough did not resonate with him. death of a close friend from lung cancer from smoking did not resonate with him. i do not know what would. mr. cavalier's choices are the only legal cause of his coronary artery disease. ms. fanali admitted that no additional information would have mattered. only mr. cavalier had the ability to decide to quit smoking and prevent his death. mr. cavalier received adequate warnings on every pack that he smoked. he is one hundred percent responsible for the choices he made. mr. cavalier's knowledge about the dangers of smoking, plus mr. cavalier's power over his smoking, he was the only one that had power over his own smoking. nobody could force him to stop. and mr. cavalier's responsibility to choose health over smoking, one hundred percent. the next question on the verdict form: "what is the total amount of damages sustained by ann cavalier for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and her pain and suffering as a result of the thomas cavalier's death? any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. and i'm not talking about damages because we are of the position that damages should be awarded to the contrary. i submit to you that no damages should be awarded at all. but it is incumbent upon me to discuss all the questions on the verdict form, and that is why i'm discussing this one. plaintiff is not entitled to recover compensatory damages in the amount -- in excess of the amount which represents the loss actually inflicted by the action of the defendants. the purpose of compensatory damage is to compensate, not to punish the defendants. plaintiff is seeking damages for mrs. cavalier's pain and suffering. now yesterday you heard the figure tossed out of $10 million. and that that might -- well, that defies common sense. plaintiff's claim does not include economic damages. those are damages for lost wages, lost financial support. and this claim does not include anything like medical expenses or funeral expenses. there can be no recovery for mr. cavalier's pain and suffering or donna fanali's pain and suffering or jeanne dupuis's pain and suffering or cheryl lupo's pain and suffering. none of those things are involved in this case, just mrs. cavalier's pain and suffering. again, the damages start at zero. and the plaintiff has to prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence each and every dollar of damages. one of the things that you will have with you, that you have now, is instruction no. 18, and it talks about the credibility of witnesses. and i want to discuss that briefly with you. in evaluating the believability of any witness, and the weight you will give the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness, or lack of frankness, of the witness, and that is what i want to talk about. the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness. and i want to ask you, why were not the plaintiff's witnesses frank with you? cheryl lupo had to be impeached four times. on four occasions, ms. schneider had to show her a deposition and said, "well, you testified differently in here in front of the jury than you did in your deposition where you took the same oath to tell the truth and nothing but the truth so help you god." but you said something different here. well, the truth does not change. you do not have to try to remember it because it does not change. but my grandmother used to say "the truth do not change." that is what she would say. now, jeanne dupuis had to be impeached six times. again, confronted with the deposition. and mr. gary was showing you all those pages of the deposition that they -- the testimony, but impeached because not consistent. donna fanali had to be impeached 10 times, including an impeachment about "well, your father did not lie to the doctors about his quitting smoking, knowing that he did quit." well, both of those things cannot be true. you can take those into account when you are evaluating what these people said, what they told you. and donna fanali filed the lawsuit, mrs. cavalier has been affected by dementia and alzheimer's since 2006. the lawsuit was filed in 2008. before trial, jeanne agreed. donna took it upon herself, upon her own initiative to make the claim. before trial, jeanne did not know whether donna had discussed the lawsuit with their mother when the lawsuit was filed. donna filed the lawsuit after seeing an ad for the gary firm on tv. now, plaintiff wants at least $10 million in damages and it defies common sense. they want millions of dollars for concealing information from mr. cavalier when the plaintiff and her family admit that they did not pay much attention to the warnings that cigarettes could kill you, but they want to recover millions of dollars without even paying attention to the warnings. they say no additional information would have mattered to mr. cavalier in his smoking decisions, but yet they want to recover millions of dollars from r.j. reynolds for not telling him more information. they want millions of dollars when no one knows why mr. cavalier started smoking, there is no evidence about it. millions of dollars when no one knows what brands mr. cavalier smoked before 1961, when he was 38 years old. they showed you all the stuff about youth smoking, a photograph at the teamsters union party with the children with viceroy candy cigarettes, as if that had anything to do with this case, all the stuff about youth smoking and targeting youth. the man is 38 years old before anybody places an r.j. reynolds product in his hand, but they want millions of dollars from reynolds. millions of dollars when mr. cavalier continued to smoke throughout the '50s, '60s, '70s and '80s at the same time millions and millions and millions of other smokers were quitting. millions of dollars when no evidence mr. cavalier relied on any advertisement or any tobacco organization. it defies common sense. millions of dollars when mr. cavalier's family believed that he died of lung cancer until they walked into court for the trial. now, they had a deposition. these depositions were not taken years ago, they were taken last summer. they were taken in july and august of this year. and to a person they were saying well, that -- that their father died of lung cancer. but when they got to the courthouse, all of a sudden it was coronary artery disease that killed him. oh, it is congestive heart failure that killed him. well, what happened between july and now? you said one thing in your deposition, all 700 and some pages of it, talking about, well, lung cancer. and then you come in here and all of a sudden it is constructive -- i mean, that it is congestive heart disease -- coronary artery disease. well, the truth does not change. they want millions of dollars when the plaintiff admits the pack warnings on the cigarettes adequately warned smokers, including mr. cavalier, that it was adequate. it is sufficiently warned you about the dangers of smoking, the adverse health effects of smoking. and the peanut gallery is reminding me that i've got a board here with the warnings on it. plaintiff admits the warnings were adequate as a matter of law. and plaintiff does not dispute their adequacy, that they were sufficient. they put the smoker on notice, give the smoker the sufficient information that this was enough, that you did not have to put all of the chemicals and everything. the pack is so small, you cannot put all that on there anyway. but the shorthand is it will kill you. the shorthand is it causes lung cancer, and heart disease, emphysema, may complicate pregnancy. the shorthand quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. in shorthand, it contains carbon monoxide. that is poison. everybody knows that. you leave the engine running in your car and you are in a garage or an enclosed space, it will kill you. what would you rather know, that it can kill you or that it is -- you want the formulas with all the chemicals in it? it makes no sense at all. but the warning is adequate. that is the point. the warning is adequate. millions of dollars is what they want, when plaintiffs admit that any additional information would not have mattered to mr. cavalier. they are asking for millions of dollars when plaintiff admitted mr. cavalier loved cigarettes. he loved smoking. he did what he loved doing, to the tune of five packs a day. and no, we are not faulting him. nobody is in here disparaging him or casting aspersions on him or engaging in an activity that he loved. what we do take issue with is someone coming in and wanting compensation because the man indulged in an activity that he loved doing. "please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted." no. the judge will instruct you that if you find punitive damages are warranted, you will return for a second phase of trial which we will anticipate -- we anticipate will take a day or two. i submit to you, you answer "no," and it is over. the burden of proof on the other issues in the case, it is been by the greater weight of the evidence. you heard us talking about greater weight of the evidence. well, in order to get punitive damages, entitlement to punitive damages, the plaintiff has to prove to you by clear and convincing evidence, and that is a different standard, it is a much higher standard, it is not beyond a reasonable doubt, but it is much higher than greater weight of the evidence -- much higher than greater weight of the evidence. the law will provide us some direction on that. now punitive damages can be awarded only for concealment and agreement to conceal information that was a legal cause of mr. cavalier's death. information that but for the concealment of that information, the omission of that information, mr. cavalier would have quit smoking and not died -- not died of a smoking-related disease. you may not punish reynolds for any harm suffered by anyone other than mr. cavalier. and you heard time and again about all the people who are dying across the country from smoking-related illnesses. no, it does not have anything to do with mr. cavalier. this case is about mr. cavalier. any punitive damages awarded are in addition to damages that fully compensate mrs. cavalier. and punitive damages can be awarded only -- can be awarded to mrs. cavalier only. they cannot be awarded to the american cancer association, or the american lung association or anything of that sort. whatever punitive damages are awarded, and i submit to you that they should not be, can only be awarded to ann cavalier. here is instruction no. 15: for purposes of determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may not -- you may not consider in any way engle findings. you cannot consider them. not at all. no. the law is you cannot consider them. the engle findings do not establish that ms. fanali is entitled to recover punitive damages on behalf of her mother. in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may also take into consideration any mitigating evidence. and mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate there is no need to impugn -- impose punitive damages against reynolds. and i submit to you there is no need to impose punitive damages against reynolds. and i will tell you why. dr. proctor testified that over the years, that reynolds has engaged in a number of efforts to make a less hazardous cigarette. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. question: now, the historical record demonstrates that the tobacco companies tried to make a cigarette that was less hazardous, understanding there is no such thing as a safe cigarette, they tried to make a cigarette that was less hazardous. answer: many cigarettes, they used catalysts in the '50s. they used special breeding techniques in the '60s. they used genetic engineering. they used nicotine-free cigarettes. they developed premier and eclipse at reynolds to develop a cigarette that would heat, not burn tobacco. there were many. if you listed all the genuine efforts, there would be many dozens. dozens of efforts to try to make the product less hazardous, recognizing that it is deadly, that there is no way to make it completely safe. from the '50s to the '90s, reynolds made efforts to remove known carcinogens from smoke. dr. proctor testified to this. they started developing heat, not burn technology. spent a billion dollars back in the '80s trying to develop a less harmful cigarette. and it failed because people would not buy it due to the taste. you cannot make consumers buy things they do not want to buy. take the nicotine out. that is what you heard dr. proctor say. well, if they took the nicotine out then it would be -- it would be safer because people would smoke less of it or they would not smoke it and then people would not use it. well, r.j. reynolds and philip morris manufactured denicotinized cigarettes. it sold poorly, or they sold poorly, and they were rejected by consumers. and dr. farone told you that they were severely criticized by the antismoking community as the most dangerous product to be put on the market in the last 10 years. the public health community petitioned the federal government to force philip morris to stop advertising and selling denicotinized cigarettes. mitigating evidence. r.j. reynolds funded $350 million in research and dr. proctor says it would be several times that amount if you adjust it for inflation. the council for tobacco research funded projects that resulted in more than 7,000 peer-reviewed articles. the surgeon general has cited ctr-funded studies, studies funded by the tobacco companies, more than 600 times. ctr funded research at top universities, including university of florida, university of miami, florida state, and so on, and funded at least ten nobel prize winners. mitigating evidence, the relationship between smoking and copd. that was some of the research that was done, established this relationship between cigarette smoking and copd. some of research established the effects of cigarette smoking on the impairment of lung function among heavy smokers. the effects of inhalation of cigarette smoke on the risk of lung injury and declining lung function. articles on addiction and withdraw. all of this funded by the tobacco industry, and there is no evidence that the funding was cut off. now, dr. proctor sat there on direct examination in the course of a day a better part of a second day and said, oh, yeah, when they did things that were critical of tobacco, that showed a link between smoking and adverse health effects, the funding got cut off. well, on cross-examination, he was asked about each of those. have you seen anything where that indicates that dr. janoff's financing was cut off? no. have you seen anything to indicate dr. lombard's funding was cut off by anything. no. you have looked at all these documents -- millions of pages of documents, he said. have you seen anything that dr. knapp's founding was cut off because he published an article that said that smoking was addictive back in 1963? no. dr. hanes? no. dr. bosse? no. have you seen anything about any scientist's funding being cut off because they published something that was adverse to the tobacco industry? absolutely not. dr. farone testified about the tobacco working group, and he told you that it was a collaboration between the federal government, the public health community, and the tobacco industry. now, the tobacco working group, that is people from the american heart association and the american cancer society, the federal government, and people from the tobacco industry. they never recommended that tobacco industry remove any additives or flavors or ammonia or humectants -- and humectants include glycerol. that keeps the tobacco moist, the same thing in opening statements, you were told that, well, glycerine, that is the same thing that is in antifreeze. but it is not antifreeze that is in the tobacco. it is just a chemical component that is similar to one found in antifreeze. the tobacco working group recommended that companies manipulate nicotine and tar levels in cigarettes. and dr. farone said, yeah, well, you can. manipulate. it has a negative connotation. manipulate. but what they did was they adjusted the amount of nicotine in the cigarette in an effort to lower the amount of -- while lowering the amount of tar, recognizing that the tar is what causes disease, not the nicotine, so that someone smoking the cigarette would get a certain level of nicotine and at the same time get less tar. and so that is what this group, government officials, public health officials, people from the tobacco companies, recommended that the companies manipulate tar and nicotine levels in cigarettes in an effort to make them less hazardous. more mitigating evidence, evidence of why reynolds should not be punished. since 1986, reynolds has disclosed to congress the ingredients and additives in its cigarettes, and since 2009, reynolds has disclosed to the food and drug administration its formulas for all cigarette products and disclosed to the fda all research done on the ingredients and the additives. well, the bottom line is that the tobacco industry is becoming obsolete. dr. proctor told you that. smoking is denormalized and marginalized in today's society, and ever since the surgeon general's report came out in 1964, this society has been marching toward that end. smoking rates are at their lowest level since the 1920s. the cigarette is a horse and buggy technology, according to dr. proctor. we are in a period of collapse of smoking. smoking is on its way out. it is no longer socially acceptable. it is stigmatized to smoke. and among youth, youth smoking has dropped 66 percent since 1966, and in all the 50 states, of all the 50 states in the united states of america, there is only one state that has lower rates of youth smoking than florida, and that is utah, which is heavily mormon and the mormons said no drinking, no smoking, do not even use caffeine. it is against their religion. only that state has a higher -- has a lower rate of youth smoking than florida. cigarettes are stigmatized. teenagers today are more likely to smoke marijuana or drink alcohol than smoke cigarettes. smoking is on its way out. you heard all this stuff about youth marketing and our selling to youngsters, references to our children. well, our children are not smoking. they are doing some other things, but they are not smoking. and then if you want to take up an activity, it does not have to be advertised. there is no advertising for marijuana. you do not see any ads for marijuana, but people are using it. that is because it is becoming more socially acceptable. the social forces in the country are leaning in that direction, with states legalizing marijuana for medicinal and recreational use. the evidence demonstrates there is no need to impose punitive damages. in deciding whether punitive damages are warranted, you may not seek to punish r.j. reynolds for any harm suffered by any individuals other than thomas cavalier. mr. acosta: your honor, i object to that. that is a misstatement of the law. the court: he is just reading from the final jury instructions. mr. persons: i'm reading the instructions, and it is instruction 15. nor may you punish r.j. reynolds for conduct that did not produce harms within the state of florida. the clerk: ten minutes, counsel. mr. persons: thank you. i thought i had turned it off. i apologize. okay. we talked about damages, and you should not even get there. punitive damages warranted? no. there goes the clicker. i'm almost done. i know we need a break. you are going to get one, i'm sure. summing up, mr. cavalier did not die from coronary artery disease caused by smoking. he died from copd. the coronary artery disease that he did have was caused by diabetes, one hundred percent. no evidence that mr. cavalier smoked r.j. reynolds cigarettes before 1961 when he was 38 years old. in fact, there is no physical evidence of r.j. reynolds' product being smoked by mr. cavalier. all of the photographs that have cigarette packs in them have parliament cigarettes in front of mr. cavalier. that is a philip morris product, not an r.j. reynolds product. we have donna said that he smoked kools, but we do not have anything that we can look at to verify or confirm that. donna also said on the stand that, well, he bought more kools, he bought them by the carton, while he bought parliament by the pack; yet in all the photographs there is parliament and not kool. some of the photographs go back before the children were born. parliament, not kools. mr. cavalier continued to smoke for decades despite repeated specific warnings about the dangers, starting before he ever smoked an r.j. reynolds cigarette. mr. cavalier always had the ability to quit but continued to smoke -- continued to smoke until he was motivated to quit, and then he quit in 1989. mr. cavalier's smoking decisions were not influenced by anything r.j. reynolds said or anything r.j. reynolds did. and here is dr. cuyler hammond, and this was a broadcast about the research. you see, when they did this research, it was big news, and so you did not have to read, you could sit in front of your television or in front of your radio and get this information that is coming out about the dangers, the health risks of smoking. here's dr. cuyler hammond talking about the research he and daniel horn did, the epidemiological studies, that demonstrated, according to dr. cuyler hammond, beyond a reasonable doubt the link between smoking and lung cancer. would you play it, mr. smith? 5 dr. hammond: it is now subject to my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they want to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: and then when the surgeon general's report came out, the news covered that. 16 harry reasoner: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him that it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: and that is consistent with what donna fanali told us. whether or not he was going to quit was his own decision, and when he made that decision, when he made up his mind he was going to quit, that is when he quit. i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming that it was mr. cavalier's fault for his smoking, and not that of anyone else. only he had control of it, and no one else should be blamed for it. and if you apply the law to the facts, the evidence, based on the evidence that you have heard in the courtroom, the evidence points in only one direction, and that is a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. i thank you for your kind attention.