mr. geise: ms. shamp, ms. bryan, mrs. clayton. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. once again it is the bottom of an inning, and once again i want to start by thanking you all for your service. as i said in voir dire and opening statements, we could not have a jury trial without a jury. so you are pretty essential to this process. the lawyers, we have to be here. we choose to do this for a living. mrs. clayton is here; she chose to file a lawsuit. but you did not choose any 2862 of this. you were drafted to seat here with us for a couple of weeks. and there is a range of ways that people can make a contribution in our country. some serve in the armed forces, they serve our country that way. many of us vote on election day. that is a small contribution. for the past two weeks you have contributed by serving on a jury. so whatever you decide, whatever your verdict is, you can go home to your friends, to your family, to your co-workers, and you can tell them that you contributed to help making this country what it is, because you have. and because you did, and for the two weeks of service you have put in, i want to thank you on behalf of myself, mr. carter, our team, and my client. we appreciate it. now, when this case started last week i told you that this case is not about other smokers, it is only about david clayton. and in particular, this case is about the choices he made when it came to smoking. as this case draws to a close that is what it is still about. two weeks ago i told you you would hear an avalanche of information about things that have 2863 nothing to do with david clayton. and you did. in fact, you heard a lot of that again this afternoon. you heard about things that judge mccaulie said had already been resolved in that other case, things that i told you in my opening statement were not in dispute. dr. burns and dr. wright. they spent a lot of time telling you that smoking causes lung cancer. you heard that from judge mccaulie and from me on day 1. it was not an issue then. it is not an issue now. dr. burns and dr. werner spent a lot of time telling you cigarette smoking is addictive. you heard that from judge mccaulie, you heard that from me on day 1. it was not an issue then. it is not an issue now. and this case is also not about whether cigarettes should be legal. they are. they are legal to manufacture, they are legal to advertise, they are legal to sell. those are all legal acts. and in this case you heard reynolds does that. cigarettes are also legal to smoke. everyone has the right to smoke or not to smoke. and smokers like mr. clayton make the choice to smoke cigarettes, and that is a legal act too. 2864 now, throughout my closing argument i'm going to walk through the evidence you heard. some of it i agree with ms. shamp, some of it i do not. and i'm also going to revisit some of the things you were promised in opening statement to see if the parties kept their word. and if you recall, in opening statement i told you you would hear two versions of david clayton's story, the lawsuit david clayton versus the real david clayton. and you did. the plaintiff tried to tell you a story of lawsuit david clayton as somebody who was out of control, who never quit until after he had surgery for his lung cancer. on the other hand, we presented evidence. you saw lots of evidence about the real david clayton, in his own medical records and in his own words, things he told his doctors to get treatment for the diseases he had at the time he had them. and we showed you that the real david clayton was someone who made a number of unhealthy choices, including smoking, all against his doctor's wishes and orders. and he did not make those choices out of addiction. he made those choices because that is what he wanted to do. 2865 and i also told you in opening statement that the plaintiff would probably tell you half the story on a lot of things, and that you would probably have to wait until the bottom of the inning to hear the other half. the plaintiff did just that. the witness who had the most half stories to tell was dr. proctor. and you remember him. he was the guy, the million-and-a-half-dollar man. he had the travel itinerary. this was already his sixth trial this year, and we are just in march. now, ms. shamp said dr. giakas is a hired gun because he spent 160 hours on this case reading thousands of pages to prepare to come here. he is a hired gun. dr. proctor has made a million and-a-half dollars. and how many hours did he tell you he spent preparing for this case? zero. but dr. giakas is the hired gun. and dr. proctor came here, and he could not tell you anything about david clayton, nothing about his story. you recall i was going through a laundry list of things with dr. proctor: you do not know this, you do not know that, you do not know this, you did not look at that. and it is simple. i said, all right, now, dr. 2866 proctor, are you here to testify specifically about david clayton? he said, no, not at all. but nothing at all is sometimes better than half of it all. and how many times did i have to show you the rest of the story with dr. proctor? he would plant the nugget in your heads during direct examination and then wait to see if i bring out the other side of the story in cross. so i did. i did it often. you remember that ms. shamp, in her opening she talked about the winston ad with the flintstones? and i told you in opening statement there was another half to that. not deterred she talked about that ad with dr. proctor, planting the seed that reynolds uses cartoons and advertisements with kids. but on cross you learned the other half of the story. dr. proctor gave it up. the flintstones were originally an adult come modeled after the honeymooners and aired in the evening, and the other sponsors on the flintstones were alka seltzer and one a day vitamins. and i played you an ad that showed fred and wilma with alka seltzer and one a day. dr. proctor did not tell you that. and you learned that mr. clayton was grown man when the flintstones debuted. you learned that 2867 reynolds never advertised on flintstones after it moved to the mornings. and the last part of the story that they did not share is there was no evidence that mr. clayton ever watched the flintstones. another half story. teague 53. i think it was the first document that ms. shamp showed you in her closing argument today. and it told you that dr. teague did this research project and found out all this information about cigarettes, and that he did not make any of that research public. but on cross you heard that the research was already public. remember the 78 articles cited in teague's 53 memo? all public literature. now, dr. proctor talked about that some of them were in a german journal, or some of them were just an abstract. well, i'm sorry dr. teague had to work a little harder to find those out there, but it was all public. another example was kind of at the end of ms. shamp's closing where she talked about internal company research about nicotine, and she suggests that, you know, this research is a way to find a level to keep smokers hooked. but on cross-examination with dr. proctor you 2868 heard there was another side of this nicotine story. you heard that some of this research was done at the urging of public health officials in conjunction with the national cancer institute and under the instigation of the surgeon general. and it was done as a way to try to find a less hazardous cigarette. that was the name of the nci tobacco working group program. it was towards a less hazardous cigarette. the idea was if we can get the tar down and keep the nicotine up maybe that is better, because tar kills and nicotine is why people are smoking. now, ms. shamp calls that nicotine manipulation. but as you heard, the national cancer institute called it progress. dr. proctor did not tell you any of that on direct. another misleading half story: joe camel. do you remember hearing about joe camel? dr. proctor alleged joe camel made people smoke. now, since dr. proctor did not know anything about mr. clayton, he probably did not know that mr. clayton was in his 50's when joe camel debuted, and he had not smoked camel cigarettes for years before it came out. but surely dr. proctor knew that his allegations had been investigated and shot down by 2869 the ftc. you remember this slide that you saw? the ftc investigated in 1994 and said: although it may seem intuitive to some that the joe camel advertising campaign would lead more children to smoke, or lead children to smoke more, the evidence to support that intuition is not there. another half story, the frank statement. you heard a lot, you saw a lot about the frank statement, probably a lot more than you ever wanted to know, and you are ready to forget about it. but before you do, remember what ms. shamp told you in her opening she said the frank statement ran in every newspaper. at the time i thought that was a little bit of an overreach. dr. proctor took the stand and said it ran in all these papers, hundreds of papers around the country. okay. that is probably accurate. i think it was, but they left out a very important part of the story, the part of the story that has to do with david clayton. he lived in moultrie, georgia in 1954. so the obvious question is, did the frank statement run in the moultrie observer. now, the plaintiffs have this exhibit. i think 2870 it may be their exhibit 493. it is our exhibit ans1405. and i used it with dr. proctor. and what did it show? let us take a look at it. it showed that the frank statement ran in atlanta, atlanta, augusta, columbus, macon, and savannah. but the one city that does not appear on that list is moultrie, and the newspaper that does not appear on that is the moultrie observer. ms. shamp and dr. proctor knew that, but they did not tell you that. i had to do it when we got to the other half of the story. so no matter how many times the frank statement comes up, we know david clayton never saw it, and neither did anyone else in moultrie, georgia. again half the story. dr. burns and dr. proctor showed you lots of memos from bench-level scientists and other employees at reynolds. but there was one, and i had to show dr. proctor, that he did not show you. let us look at this. this is in 1968. it is from the president of r.j. reynolds to their head of research and development. and this is their area of special emphasis: in cooperation with others you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. prepare a plan. foster any relationship with the 2871 government. if there is a safer cigarette let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. this memo was not prepared as a trial exhibit. it was a directive to continue. that means the work had already started, and they wanted to increase their efforts to find a safer cigarette. and you heard about some of those efforts, and we will talk about that. so why did you have to wait until cross-examination to get the full story, the side the plaintiff did not want to tell you? the answer is simple. to get you mad. dr. burns and dr. proctor were not here to offer a single opinion about mr. clayton. in fact, they could not, because they did not know a single fact about mr. clayton. they were here to get you mad in the hopes that you would decide the case based on emotion instead of the facts of mr. clayton's case. because if you focus on the real david clayton, unlike dr. proctor or dr. burns, the plaintiff loses. the plaintiff loses because she cannot meet the burden of proving what caused his death. the plaintiff loses because the real david clayton 2872 was not addicted. he maintained control over his smoking choices, and he smoked because he wanted to until he was motivated to quit. the plaintiff loses because any addiction mr. clayton had was not the legal and substantial cause of his injury. instead, his choices to smoke, along with a lot of other things he was told not to do, were the legal causes of his actions and their consequences. and finally, the plaintiff loses because she cannot prove a link between anything reynolds said or did not say and any smoking decision mr. clayton ever made. now, you might recall i showed this slide in opening statement. these are the three burdens the plaintiff has, and i think ms. shamp went through them in her closing argument: smoking causation, addiction, and addiction causation. and i agree with ms. shamp -- can we get the first question from the verdict form? do you not have it? that is fine. i agree with ms. shamp that the first question on the verdict form basically includes those three issues. those are the three things that ms. shamp needs to prove. and if they do not prove one of them, they lose. two out of three is not good enough. 2873 so you need to agree on each and every hurdle in order for them to prevail on the first question. if you do not agree on one of them, they lose. and i think the evidence will show they lose on each of the three. let us start with the cause of death issue. i told you in my opening statement that the evidence about the cause of death may be a little bit confusing, and i think it was. now, instead of hearing from any doctor whoever treated, whoever saw mr. clayton, you heard from dr. wright. dr. wright is a professional witness. i think he told mr. carter that he is testified over 1500 times, and he said most of those cases deal with electrocutions. and dr. wright showed you certain pathology, pathology slides, and he talked about features on those that showed that david clayton had been a smoker. then he said, as a result smoking caused his lung cancer. but dr. wright showed you pictures from mr. clayton's 1994 lung cancer, not from his 2005 lung cancer. and dr. wright admitted that he was cured from his 1994 lung cancer, and that the 2005 lung cancer was a completely different event. so the 2874 slides that dr. wright showed you do not have anything to do with the 2005 lung cancer. we do not know what those slides look like. and there is no question that mr. clayton was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2005. there is no dispute over that. and there is no dispute that dr. rice did treat him for that lung cancer. you saw the medical records. and i know i said it in opening that dr. rice was mr. clayton's pulmonologist. that is just what dr. wright told us at his deposition. if he is only an internal medicine doctor, so be it. either way, it does not change the fact that dr. rice treated david clayton for lung cancer. and no one claims that dr. rice did not know that smoking causes lung cancer. in fact, dr. wright told you that doctors have known that and warned their patients about it since the 1960's. so dr. rice knew he had lung cancer, and he treated him for it, and he even mentioned lung cancer on that medical record, remember, he filled out about an hour before mr. clayton passed away. so it was in his mind. even so, dr. rice did not conclude that lung cancer was one of the five potential causes of mr. clayton's death. ms. shamp talked about the evidence you have 2875 and the records you have. the only record that says anything about the cause of mr. clayton's death is the death certificate. and you saw it. it is signed by dr. rice, and it has -- there is four lines there, and dr. wright told you you can put four things there, and then you can also put something else in this box if you want. when dr. rice filled it out he said: respiratory failure, pulmonary embolism, and copd. he knew that mr. clayton had lung cancer, but he did not list it. and what else did dr. rice say on the death certificate? let us look at the next slide. he is asked specifically by the state of florida: does tobacco, or did tobacco use contribute to death? dr. rice did not say yes, dr. rice did not say probably. he said it was unknown. unknown does not equal proof. one other point about dr. wright's opinion, because it kind of came up during i think his -- in his direct examination mr. carter asked him about it. but he said that, you know, that pulmonary embolism, that -- that -- i agree that could have caused his death. and he suggested that that embolism could be related to the lung cancer. 2876 well, you saw a disability record back in the early 1990's that said that mr. clayton suffered from immobility because of that disability. and dr. wright said that immobility from the lung cancer could have led to the pulmonary embolism. now, dr. wright did not talk about those disability records, because the plaintiff never gave them to him to review. so we did not get to ask him about it. so the plaintiff has the burden of proving what caused david clayton's death, and the evidence may be a little bit confusing, but there is not a lot of it out there about mr. clayton, but we know that the death certificate from the state of florida does not mention lung cancer, and we know that matter what the cause, whether it was copd, or pulmonary embolism, or lung cancer, the doctor who filled out the death certificate did not say it was caused by smoking. if it was not proven to dr. rice, it was not proven to you either. now, i told you in opening statement that you would hear two versions of david clayton's story, and you did. the plaintiff's version came from witnesses talking about events that happened 20, 30, 2877 40, 50 years ago. and the lawsuit version of david clayton's story portrays him as a heavy, heavy smoker, compulsive, out of control, went from 2, to 3, to 4 packs per day, and unable to quit until after he had lung cancer. but you saw a different version of david clayton's smoking history, a different version of how much he smoked, when he stopped. a version that showed a man very much in control of his smoking. and that version was told by mr. clayton himself. although he was not here to take the witness stand, you know a lot about what he did from his medical records. years before this lawsuit he told his doctors things they needed to know in order to treat him. these were statements taken at the time the events happened. these are not memories 20 years later for purposes of a lawsuit. these are evidence of the real david clayton. now, ms. shamp talked about credibility and believability. and there is a jury instruction on that, and you should read that. and when it comes to witness' memories and testimony, please consider this: when each witness walks in this courtroom and holds their hand up and they take an oath to tell the truth, that is the same oath each of these 2878 witnesses took in their depositions. but as you saw over and over, the story that the witnesses told about the real david clayton in their depositions changed when they came to court to talk about lawsuit david clayton. and some were kind of simple discrepancies. you recall mrs. clayton's daughter vanessa. she came into court and she talked about how close her relationship had been with her stepfather, but mr. carter had to show her what she said in her deposition where she said: i appreciate what he done for us, but we was not close. there were more with willie mccullough, jr., mrs. clayton's son. let us look at some of those. in his deposition he said mr. clayton said he enjoyed smoking. trial testimony, he did not think so. before his first cancer he said that his mother told mr. clayton he should quit, but here he did not think so. he said mr. clayton used to tell him smoking was bad, but at trial said he did not. he said he only asked mr. clayton to pull off the road once or twice on that that trip to disney, but on the stand he said they stopped at every rest stop. he said he never saw mr. clayton smoke after his lung was removed in his depo, but here at trial he 2879 said he saw it once or twice. and in his deposition he said, yeah, he drank 3 or 4 beers on friday, 3 or 4 on saturday, but at trial he did not know how much mr. clayton drank. mr. mccullough said one thing in his deposition about the real david clayton and something different at trial about the lawsuit david clayton. and so did mrs. clayton. let us look at the comparison of her testimony. remember she told me that she saw him smoke after his lung surgery at trial, but then i had to impeach her with her deposition testimony where she said she did not. she also at her deposition said there was no place he would not go because he was not allowed to smoke there, but at trial she said he refused go certain places. she said she did not notice any difference when he was chewing gum to quit in her deposition, but here at trial she said, oh, yeah, i noticed something, he looked tired. in her deposition she said, i do not know what he knew about the harms of smoking, but at trial she said she knew he did not think they would harm him. and this was the one that surprised me the most. in her deposition she said her husband was intelligent. but remember when i asked her that 2880 question on the stand? she would not even agree with that. now, one thing about the question of whether he knew cigarettes were harmful. you also remember that mrs. clayton said at the beginning of their marriage in 1979 that is when she started to get on him about smoking. and there were two reasons she got on him. one, she did not want him dropping ashes all over, burning up the house. that was one reason. the second reason was it was not healthy, harmful to him. 1979. again, one thing is said in a deposition about the real david clayton, and something different was said at trial about lawsuit david clayton. ms. shamp said you look to see if people are trying to describe the person in a certain way to seek their needs, or suit their needs. i agree. each time the story at trial is to support the story about lawsuit david clayton that was completely contrary to the story in deposition about the real david clayton, a story at deposition that came under the same oath that these witnesses took when they testified before you. so now let me talk a little bit about addiction. and you will need to decide what addiction 2881 means in this case. you heard expert testimony, and there is a lot of testimony about addiction, but the court and your instructions do not have a definition. now, first of all, if you look through all the medical records you will not see a medical record from a doctor who treated mr. clayton that reveals a diagnosis of addiction. you will not. and you heard that people who are addicted experience a loss of control, or as dr. giakas said, they become significantly impaired and distressed. mr. clayton's control over his smoking is documented in record after record from the time when he was a cigarette smoker. let us look at these. and i'm not going to go through these one-by-one. i know you folks have been paying attention, and i know we put these up probably more than you wanted to see them in the last two weeks. you saw these. from '79 to '93 every time mr. clayton reported his smoking it was one pack per day, or even less, sometimes down to 1 to 3 cigarettes per day. all of these are in evidence. you can look at them. i want to show you one from 1982. it says, smokes half a pack per day. and the reason i want 2882 to show you this one is david clayton signed this one. it is not some random doctor somewhere who fills it out and he does not have any idea what they put down. he signed the paper. and over the course of 14 years, from 1979 to 1993, before he was diagnosed with lung cancer, before there was a lawsuit, he consistently told his doctors he smoked one pack per day, or less. over 20 years later in this lawsuit the witnesses want to tell you those records are wrong, even the one mr. clayton signed. the real david clayton told doctor after doctor for many years when he was trying to get treatment for himself for his ulcers, for his stomach, that he did not smoke more than a pack a day, that he controlled how much he smoked. now in this lawsuit they want you to think he smoked 2, 3, or even 4 packs per day. now, one point about the friends and family members that you heard from about his smoking history. and i agree with ms. shamp. i think everyone said he was a heavy smoker. he would smoke throughout the day. but the interesting thing was the only one of them who was a cigarette smoker himself was lee bonner. ms. shamp: objection, your honor. 2883 the court: hold on a second. (sidebar conference outside the hearing of the jury.) the court: okay. let us see here. yes, ma'am. ms. shamp: your honor, we moved in limine to keep out evidence of other people smoking. and so for him to suggest now that the only people that have evidence of cigarette smoking i think is improper. mr. geise: she asked mr. bonner, did you smoke with him when you were growing up? yes. they asked mr. gavin, did you smoke with him? no, i smoked cigars. they talked about the smoking history of those folks. ms. shamp: your honor, it is improper to suggest that the only person who testified was a cigarette smoker. that is not true. that is a false statement by counsel. the court: okay. mr. geise: your honor, you know what? i'll clear it up. you would agree that gloria and willie are not cigarette smokers? ms. shamp: yeah. mr. geise: okay. and you agree mr. bonner 2884 was? ms. shamp: yeah. mr. geise: and smith gavin was not? ms. shamp: right. mr. geise: okay. i will not mention anybody else. i'll use those four or five names and no one else. the court: i think the door was opened in the testimony about it, and you can rebut if there is a discrepancy about his argument. ms. shamp: he can rebut, but i do not think he can say -- the court: no, you can rebut. ms. shamp: i know, but i do not think he can say something that because of the court's ruling is actually just not true, and that was my complaint. the court: okay. (following sidebar.) mr. geise: may i continue, your honor? the court: i'll overrule the objection. you may continue. mr. geise: so of all the witnesses you heard from, i want to talk about lee bonner. he was the one who talked about he was a cigarette smoker. and lee bonner was mr. clayton's lifelong friend from 2885 the time he was young until late in his life. and he said mr. clayton was about a 1 to 1-and-a-half pack per day smoker, and he was not a chainsmoker. now, i realize that mrs. clayton, who is not a smoker, and willie mccullough, who is not a smoker, and smith gavin, who said he smoked cigars, not cigarettes, may have said something else. but mr. bonner knows smoking behavior because he is a smoker. maybe to non-smokers it may seem like mr. clayton was smoking two packs a day, but to a smoker like lee bonner it was only a pack to pack and-a-half. and that what is dr. giakas and dr. werner kind of agreed on, pack, pack and-a-half, two. and they told you that the information in this case was kind of all across the board, sometimes down to 1 to 3, sometimes higher, depending on the deposition, but that is where they all came out. and the disparity about what mr. clayton said about his smoking history while he was being treated, while he was a smoker, and what he said years later, a decade after he quit, is pretty telling. you recall that the attorneys made a cheat sheet for dr. wright. instead of going through all 2886 the records that had a smoking history on them, they just made a list of all of them for him. i think this is plaintiff's exhibit 50. and that cheat sheet shows what i'm trying to explain. let us look at the first exhibit. before 1994, before mr. clayton is -- and at the time he is diagnosed with lung cancer -- and i cut it off here. before that every record says a half pack per day, or one pack per day at the most back in 1979. everything after that is less than a half pack per day. this is the plaintiff's exhibit. this is their summary of it. this is their cheat sheet for dr. wright. now let us go to the back half of their exhibit. this is after 2005. there is a couple records in 2000 and 2002 that did say he is not smoking, but they do not say how much. after that, that is when they start to say, oh, it is a pack and-a-half per day, it is 100-pack-year history. that is where those records are in there. and remember something. these records never say 3 or 4 packs per day. they do not. and recall something else about these doctor visits. this is the time when mrs. clayton said she 2887 started going to the doctor with mr. clayton. that is when the numbers start to go up. so the plaintiff's cheat sheet makes it clear. it is proof that the real david clayton, while he was a smoker, said one thing, and the story for lawsuit david clayton is another. i told you during opening statement you would hear some simple facts about nicotine, and you did, facts about nicotine, nicotine addiction. i'm going to put the slide up. you saw these. i do not think anybody disagreed. ms. shamp in her closing brought up brain receptors again, nicotinic receptors. i think dr. werner finally agreed, and i know dr. giakas told you that those changes are not permanent. and while there are nicotinic receptors, you heard there are caffeine receptors, and everything else. any substance like that causes that. you get up regulation, you stop using it and it goes back to normal. and i think when dr. werner talks about nicotine hijacking the brain, she said caffeine also hijacks the brain. substances work the same. now, the one thing that is interesting is we talked about quitting. can smokers quit? yes, 2888 every smoker can quit. and what percentage of them are addicted came up, and plaintiffs put in some evidence on that. and it was funny. when ms. shamp had one of her slides up in her closing argument, i do not know if you noticed it, there was a typo at the bottom of one and it said, statistical poof. i think she meant proof. but i think statistical poof kind of funny, because they kept putting on the dsm-4 book saying 80 to ninety percent of people are addicted. well, the statistical poof is dsm-5 that says fifty percent. fifty percent. half are, half are not. they want to keep telling you everybody is, and you should assume david clayton was addicted because 80 to ninety percent of the people are. well, maybe that was the science back then, but you have the benefit of the science today. and you will not be instructed that you need to base your verdict on outdated science. you can base it on science you got today. they show you the 2014 surgeon general's report, the 2010 surgeon general's report. look at the 2013 dsm-5. and that says fifty percent of current daily smokers are addicted. half and half. so when 2889 they want to tell you about 80 or ninety percent of everybody's addicted, statistical poof. now, dr. werner used the slide to depict the addiction cycle. remember that? and one of the things she left off that i had to bring up is the fact that over 60 million smokers, including millions of addicted smokers, stop for good. 60 million. mr. clayton was one of them. these are the facts. these are the facts you have in this case. i want to talk a little bit about dsm-5. both dr. werner and dr. giakas talked about it. and i'm compelled to point out a couple things about dr. werner. i appreciate that ms. shamp put up some of her qualifications, and she is at the university of florida, and i do not knock what she is doing there. you saw dr. giakas' resume today where they tried to take a shot at him for apparently not putting that he was the chairman of the psychiatry department on his resume, until he pointed out where it was on his resume. so he is had positions too at hospitals, and he is done lots of important things at those places treating people. and his practice is treating people day in and day out. 2890 but a couple points about dr. werner. you saw her syllabus called the addictionologist in court. do you remember that? and i walked through some of the power point slides with her. and she follows her own advice right down to what she wore to this courtroom yesterday. and she tried, as it said on her slide, to control the cross. remember she gave me a hard time? it was a tough cross. i mean, she would not give me an answer. i had to impeach her a lot of times. i lost track of how many times i had to impeach her with something she told a different jury earlier this year, or told me in her deposition two months ago. why? what is she afraid of? why is she trying to control the cross? was she trying to divert attention away are from the fact that she lost the two questionnaires she had mrs. clayton fill out? she said she has three tools she relies on. two of them are not in her toolbox. she lost them. had her fill them out, and lost them. and then while she finally admitted that she does not know what is on them, she was confident, confident that they were consistent with the way she filled them out. 2891 but let us look at her own fagerstrom questionnaires. remember she filled out two of them? she filled out. let us look at them side-by-side. and i'm not going to go through all the questions. i mean, sometimes she answers one, sometimes she does not. but she answered it in september, if you add them up, 3 plus 3 is 6. add them up in january she comes up with 7. medium. high. it is interesting that as we got closer to trial and dr. werner filled out the fagerstrom questionnaire again, that not only were her answers not consistent, but she found a higher level of dependence, making it higher for when the addictionologist came to court. now, i also want to talk about dsm-5 and dr. werner. and this story is either interesting or confusing. she says that she cannot use dsm-5 with her patients, despite the fact that it came out last may, and she explains that it is impossible to do it because the codes are different in dsm-4 tr and dsm-5. well, after i pointed out that the code numbers are exactly the same and dsm-5 just has the icd-9 and icd-10. and dr. giakas told you he is been using 2892 it since may, and he is not had a problem getting things reimbursed from insurance. dr. werner comes back on redirect and says, oh, you know, i do not do the billing. well, based on the fact that she lost mrs. clayton's questionnaire, we know she does not do the recordkeeping either. so here's some facts about dsm-5. came out in may. same codes as dsm-4 tr. dr. giakas used it immediately in his clinical practice. dr. werner still has not used it in her practice, but her attorneys asked her to use it in this case. and dr. giakas -- dr. werner told you that psychiatrists can look at the dsm-5, and using their clinical judgment and experience they can disagree. it happens, and it did here. dr. giakas came up with a different opinion than dr. werner did. dr. giakas though used the same judgment experience approach he uses in treating his patients. dr. werner used an approach she uses only in lawsuits. and dr. giakas told you, in his practice he finds about fifty percent of his patients would be addicted. it is the same number as dsm-5. so after telling you the dsm cannot be used as a cookbook, ms. bryan and dr. werner did exactly that. 2893 they put all the criteria up and they went down one-by-one and used it as a checklist. the interesting thing, when it comes to dsm-5, dr. werner has never used that checklist with a patient. only for trial. but even in trying to use this cookbook, dr. werner missed the first step of the recipe, and that is you need to have clinically significant impairment or distress. and dr. giakas told you the reasons why mr. clayton was not clinically significantly impaired or distressed. and in addition, dr. werner did not even follow the recipe the right way. there is a part that ms. shamp did not show you when she showed you the top of the criteria. remember the part that says you need to observe it within the same 12-month period? did dr. werner do that? no. she took this bit of information from the 50's, or this bit of information from the 70's, she put it all together, and that is how she formed her opinion. but it does not work that way. and, ladies and gentlemen, choosing to do something you enjoy, like smoking, and stopping it when you are motivated and ready to quit is not a sign of clinically significant impairment or 2894 distress. spending time in your basement watching football, drinking beer, and smoking is not a disorder. it is a decision. and david clayton had the choice and the control to make a different decision if he wanted to. all he needed was motivation. the key to quitting is motivation. and you heard about mr. clayton's alleged quit attempts. i'm not going to go through them one-by-one. you heard about the gum. it could not have been nicotine gum because it was not available over-the-counter until after he stopped smoking. you heard about him taking some cigarettes to work and leaving some at home. you heard about that. in each of those cases he continued smoking. his method to quit smoking was to continue smoking. he did not take other steps. he did not make other plans. he did not have a plan at all. he did not have the motivation. now, when he used the patch in 1993 -- and we will talk about when he stopped -- i think that is a sign he was motivated. i do not know if he stopped in '93 or '94, the evidence is a little bit inconsistent there, but that is the first time in his 60 years that he showed any motivation that he 2895 wanted to quit. now, dr. werner admitted what i just said, that there is some inconsistencies about when he quit. and you saw some of these records. let us look at these. this is from '94, and mr. clayton told his doctors he had stopped smoking back in '93. there is one more record from this time, and again i think this is important. can we see the next one, please? this is may 9, 1994, to be completed by the patient: do you smoke? it says yes, then it is checked off and says, no, quit one year ago. how many packs a day? zero. signed by david clayton. in may of 1994 he signed his name to a document that says i quit in 1993. now, mrs. clayton disagrees. disagrees with all -- you will see almost every entry on his medical records she admits that is his signature, but disagrees he had stopped smoking. and as i said, you will see the medical records on that second half of the cheat sheet in 2005 that said he kept smoking until 1994. those are over ten years after he quit. those are at a time when mrs. clayton was going to the doctor with him. there is no record from '93, 2896 '94, '96, '98 that supports mrs. clayton's version. that is the evidence of when mr. clayton quit smoking. on one side the real david clayton, the contemporaneous medical records, his statements to his doctor, documents he signed that says he quit in '93. on the other side for lawsuit david clayton is the testimony of witnesses 20 years after the fact that said, no, he kept smoking. i submit that mr. clayton's consistent contemporaneous statements about his smoking history, when he quit in the 90's are what you should rely on. i suggest they are more reliable than hazy memories two decades later. and when you look at this time component, i think dr. wright said something that is important. let us look at what he said. he was asked: and having read that do you now recall that the medical records you received had some highlighting on them? and he said: that is what i said then, and it was closer in time. so i suspect it was accurate. david clayton's records in 1993 and 1994 were closer in time, and i suspect they were accurate. but no matter when he quit, we know this we now. we know that he had the ability to quit smoking. and whether it was '93 or '94, he stopped 2897 for the next 12 years. there is no dispute over that. and dr. werner admitted he had that ability to quit at any point. let us look at what she said. i asked her: and mr. clayton had the ability to voluntarily decide to quit; correct? and she said yes. the real david clayton never experienced a loss of control, he never lost the ability to quit, he never was significantly impaired, he was never significantly distressed, and he was never addicted. because the plaintiff did not meet her burden to prove that, she does not clear the second hurdle, she does not meet that second burden. and for that additional reason the answer to the first question on the verdict form should be no. your honor, i think i can get through one more area, if that is okay. the court: yes, sir. mr. geise: okay. thank you. if you find that mr. clayton was addicted the third hurdle is this one, addiction causation. the plaintiff must prove addiction was a legal cause of mr. clayton's injury, and to be the legal cause the addiction must directly and in a natural and continuous sequence substantially contribute to 2898 producing his death. in other words, but for his addiction his death would not have occurred. and we know that addiction was not the legal cause for why he smoked up until the 1970's, because that is when dr. werner says is the first time she can say he was addicted. so for those first 30 years or so of his smoking their expert did not say he was addicted. and even if he was addicted at that point, if it was not a substantial cause, and instead his choices and his wants were more important to what he did, more directly the cause, then addiction is not a legal cause. and that is exactly what the evidence shows you in this case. the but for cause of his death was his choice, his decision to smoke for as long as he did because that is what he wanted to do. so i think you should ask this question. if mr. clayton was not addicted, would he have continued to smoke? the answer is, of course he would have. for this reason alone addiction cannot be the legal cause of his death, because it was far from the substantial cause of his smoking. you heard and saw the evidence about mr. clayton's decision making when it came to his death and what he put in his body. he routinely made 2899 choices that were not in the best interest of his health and contrary to his doctors' advice. and these ulcers, they are a big part of who the real david clayton is. the real david clayton suffered from them going back into the 70's. and this was not just heartburn here or there. you saw the records. you heard that in 1979 they took a biopsy from his stomach, diagnosed him with gastritis. mrs. clayton told you his doctors were constantly telling him that he needed to keep off cigarette smoke so it did not get on his ulcers so they could heal. and that was not the only advice they gave him about this. you saw this record in 1986. i'm not going to read it to you again. you saw what they told him to stay away from. and did david clayton act on this advice for the sake of his health and his stomach? no. but we saw these records. and again, 1986 and 1988, you saw what he reported, you saw what he told his doctors about what he was drinking, what he was smoking. you saw that. and these are 1986 and 1988. 1999, you remember mr. clayton stopped working 2900 at design containers because his stomach ulcers were so painful. so even though he stopped working he did not stop the behaviors that the doctors told him were making his condition worse. and it continued after he stopped working. you saw these records in 1992 and 1993. drinking continued. coffee, tea, cola, it continued. still he is choosing to consume things that are tearing his stomach apart. and this is a chart. i had part of this chart for you in opening. let us take a lock at it. you can see after 1986 when his doctors tell him what to avoid, you can see his consumption of tea goes up, coffee stays the same, soda goes up, beer stays the same, and cigarettes was consistently a half pack per day. in addition, you heard about the doctors' advice that he needed to change from whole to skim milk. you know, you might say, it is just milk, why does it matter? it matters because it tells you what he did when he was given information from his doctors. he was told to switch. he did not. why? he did not like it, and he was not going to do something he did not like no matter what his doctors said. 2901 so even though his doctors told him to avoid these things, and the stomach pain from his ulcers forced him to quit work, he kept doing it for years, not because of an from addiction, but because he wanted to. you heard from mrs. clayton that mr. clayton was a grown man. she would not force anything on him. that is what she said when it came to milk. interestingly he reports that the amount he smoked stayed the same, but these other substances went up. now, the plaintiff's witnesses will try to sweep aside these descriptions of how much mr. clayton smoked in his medical records and say people underestimate how much they smoke to their doctors because they know they should not be smoking. and that is what mrs. clayton said he did. but she also said he drank more than he was telling his doctors too. now, first of all, from what we heard about david clayton, he is not the kind of guy who would lie to his doctors, or sign his name on documents that were not true. and even if we adopt the plaintiff's logic it needs to be true across the board, does not it? it needs to be true for all the 2902 other behaviors on there that his doctors are warning him against. so is his tea, his coffee, his cola consumption much greater than he admitted? is he underreporting that too? mrs. clayton said all those records are wrong. she said he grossly overreported his coffee, tea, and his cola use. does it make any sense that david clayton would make up a history of things he was warned to avoid for a decade? of course not. mr. clayton made all these choices, unhealthy and especially harmful to him with ulcers as they may be, not because of addiction, but because he wanted to. no one claims he was addicted to tea, or coffee, or pepsi, or beer. just like smoking, these were his choices. and the plaintiff seems to think that, you know, we are trying to slander mr. clayton by talking about the fact that he drank beer. i'm going to be the last person to criticize somebody for drinking beer. it is just the opposite. he drank alcohol, but he was not an alcoholic. he smoked cigarettes, but he was not a nicotine addict. he made those choices. your honor, we are close to 5. this would be a 2903 good point to stop. [#delete recess#] the court: yes, sir. mr. geise: ms. shamp, ms. bryan, mrs. clayton. good morning again, ladies and gentlemen. when we stopped yesterday, i was discussing the concept of the plaintiff's burden of addiction causation. and just to restart this morning, let me kind of set where we are. we are still on this first question of the verdict form, and we will look at that in a moment. and that first question has a lot in it. there is three different hurdles of burdens of plaintiff. they are called plaintiff has to prove cause of death and that it is related to smoking. the plaintiff has to prove that mr. clayton was addicted. and then the plaintiff, even if they meet those two burdens, still needs to prove but for that addiction, mr. clayton would have avoided smoking and avoided his death. and the judge has read you your instruction. you will get a copy of them. let me reset what legal cause means in terms of addiction. addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of david clayton's lung cancer and death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing david clayton's death so that it can reasonably be said but for that addiction, his death would not have occurred when it did. and the evidence in this case proves that addiction is not the but for reason for any of mr. clayton's behaviors, including smoking. we saw this chart briefly yesterday. mr. clayton drank tea, coffee, pepsi and beer, despite the toll they were taking, because he wanted to, not because of addiction. but for wanting to drink those things, he would not have. same with smoking. he smoked for as long as he did because he wanted to, not because of an addiction. but for his choice to continue, he would have stopped, and he would have avoided his death. and here's another way to look at what is required for legal cause that comes out of your instructions. is it the direct cause, the natural cause, the continuous cause, the substantial cause. and you saw in this case that it was not. you saw that mr. clayton's choices were the direct and natural, the continuous and the substantial cause. let us look at the next slide. and what were those choices? they were the choice to begin smoking, the choice to continue smoking, despite the health warnings. and we will talk about some of those, the choice to control his smoking, how much he smoked and the choice not to quit until he was ready to, until he was motivated to. and because david clayton had control over his decisions and his choices, it cannot be said that nicotine addiction caused his injury. you heard that personal choice is a factor in this case from ms. shamp. and i agree. it is. and mr. clayton's choice is a substantial cause for all of his behaviors, including smoking. and the plaintiff's witnesses agree that the choice lies with the individual. let us look at what dr. burns said. he was asked about something surgeon general koop had written, that smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. and dr. burns, when asked if he agreed with it, he said, absolutely, sure. and so does dr. werner. she was asked the same question. and she said that is the first step in quitting is deciding that you are going to attempt to quit, yes. mr. clayton had to make the decision that he decided to continue that behavior. now, some people in this case respected mr. clayton's decision. let us look at willie mccullough, jr., his stepson. he was asked: "the reason you never asked or encouraged mr. clayton to quit smoking is because you respected his decision." and he said, "yes." "okay. you let him do what he wanted to do, correct?" "yes." now, mrs. clayton does not want to respect mr. clayton's decisions. in this lawsuit, to get money for her husband's choices, they are telling you that he did not have a choice that he was addicted and that addiction overrun his choice and he could not make a decision. but you heard it from dr. proctor that dr. koop tells you who is in control. and let us look at what dr. koop said. ultimately, you are the one that has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. no matter how you smoked or how much you smoke, the choice to light up is always yours. the cigarette did not jump into mr. clayton's mouth, the coffee did not brew itself, the beer did not hop in his hand. he made each and every choice, despite knowledge of the harm that it could be doing to him. and when mr. clayton made the choice to smoke, his choice was the legal cause. how do we know? because he kept doing things for years and years that he knew were bad for him. but for his choice to continue, he would have stopped smoking. as a result, any disease or death brought on by mr. clayton's smoking was not legally caused by addiction. the substantial cause of his smoking and his disease was his choice to smoke. i want to go back to the verdict form. and look at the first question: was david clayton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and all three hurdles are in these questions. the first one: what is the cause of his lung cancer and death? is it related to smoking? we know from his treating physician that filled out the death certificate, he did not say lung cancer caused it and he said it was unknown whether it was related to smoking. the second one: was david clayton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? you heard that david clayton was -- did not lose control, he did not have a significant impairment or distress so he was not addicted. and then third, what we have just been talking about: if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and you know that addiction was not the but for reason that he smoked, it was not the but for reason of his death. so on all three of those issues, the plaintiff failed to meet their burden. they have to meet it on all three. one out of three or two out of three does not cut it, they need all three and they failed on all three. for that reason, your answer to question number 1 should be no. and if you notice -- if your answer to question number 1 was no, you are proceed no further. the case is over. that answer decides this case. now, if you continue past that first question and found that the plaintiff meets all three of those hurdles, you will need to consider questions 2 and 3. and these are the conspiracy to conceal claims and concealment claims. and because they are on separate pages of the verdict form, i put them on one slide to make it easier. and you will see with these questions, they really break down. there is two prongs to them, two prongs. first, you need to determine if the information about the health risks and the health effects and the addictive nature of cigarette smoking was a secret to mr. clayton. and, if so, you need to determine if he relied on any statement to his detriment. that is the legal cause point that we talked about. here, the information was not a secret to mr. clayton, and he did not rely on anything any tobacco company said, let alone r. j. reynolds. so the first question: were the dangers of smoking a secret? you will remember in opening statement that ms. shamp would say people did not know; people did not know about the risks. but the other side of the story that we showed you showed just the opposite. it showed the public did know about the risks of smoking and the addictive nature. and more importantly, so did the real david clayton. and we need to start this story before mr. clayton was born and, as dr. proctor said, before reynolds even existed. let us look at the next slide. dr. proctor said before reynolds existed, it was known tobacco contained nicotine, known for hundreds of years that it could be addictive, known for hundreds of years it could be hard to quit, known for such a long time that smoking can be bad. and since the beginning of the 20th century, it was common to refer to cigarettes as "coffin nails" or "cancer sticks." you saw the evidence. can we see the next one? the florida health notes in 1906. the next one, please. the surgeon general in 1915, all referring to smoking as addictive. and dr. proctor told you about the prohibition movement where smoking and cigarettes were illegal in states and he talked about alcohol prohibition. when they were done with that, they chanted "nicotine next, nicotine next." and he said that is because nicotine was synonymous with tobacco. everybody knew that was the drug in tobacco that made it hard to quit. you saw a three stooges clip from the 1930s, and you remember the scene where -- i think it was curly won the prize from the coffin nails cigarette company? dr. proctor can say, oh, that is only a joke. well, it is only a joke if people get it. and people got it. the three stooges and their fans got the material information that smoking could kill you. it could seal your coffin. and that is not a joke. you saw the coverage in reader's digest. and ms. shamp can say mr. clayton did not read it. i did not hear the evidence that he read it or not, but i know it was out there in the public. and it was the most widely circulated magazine in the 1950s, much more widely circulated than true magazine that ms. shamp talked about. and let us leave reader's digest out of it. let us look at moultrie, georgia. the moultrie observer covered the risks of smoking year after year. now, not surprisingly with all this coverage in the '50s, the public health officials said, yes, there is widespread dissemination about the risks of smoking. you heard from dr. heller -- you heard from dr. burney and dr. heller. dr. burney was the surgeon general. dr. heller was a director of the national cancer institute. and you saw their statements that the public would have been -- had been informed about the risks of smoking. they came to that conclusion. now, dr. proctor says that these giants and pioneers in the field of public health -- remember what he said about them? he said they were beating their chest when they made these comments. ladies and gentlemen, these guys were making history in the 1950s, not studying history 50 years later. these were officials who had their boots on the ground at that time. they were eyewitnesses to what was going on. and this was their account of what was happening, that the public was aware, that the public knew. now, instead of praising them for their work, you remember dr. proctor called some of these guys "aloof figureheads." i do not think these guys were aloof figureheads. they were eyewitnesses. in 1964, 50 years ago, the surgeon general's report linked smoking to lung cancer. they published it. it was front page news everywhere, in jacksonville, in moultrie, everywhere. it was front page news. now, in the 1960s, ms. shamp yesterday mentioned smith gavin. but she did not mention this story that smith gavin told you on the witness stand. remember, he said in the late 1960s that he saw david clayton have what he called a "strangling cough"? i do not know if you remember that testimony. and he was gasping for breath. and mr. gavin thought that that strangling cough was caused by smoking, and he told mr. clayton to stop. when mr. clayton was playing cards with his buddies and he would need a cigarette, they referred to him as having a "nicotine fit." this is information about the health risks of smoking and the effect nicotine could have. it was material information that mr. clayton had and mr. gavin told you he had it. 1966, warning label goes on the packages. from that point on, every pack of cigarettes that mr. clayton had put in his pocket had that warning. the warning was there every single day. you heard that 13 million people quit in the four years after this warning label came out. 14 million people -- or 13 million people had that warning in their hands, and they took matters in their own hands and quit. mr. clayton did not even try. and the message was being communicated throughout america in towns large and small. ms. shamp said i'd show you daniel horn, so i figured i'll show you daniel horn. this is what daniel horn said. "you could stand on a rooftop and shout, 'smoking is dangerous,' at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." ms. shamp said that is anecdotal. well, let us look at what their own expert said. let us look at what dr. burns said. "now, in 1981, you gave a speech to a lung association group about the percentage of smokers who were aware of the risks, correct? "yes, i'm well familiar with that group. "all right. and you told that group in 1981 that 95 percent of smokers were thoroughly aware of the health risks, and ninety percent thought that it might affect their own health, correct? "that is correct." and he added. "and i believe i said that more smokers know that cigarette smoking causes disease or cancer than know the name of the president of the united states." ms. shamp calls it anecdotal. i call that evidence in this case. and the warnings kept coming, 1970, 1985, on every pack that mr. clayton picked up. and you have heard he watched the news every night. maybe he did not watch the whole news each night, but he watched some of the news every night when he got back from work. and you know that he received warnings from his doctors. you know he received warnings that told him smoking is not good for your ulcers, stop it. and if you want to believe willie mccullough, jr., on one thing in this case, believe him on this story. he told you he was not a cigarette smoker, and they would be in the basement watching football. mr. clayton would ask him, are you a smoker? he said, no. and mr. clayton told him, do not smoke. it is bad for you and it can be hard to quit. now, mr. clayton may not have used the terminology that the surgeon general uses, but he knew the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking, and he told that to willie mccullough. it was not a secret. so on the first prong of these two claims, number 2 and 3, the plaintiff cannot prove that material information about the health effects or addictive nature were secrets from mr. clayton. they assuredly were not. so for that reason, and that reason alone on that prong, those two claims fail and the answer should be no. but there is another reason they should be no and that is the legal cause reason. that is the reliance reason. i do not know if you have noticed, but on some of the trips up to sidebar, i can see they are building a walkway between the building on the other side of the street and the courthouse. and the plaintiff needs to build a walkway in this courtroom between something reynolds said or did and mr. clayton's decisions. for purposes of the verdict form, you saw when i put it up, it had legal cause. legal cause for questions 2 and 3 requires reliance. it requires reliance by mr. clayton. the plaintiff has to prove that reynolds' conduct caused mr. clayton, not some other smoker, but mr. clayton to take some action, to rely on something that they said or did not say and that he got a disease caused by smoking that he otherwise would not have gotten. and if the plaintiff cannot build that walkway, they lose on those two questions. and the evidence you heard show the plaintiff never set the first stone in building that walkway. in opening statements, i told you to keep this question in mind: what does this have to do with david clayton? and dr. proctor showed you document after document or statement by statement, and -- and i'll agree that some of those statements are stupid. and some of those positions, even if they were based on science or not at the time, were clung to for far too long. and in some other smoker's case, they may be relevant to their decisions but they were not to mr. clayton. for both the second and the third question on the verdict form, the plaintiff has to build that walkway. and she did not. and fact witness after fact witness told us why. let us look at this chart. there was not a single fact witness who told you that mr. clayton relied on any one of these things, not one, not one. now, ms. shamp may talk about mr. clayton made a comment once; oh, i do not think they are harmful. i do not know if he made that statement or not, but nobody ever said he made that statement because i heard r. j. reynolds say this and i'm doing that. we do not know if he said it, and we do not know why he said it. and that is not proof that he relied on anything that any of these people said or any of these statements. now, ms. shamp touched on it yesterday, and she may come back to it later today. and they argue that even if there is no evidence specifically about mr. clayton hearing or seeing or reading these things and then relying on it that you can assume or infer that it happened. well, she also told you yesterday, do not speculate. and i agree with that. do not speculate. look for proof. look for proof. you know from the evidence that he did not hear it; he did not see it and he did not rely on it. and those are the facts about the real david clayton from the people who knew him. do not assume something else. now, all of the fact witnesses who knew david clayton agreed, and i could put up all of their testimony for what they said. but i'm just going to use the testimony from mrs. clayton. and i apologize but this is a little bit long, but i'm going to walk through the questions she was asked and the answers she gave. "you have never heard of something called the 'frank statement'? "no. "never discussed it with mr. clayton? "no. "never heard of the council for tobacco research? "no. "or the tobacco institute research committee? "no. "or the tobacco institute? "no. "and you never discussed any of those things with mr. clayton? "no." next slide. "you never talked with mr. clayton about anything that a tobacco company may have said about smoking, correct? "no. "you never talked to mr. clayton about anything r. j. reynolds tobacco company may have said about smoking, correct? "no. "no, you did not? "i mean we did not talk about it. "or anything the american tobacco said? "no. "anything brown & williamson said? "no. "and you did not discuss any cigarette advertisements with him, did you? "no." ladies and gentlemen, use your common sense and focus on the facts about david clayton. when the plaintiff cannot produce a witness to say he heard, read, saw and relied on something, do not infer otherwise. so the question comes down to this: did concealment of information cause mr. clayton's death? and i think you saw from the evidence that the answer was no. and this case is only about mr. clayton. no matter what some other smoker may have done, the plaintiff has to prove what mr. clayton did and she did not. there is no bridge. there is no walkway. there is no proof of reliance. so if we go to the verdict form then, on questions -- can i have the elmo, please? thank you. if we go to the verdict form on question 2: whether concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of david clayton's death, the answer is no because he knew the material facts, and he did not rely on anything. so the answer is no. question 3: state whether r. j. reynolds's agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of david clayton's death. again, because he knew the material facts and there is no reliance, the answer is no. i want to touch for one second on advertisements. you saw what i went through with the testimony with mrs. clayton. we asked every -- every witness about advertisements, whether they had a discussion and whether mr. clayton relied on them and nobody could say he did. they showed you ads through two fact witnesses, mrs. clayton and smith gavin. now, interestingly, after saying how important ads were and how ads convinced people to smoke, the two fact witnesses that they showed you that knew about ads never smoked. so it did not have that impact on either one of them. and you saw when i asked mrs. clayton about advertisements, every ad that she showed you had a warning label on it, every ad. and with mr. gavin, he said if they were playing cards and an ad came on for a brand of cigarettes that one of the guys smoked, they would make fun of the guy for smoking that brand. they would joke around about it. and he admitted this as well. he was asked: "mr. clayton never told you why he smoked winston cigarettes, did he?" and he said, "well, no, he did not tell me why he smoked none of them." there is no reliance. so the important -- the important facts in this case, no witness who knew mr. clayton testified that he ever smoked a brand of cigarette because of an ad or a slogan, "winston tastes good like a cigarette should" or nothing. and with regard to advertising, you heard in your instructions yesterday that there is no liability for advertising. plaintiff knew that would be the instruction and knew that advertising had nothing to do with mr. clayton's choices. but they still showed you those ads, again, to try to get you upset, to try to make you angry. so if you get to -- i do not think you should get past question 1, but if you get through 1, 2 and 3 and then you get to question 4, you see state the percentage of fault, if any, that was a legal cause of david clayton's death. and if you get that far, you will have to allocate responsibility between reynolds and mr. clayton. and let us look at the next slide, please. this is the question: the allocation of fault for mr. clayton's death. and there are two points i want you to keep in mind. the assignment of fault relegates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. clayton's death, and reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of his death. these points are important. comparative fault is not a global comparison of conduct. you do not take anything that david clayton ever did and anything the tobacco industry ever did and compare them. it is a comparison of actions of david clayton and r. j. reynolds that were the legal cause of his death. it is a very narrow inquiry. so if ms. shamp wants to talk about things that affected hundreds of thousands of other smokers, that is not the inquiry on this question. and you may have seen things a tobacco company said or wrote that you do not like, but if they did not affect david clayton, it is not something you consider for this evaluation. and when ms. shamp was talking about this yesterday, she was talking about taking responsibility. i do not think she ever said mr. clayton has any responsibility for doing what he wanted to do for as long as he did, not any. and i come back to the words of the plaintiff's own experts. dr. werner said that the decision whether or not to quit is one hundred percent within the smoker's control. and dr. burns said this. "and you said many times that smokers are responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? "that is correct. "and even if they are addicted, the smokers are still responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? "that is correct. the fact that someone is addicted is a barrier to behavioral change, but it does not free them from responsibility for their own behavior." mr. clayton is not free from responsibility for his own behavior. he was responsible for all of his choices, responsible for the damage to his ulcers, for drinking and eating and smoking and things that were hurting him, responsible for his decision to choose to smoke and keep smoking, despite the knowledge of the risks and what his doctors said and responsible for the injuries he suffered because of those choices. because, ultimately, you are the one who has control of your behavior and it is not 10 percent control or fifty percent control. it is 100 percent control. and nobody made mr. clayton's decisions for him. nobody could choose for him to stop smoking coffee or tea or pepsi or beer. nobody could decide for him to choose to smoke or choose for him to stop smoking, not lee bonner, not smith gavin, not mrs. clayton. in fact, she told you you could not force anything on him. only mr. clayton could make those choices. he had the control. he had the power. he had the responsibility. so if you get to this point on the verdict form, i ask you to give him one hundred percent responsibility for his conduct and his decisions. now, if you find everything that i've said yesterday and today unpersuasive based on the evidence and you decide to return a verdict for mrs. clayton, you will have to decide the amount of damages. and -- and this is hard for me. we all feel compassion and we all wish mrs. clayton the best. but compassion and good wishes are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. your instructions that the judge read to you tell you that any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence. it cannot it be a number that comes out of thin air, pulled out of a hat. there needs to be an evidentiary basis for it. and yesterday ms. shamp asked you to award mrs. clayton over $2 million. she asked you to make her a multimillionaire. and it is not a question of whether reynolds is a big company. if you find reynolds liable, it is a question about what were the damages to mrs. clayton as a result of her husband's death. so if you choose to make an award and decide to compensate her, please compensate her based on the evidence you heard, using your good judgment and common sense. if you get all the way through the verdict form, you have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. and can we grab the slide on just the background on punitive damages? punitive damages are damages in addition to damages that fully compensate the plaintiff. punitive damages can only -- can be awarded only for conduct that is a legal cause of the harms suffered by the plaintiff, and punitive damages cannot be based on these findings. and because ms. shamp talked about them yesterday -- they are in your instructions -- i want to bring out, this is directly in your instructions. it says this: the engle findings may not be considered in any way when determining whether punitive damages may be warranted, not at all. and punitive damages are designed to punish and deter, punish for conduct that is tantamount to a reckless disregard for human life. and because this is a big issue, the plaintiff has to meet an even higher level and burden of proof that is called "clear and convincing evidence." and let us look at the jury instruction you received on this. clear and convincing evidence, you can see, is more compelling and persuasive. it needs to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue. it is a really, really high burden. and when considering whether to punish reynolds, i ask you to consider what you heard on the videotape from dr. figlar, testimony about what he and others at r. j. reynolds have done for decades to try and develop tobacco products that have less risk. dr. figlar told you that beginning in the 1950s, reynolds went to work identifying smoke constituents, trying to remove them, trying to reduce them. and dr. proctor even told you that reynolds has identified almost half of all of the constituents in cigarette smoke. in the 1960s, you remember reynolds started working with the national cancer institute's tobacco working group. and let us look at this next slide. this is what dr. proctor said about what reynolds was doing. they participated with the tobacco working group for ten years, and then dr. proctor said from 1967 to 1995, reynolds spent a fortune to make cigarettes less hazardous. and he said they spent a fortune to develop the premier cigarette. you remember that cigarette that would try to heat tobacco instead of burning it, to try to reduce the tar? and dr. proctor said the surgeon general's report even cited reynolds' book, and i held it up for him, that huge book on premier. and the whole time that mr. clayton was alive, the public health community, including dr. burns, encouraged reynolds to try to lower tar and nicotine in cigarettes. and you saw from dr. figlar's testimony that reynolds worked to do that. let us talk about ctr. you heard about ctr and dr. proctor said they funded research that produced over 7,000 peer-reviewed articles. it was research that had a substantial influence on the public health community, and he told you how many times over the years that the ctr grantees were cited by the surgeon general. let us look at the next slide, please. dr. figlar showed you this. these were all the different surgeon general's reports that r. j. reynolds' scientists were cited in. dr. figlar also talked about the patents, and i think the -- ms. shamp talked about patents yesterday. well, the interesting thing about patents is they are public. you submit a patent application to the patent trademark office and you get it patented. everybody can look at it. reynolds was working on those ideas and sharing it with the public. can we see the next slide, please? dr. rodgman. dr. proctor had pretty praiseworthy things to say about dr. rodgman. he said he used the best available science to identify the constituents. he said his research was excellent. he did not keep it secret. and you remember dr. proctor admitted that dr. rodgman gave a speech to the american chemical society in the 1960s, talking about the compounds that reynolds was finding. he even drew them for the chemists and included nicotine and other carcinogens. can we see the next slide? larson, haag and silvette, otherwise known as the green monster. remember, we talked about this with dr. proctor? it was this comprehensive account of literature. they collected everything they could find, every research article about smoking and health and addiction and put it in a book. and i held it up for dr. proctor. "remember the green monster?" and he is like: "oh, yes. i have it. i still rely on it." and he relies on the green one and the red one and the yellow one and the blue one, all of them. ladies and gentlemen, this is not a record of wanton conduct or disregard of human life. this is a record of reynolds trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky but legal product. it is a record of contribution to science that was recognized by the public health committee. there were some successes. there were some failures. but reynolds tried. and trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky product should not be punished or deterred. but you also heard about how the tobacco industry and reynolds in particular has changed over the last years. can we see the next slide, please? you heard that there was an agreement, and the organizations you have heard about in this trial -- ctr, ti, tirc -- they have all been disbanded. you heard a lot about dr. teague, rodgman, horrigan. all of those employees, they are long gone. the documents. dr. proctor told you all these internal documents used to be secret, and i think many companies probably keep their internal documents internal. but dr. proctor told you these documents are all publicly available now. millions and millions and millions of pages of documents are available on a public website. when you are done with your jury service, if you want to see what dr. teague wrote, if you want to see what dr. rodgman wrote, you can log on when you get home, and you can look at every one of those documents. now, the other thing you heard about was reynolds' position. and if the company's position on smoking and health and nicotine throughout the years angers you, dr. figlar told you that for over a decade now, reynolds' position is that smoking causes cancer and is addictive. in the past, you saw where industry representatives would challenge the surgeon general's reports. you saw a press conference about it, but dr. proctor told you that does not happen anymore. when the new surgeon general's report came out, it immediately went on r. j. reynolds' website with a link to it. and you also heard about some of the restrictions that reynolds works under now. between dr. proctor and dr. cook and dr. figlar, you heard about tpsac. it is the tobacco product safety assessment committee for the fda, and it does what its name implies. you heard from dr. figlar that reynolds meets with the fda, gives presentations with the fda and works with the fda scientists to tell them what they are doing about product development. ladies and gentlemen, looking at all of this, there is no need to punish or deter r. j. reynolds for these changes that took place over a decade ago. so if you get to the sixth question on the verdict form, if you get to the sixth question, you will have already fully compensated mrs. clayton for her losses, already done that. this is just a request for more money. but that request comes with a higher burden, a burden of clear and convincing, and the plaintiff has not met that burden of proof. so if you were to check yes on this, we would come back for another phase of trial with more witnesses and more evidence and more arguments, but i think based on the evidence and the plaintiff's failure to meet that higher burden, your answer to question 6 has to be no. in jury selection, each of you committed to holding the plaintiff to her burden of proof. and if the evidence warranted, you committed to your ability to enter a verdict on behalf of my client. at the end of this trial, the evidence compels a verdict in reynolds' favor on every question, on the question of the cause of death, on the question of whether mr. clayton was addicted, on the question whether addiction was the legal cause of his death and the question on whether reynolds' conduct was a legal cause of mr. clayton's death. the evidence about the real david clayton compels a verdict against the lawsuit david clayton and a verdict in reynolds' favor. mr. clayton lived his life the way he wanted to, despite painful ulcers, despite warnings from his doctors. do not reward the plaintiff by making mr. clayton a victim because of his own choices. now, this is the last chance i get to speak to you. as the plaintiff has the burden of proof, when i sit down, ms. shamp gets to stand up. and i can tell by her body language that she is ready to do that. because i cannot respond to her, i would ask one of you to be my advocate in the jury room when you deliberate. you have seen how we have responded throughout this trial by showing you the other side of the story. and as you deliberate, i ask you to keep the full story in mind and answer ms. shamp as you think i would answer her based on what we have done in this trial. ladies and gentlemen, it has been my pleasure and mr. carter's pleasure to try this case in front of you. we truly appreciate your jury service. we cannot do this without you people doing what you are doing. i want to thank you again for your jury service and your patience and your dedication to the process. thank you.