ms. shamp: first, i want to thank you. i -- i know this has been a long two weeks, and i know that you-all have been paying attention. i see you have been writing notes, and on behalf of myself and my team and my client, i want to thank you for the attention that you have paid. in 1953, r. j. reynolds knew that the studies tended to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung. they also knew that benzopyrene and benzo(a)pyrene, both carcinogens, were identified in distillates of tobacco smoke. at that point, r. j. reynolds hit a fork in the road. what were they going to do? they had two choices. at that point, they could have chosen to come clean, to publish the information that they knew, to give it to the surgeon general, to tell people. they could have warned their customers, put labels on packages. they could have gone to their advertisers and talked about advertising responsibly based on the information that they knew. they could have made efforts to try to reduce the addictiveness of their products. they could have made efforts to directly avoid marketing their products that had carcinogens to children. or they could have chosen to deny that smoking caused lung cancer, to conceal the information that they knew and to try and reassure their customers that there was nothing wrong with their product, that there was a controversy out there, that doubt existed when they knew it did not. they could have chosen to go get replacement smokers for the ones who had chosen to quit. the only replacement smokers were kids, ones not able to make as informed a decision. and they chose to manipulate the nicotine in their products to sustain addiction. the presidents of all the tobacco companies met at the plaza hotel in 1953. and there, they made their decision which fork they were going to take. they decided that the industry could most effectively face this problem by jointly engaging pr counsel, a public relations firm, and from that day forward, they engaged in a campaign of deception to the american public that has cost millions and millions of lives. they decided at that time not cigarettes but doubt was their product. and they were trying to sell that to the american people. they made a choice that was intentional. it was conscious. it was a choice that they made at that time. and here and now, ladies and gentlemen, here and now, is the time that they need to be held responsible for the choices that they made. judge mccaulie began this trial, you will remember, by talking about the ancient tradition of the right to a jury trial. you remember he talked about how it was back when the magna carta was signed, and he told you that it is a precious right that is found in the seventh amendment of the united states constitution and that the two weeks that you have spent thus far serving as a juror is one of the highest rights and honors of citizenship because you, and only you, now decide what to do about the evidence that you have heard. you decide collectively what choice you are going to make as a jury. you decide whether to hold r. j. reynolds responsible for its conduct. this is my closing argument. and i will not spend the time going through all of the evidence that is been presented in this case because i know you were paying attention. i saw that you were taking notes. but what i do want to do this afternoon is talk to you about how all of this evidence proves the plaintiff's entitled to a verdict in her favor. and i've been thinking about it all for the last two weeks of how to best present it to you, and it seems the most obvious choice is to start with the verdict form. on the verdict form, as the judge told you, there is six questions that you are going to have to decide, right? and so what i'm going to do this afternoon is i'm going to discuss the evidence that is presented as to each of those questions that you have to decide. now, before i do that, i want to talk for a minute about the burden of proof that the judge just instructed you about. and what the court said -- and you will have this back in your instructions with you -- is that plaintiff needs to prove the elements of her claim by a greater weight of the evidence, a greater weight. and since we are in a courtroom, i'd like to describe it as like on the scales of justice. you put the evidence on one side that proves something and the evidence on the other side proves the other. which is heavier? so as i go through each of these issues that is on the verdict form, i'm going to talk about that. and it is important that i do that for two reasons. one is that you have taken an oath in this case to consider the issues based only upon the evidence that is presented in this courtroom. not allowed to speculate, to talk about something else or not talk, but only based on what the evidence is that has been presented here in the courtroom. so that is why it makes sense when you talk about what evidence goes on one side, what evidence goes on the other. but, two, when you go back in the jury room, you will only have one job. that is, of course, to decide what your verdict is going to be. but you have two jobs and that is each of you individually has a right and obligation to deliberate and discuss why you hold the positions you do on each of the issues and what facts and evidence was presented to support the position that you are going to take back in the jury room. so i'm going to set forth what the evidence is through each question on the verdict form as to each side each, and i'm going to ask mr. geise to do exactly the same thing. because that is what you are here to base your decision on, and that is the evidence that is presented. now, you will have basically four kinds of evidence upon which you can base your decision. the first is you will have internal documents from r. j. reynolds, american tobacco company, brown & williamson tobacco company, as well as the tobacco institute, tirc, hill & knowlton. internal documents. every document that i have discussed throughout this trial has a number on it, and i talked about that number many times. everything i go through today will have a number on the bottom of it. that is the number of that exhibit. the exhibits are in binders. they will come back with you. there will be a index in the front so you can try and figure out where they are. all right? so that is evidence that you have, the internal documents. you will also have government documents and other kinds of documents from the ftc, from the surgeon general. all of those documents are evidence that the court has allowed to be admitted into evidence. so when you take those documents back, you may consider that as evidence that supports any of the issues involved in the case. and the judge is allowing it to go back with you, that it is proper evidence for you to consider, all of it, government reports, ftc documents, internal documents from r. j. reynolds. testimony of witnesses. you have heard from a lot of witnesses. that is evidence that you have that you can rely upon. and finally you have the medical records of david clayton. you have, as you know, volumes of that. you will have all of those back there with you as well, and all of that is the evidence upon which you can base your decision in this case. so let us get to it. the first issue that you have to decide on the verdict form is whether david clayton was a member of the engle class, and you will, of course, remember we talked about the engle class. the engle class action was when the jury listened to over a year's worth of evidence, made certain findings. you remember, we talked about what a class action was, where a few people who pursue a claim on behalf of a greater number of people. so what you are called upon to decide in question 1 on the verdict form is whether david clayton is a member of that class. and if he is, he is entitled to the engle findings. i'm not going to go through and talk about the engle findings right now. i'm going to talk about them later. first i want to talk about what class membership means. the judge just instructed you on that. to prove david clayton was a member of the engle class, plaintiff must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that david clayton was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. pretty straightforward. this is actually question 1 on the verdict form. was david clayton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? yes or no. now, that question actually has sort of three parts to it, and i'm going to discuss what the evidence is with respect to each part. the first part is addiction. was david clayton addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? and you have heard a lot of evidence about that. the question is not, however, whether he could quit. that is not the question you have to decide. you have to decide whether he was addicted because everybody has said addicted people can quit. addicted people quit all the time. so you do not have to decide whether or not he could quit. you do not have to decide whether he tried hard enough to quit. that is not relative to the question of whether he was addicted. you do not have to decide whether he was motivated to quit, whether he quit in 1993 or whether he quit in 1994, whether he smoked one pack or three packs. the question of addiction, as you heard in the testimony, is a medical question. was he addicted? plain and simple. did he have an addiction to nicotine? all of these other questions about what he -- his personal decision-making, his motivation, that can be talked about later. that goes to a different issue. you have heard them talk about comparative fault. we will talk about that then. this issue is plain and simple. was he addicted? so what is the evidence of addiction? first, the evidence is is that nicotine is an addictive drug that changes the brain. we learned, of course, that nicotine is a drug. that is undisputed. nicotine is addictive. i think finally even -- mr. giakas finally admitted that today on cross examination. dr. werner talked about that. and, of course, one of the engle findings, nicotine is addictive. and we know that nicotine changes the brain. that is undisputed. both dr. giakas and dr. werner talked about that. they talked about the changes that nicotine actually makes to the brain itself. and you will remember that dr. werner described it, that you have nicotine receptors in the brain, and when someone gives the dose of nicotine, more receptors are actually created. and once those receptors are created and they get empty, that causes a physical reaction. people crave the substance. and they actually have pet scans which show that -- that when a smoker gets a pet scan -- you will recall from an addicted smoker that when they smoke, those nicotine receptors get filled up, and that gives them the sense of satiation, but then when they get empty, they start having a craving, the urge, the drive to smoke. it is a physical reaction in the body. so we know that it is a drug. it is addictive and it changes the brain. we also heard testimony that eighty percent, 80 percent, of smokers try and quit every year. but only 5 percent are successful, less than 5. we heard from dr. werner that the longer you smoke, the more you smoke, the greater the likelihood that you will have trouble quitting. we also heard from dr. werner that beginning smoking in the early teens increases the likelihood of addiction. and you will remember this drawing and you will have this back in evidence, p-957. and this is a drawing of the adolescent brain and how the prefrontal cortex is not fully developed and that when you put a substance on it, it causes these changes to the way the brain actually develops. and the studies show that if a substance is started using when the person is in adolescence, then they are more likely to become addicted. so we know this. this is evidence of addiction. nicotine is an addictive drug that changes the brain. you also had evidence of david clayton's smoking, right? you heard from lee bonner, his childhood friend. and you might have wondered. we kind of put them up in different order based on how the witnesses would be. but i think if you look at them, you will understand what we are trying to do is give you the entire story. we started from the first person in the 19- -- i guess 1940s who knew him in moultrie, georgia, when he was a child. then we went to smith gavin, who met him when he moved to jacksonville in 1963, and they were buddies and smoked together. and then after he got married, he was exposed to gloria clayton and her two children. so we brought in the two children to talk about his smoking habits. we even brought in her -- his former daughter-in-law, juanelecha mccullough, to talk about it. and, of course, we brought in gloria clayton. and what did these witnesses all say? they claimed he was a heavy smoker. many of them described him as a chain smoker. most of them described him as smoking one cigarette right after another cigarette. how much he smoked, over a pack and a half a day. and as you know, there is varying testimony about how much it was. but every single person, every single witness who described his smoking called him a heavy smoker. mr. bonner, mr. gavin, ms. parker, willie mccullough, jr., juanelecha, all the people. there was no person that came in to testify that he was not addicted, not one bit of evidence. he smoked for more than 45 years. that is undisputed. he started when he was 14 and he stopped in 1993 or '4. he smoked for over 45 years, began smoking at 14 and smoked all throughout the day. the evidence is undisputed on that. smoked first thing in the morning when he got up. smoked throughout the day, smoked in the evenings, watching television, when he went to bed and even got up in the middle of the night and smoked. so your evidence of addiction is that nicotine's an addictive drug that changes the brain. david clayton's smoking pattern. the evidence is undisputed that david clayton suffered withdrawal symptoms. you heard it from every witness. you heard it from smith gavin. when he did not have cigarettes, he would be anxious. you would see him shaking. you would see him fidgety. you heard it from vanessa parker. you heard it from every witness. you heard it from juanelecha. you heard it from gloria. every witness described withdrawal symptoms. and dr. tonia werner talked about what those symptoms were and that is exactly what she said would happen when you withdraw from a substance and the nicotine receptors are not full. now, we also have evidence that he meets the dsm-v criteria for addiction to be, and you remember dr. werner going through all of the different checklists for a diagnosis of addiction under the dsm-v, that he used larger amounts over a longer period than intended. it is undisputed. he ran out of cigarettes frequently, and that testimony came in, again, from almost every lay witness. his desire -- he had desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use. and you heard that testimony, that he would say he could not. he could not quit, though he tried, used the patch. a great deal of time spent in activities necessary to obtain or use the substance. if you think about it, if you just are talking about a pack and a half a day, that is 30 cigarettes. if you are awake for approximately 16 hours a day, sleep eight, that means you are smoking more than two cigarettes every single hour of every single awake day, if that is just a pack and a half. so certainly spent a great deal of time in activities necessary to use the substance. had a craving or strong desire to use tobacco. think about the evidence that you heard about that. from smith gavin, when he would talk about when they were playing cards, and he would tell somebody to go get them for him. now, as you heard, dr. werner said she did not have enough information for number 5 or 6 and so she did not credit those. but number 7, social or recreational activities given up or reduced because of substance abuse -- substance use, how he went down in the basement, how he left thanksgiving dinner -- oops -- use despite knowledge -- recurrent use in situations where it is physically hazardous. you heard testimony from a couple of people that he smoked in bed, that -- that several people warned him about catching fire to the house. use despite knowledge of physical problems caused or exacerbated by use. you heard testimony that he had gastritis and that his doctor told him, it is not -- it is going to exacerbate your condition, cut back. but he continued to use it despite that. and then tolerance. dr. werner talked about that, how after time you have to use more and more of the substance in order to get the same amount of satisfaction from it and withdrawal. so dr. werner went through all of these with you, one by one, and checked off nine of the eleven. and you remember what she said. if you had six or more, that means severe addiction. so he meets the dsm-v criteria for addiction, severe. and then, of course, we have dr. werner's opinion. and she testified that david clayton was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and dr. werner is a vice chairman of the department of psychiatry at the university of florida. she is assistant professor and director of the forensic psychiatry division at the university of florida. she actually teaches medical students about addiction, and she teaches them about the dsm and how to use the dsm. she is published journal articles on addiction in publications used by doctors. she even testified that she is been appointed by the governor of the state of florida to review certain inmates on it and make recommendations. dr. werner came in here, all the way from gainesville, and testified that david clayton was addicted. but then you also have this evidence, r. j. reynolds' own documents, which talk about addiction. their own documents describe nicotine, their own product, as a potent drug. this is from an r. j. reynolds' internal document. "the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry, the drug industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug." their own documents state it is the sine qua non. now, that is latin. it simply means without which there is nothing. without which there is nothing. nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking. that is their own words. it is the reason people smoke. they also recognize that their customers have a requirement every day of how much smoke -- how much nicotine they need to get to satisfy their addiction. that is p-222. and even this, from one of the directors, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." they know that their customers are addicted. so in addition to dr. werner's opinion, we have r. j. reynolds' own documents, but even more, we have statistical proof. remember? it is estimated between 80 and ninety percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence. between 80 and ninety percent are addicted, which means 25 percent of the entire united states population may have nicotine dependence as of 1994, which is when this was written, which is when david clayton stopped smoking. so let us weigh it. all right? put the evidence on one side, the evidence on the other side. the evidence that he was addicted -- dsm, dr. werner's opinion, statistical proof. so what is the evidence that he is not? dr. giakas. dr. giakas came in today and yesterday and told you that he was not addicted. now, the court instructed you about the believability of a witness, and i want to read that instruction for you. in determining the believability of any witness and the weight to be given the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, the intelligence of the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case, the means and opportunity the witness has to know the facts about which the witness testified, the ability of the witness to remember matters about which the witness testified and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness, considered in light of all the evidence in the case and in light of your own common experience and your own common sense. so let us talk about dr. giakas' testimony that david clayton was not addicted. dr. giakas is in private practice. he is never taught anybody. he is not at a university. and he testified that addiction requires extreme circumstances, and i wrote some of them down. oh, i want to back up. one of the things you can consider is whether the witness had knowledge of the facts, so i wrote down today some of the things that dr. giakas said. first, he said that david clayton was an outgoing guy. testimony from all the witnesses, he is a quiet guy. he said that he was a supervisor and he supervised people. testimony was he was a laborer. testified that he was a disciplinarian. did y'all catch him saying that? there is no evidence of that. in fact, the evidence is just the opposite. he was not a disciplinarian. he was a soft guy. when i listened to his description of david clayton, it did not sound anything like the david clayton that we have learned throughout the testimony of this case, through the witnesses who actually knew him. it sounded like somebody was trying to -- to describe a person in a certain way to suit their needs, which was not the truth. all right? he then testified that addiction requires extreme circumstances, and i wrote some of these things down, that only people who are so rude that they will break the rules. remember, he talked about that, that they would break the rules? and he also testified that every -- that he -- it had to be a clinically significant impairment or distress, but he neglects to actually read what the dsm-v says. okay. the dsm-v says "a problematic pattern of tobacco use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following." the clinically significant impairment and distress is not as dr. giakas talked to you about, that it has to be somebody who gets fired from their job or fights with their wife or loses a job or loses -- it is manifested by two of these things. withdrawal symptoms, one of the things on there. tolerance. these are the 11 criteria. if you get two of them, that is evidence of significant impairment. dr. giakas twisted this document in order to try and suit his needs, but this is what it says, "as manifested by at least two of the following." but what did he actually say? some of the stuff he said, i agreed with. he said that he believed only fifty percent of smokers are addicted. remember him saying that, that the 2013 studies -- study now says that. but remember what he also said, that fifty percent have withdrawal. i agree with that. if fifty percent are addicted, then fifty percent have withdrawal. yeah, addicted smokers have withdrawal. all -- all the evidence in this case shows that david clayton suffered withdrawal. not one shred of evidence said that he did not. so even under dr. giakas. dr. giakas also said that somebody who is addicted would be somebody who smoked all day long. dr. giakas said somebody who is addicted would be somebody who is a chain smoker. that is david clayton. dr. giakas is a hired doctor. i was astounded when he said that he spent 160 hours on this case alone and made over $70,000 just for that one. so what is the evidence of addiction? that is what you have got. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming that david clayton was addicted. the only evidence is from dr. giakas, and he has nothing, no testimony of any witnesses. the second part of the question, addiction causation. did his addiction cause him to smoke? you have the -- you will have the surgeon general's report from 2010 back with you, and you have seen that a couple of times. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in tobacco use. it is the fundamental reason. r. j. reynolds' own documents -- this is p-301 -- "for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire as opposed to flavor and other satisfactions," their own document. "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted," their own document. they know addiction is the reason people smoke, and they design their products because of that. to now come in in this courtroom and argue that david clayton smoked for some other reason than addiction? no basis. you have r. j. reynolds' own documents. you have the surgeon general's report. you have all of the evidence of his smoking behavior, which shows somebody who was trying to get nicotine in order to satisfy his nicotine cravings. what is the evidence that he smoked for a reason other than addiction? and i suspect that mr. geise will get up here and say he smoked because he wanted to, because he wanted to. what is the evidence of that? where is this evidence that he smoked for some reason other than nicotine addiction? not a shred. where is the evidence? where is the evidence he was smoking because of addiction? third, smoking caused lung cancer and death. this is going back all the way to last week. we talked about dr. wright's testimony. you will remember dr. wright coming in and showing the actual slides from the lung tissue we looked at. and the kind of cancer that david clayton had is squamous cell. you remember that. you are going to have the medical records with you as well as the pathology slides that he showed, the pictures of the slides which show the squamous cell. and you are going to have the testimony of the witnesses. the cytology report comes from the medical record from 10/4/05, that he had squamous cell carcinoma and that is the most -- the most closely associated with cigarette smoking. and a note from the date of his death, that he had end-stage lung cancer and he was dying from it, with copd, pulmonary embolus, pe, pulmonary embolus -- you remember, that is a blood clot in the lung -- and pulmonary infarct, family requests hospice care. this is from the date of his death, on 9/14/06. you will have all the medical records from that year where he was getting treated for chemotherapy and radiation and how he just continued to spiral downward and kept getting infections and pneumonia, and you heard the testimony from the witnesses on that. what is the evidence that something other than smoking caused his lung cancer? none. defendant could have put on witnesses that talked about cause, no. mr. geise: objection, your honor, not our burden to put it on. the court: sustained. ms. shamp: there was no evidence that smoking was caused -- that his lung cancer was caused by something other than smoking cigarettes. where is the evidence that something other than lung cancer caused his death? no expert witnesses testified to that. dr. wright, you will recall, said he died from lung cancer, no question about it. he died from lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes, no doubt about it. there is no medical record that said he died from something other than lung cancer. no medical record says that. the only thing that the defendant relies upon is the death certificate. all right? now, i want to point out one of the jury instructions when you are considering that, and that is the jury instruction that said that in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction to smoking cigarettes need not be the only cause. okay? need not be the only cause. so even if the defendant argued that pulmonary embolism or copd or something else contributed to it, as long as lung cancer was a cause of his death, plaintiff has satisfied their burden. it need not be the only cause. so what is the evidence that he died from lung cancer? dr. wright's testimony. and you know dr. wright has done however many autopsies. he is done thousands of autopsies in the state of florida. he is worked with every medical examiner's office, actual involvement in just about every kind of various organization that he worked with, 82 publications. and he actually looked at the slides. and he talked about that and he looked at all the medical records. but in addition, you had the testimony of the family members who watched -- gloria clayton watched after his diagnosis, how he never got better after his diagnosis with lung cancer. you have the medical records saying it was squamous lung cancer. what is the evidence that lung cancer played no role in his death? i suspect that the defendant will argue that it is dr. rice's death certificate. you will recall, of course, dr. rice had seen him maybe one time before in march and then saw him on the date of death, and that was the first time he had seen him in six months. he was not his treating doctor. he was a hospital doctor who came in and saw him. but even dr. rice's own notes say he was dying from his lung cancer. so even dr. rice's death certificate does not prove that lung cancer played no role. the evidence is overwhelming that david clayton died from lung cancer. there is really very little dispute about that issue. so those are the three issues. i want to comment for a minute about how very versatile r. j. reynolds tobacco can be. and you will remember dr. proctor's testimony about -- i remember he kept saying -- he would say, they got blocked here, go around. right? when they were blocked from -- from advertising on television, they went around it, right? and then they would put signs on the winston car, and they would -- then that is going to be shown on television. they are versatile. they would go around, right? they are doing the same thing here. because originally they argued that nicotine was not addictive, right? nicotine's not addictive. well, 2000, they finally -- all right, now, we have to admit it. the engle findings, we have to admit nicotine's addictive. we will admit nicotine's addictive but nobody's actually addicted, right? but, okay, you blocked us on that, when maybe -- maybe he was not addicted. but even if he was addicted, well, that is not why he is addicted, right? he smoked because of personal reasons, even if he was addicted. they are versatile. they are trying to move around. but i'll ask you to weigh the evidence on each of these things. was david clayton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of lung cancer? the answer is yes. so as we know, if david clayton's a member of the engle class, you check yes on question 1. the plaintiff gets the benefit of the engle findings. cigarettes cause lung cancer. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. r. j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. you will have these back with you. r. j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was misleading -- false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. conspiracy. r. j. reynolds agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. r. j. reynolds was negligent. the judge instructed you, these findings may not be denied or questioned, and they must carry the same weight they would have if you had determined them yourselves. the second question on the verdict form is: state whether r. j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a legal cause of david clayton's death. and question 3 -- i'm going to talk about these two together because they are related -- state whether their agreement to conceal was a legal cause of david clayton's death. so what is legal cause? the judge instructed you about that. and it says was a -- david clayton's reliance on r. j. reynolds' fraudulent concealment or omission of material information concerning health effects or the addictive nature of cigarette smoking is a legal cause of injury -- of loss, injury or damage when it directly and in the natural continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the alleged loss, injury or damage so that it can be reasonably said that but for such reliance, the loss, injury or damage would not have occurred. material information is information that is of such importance that a reasonable person would have considered it in their decision-making process. so this is a very important one. so what is the evidence that defendant's fraud was a cause of david clayton's death? so the question is, one of the first ones: did david clayton know about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes? right? did he know? well, we can speculate. all right? lots of people speculate and it is hard when you are in 2014. we talked about this in voir dire. everybody thinks everybody knew or always did know. all right? but that is speculation. that is speculation. let us talk about what the evidence is about whether david clayton knew, not speculating, not guessing, not saying based on 2014, i guess, what was the evidence. smith gavin's testimony. you heard from the witness who said that david clayton told him, "it will not hurt me. i do not think it is going to hurt me." and he said he told that to him many times. gloria clayton's testimony that david clayton did not think smoking was harmful. and the ftc report of 1981. and you are going to have this back with you. and i encourage you, this is an important document to look at on this issue and it is a fact document. it is p-367. because it sets forth -- and this is evidence. it sets forth what public knowledge was in 1981. let us me see if this comes up. raegan, would you bring up 367? and there is an entire chapter on what public knowledge was. there is the date on it. federal trade commission report of may of 1981, and there is an entire chapter on what the public knew about smoking and health. all right? all right. there we go and you will bring that paragraph up. and this is what the conclusion is of that paragraph. "based upon an analysis of all the data reviewed in its entirety, staff has concluded that there appear to be such significant gaps in consumer knowledge that a substantial portion of the population does not know how dangerous smoking is or whether the dangers of smoking apply to them and, therefore, does not have an understanding of the health hazards of smoking. more significant" -- "more specifically, the data suggests that a large number of consumers do not know what diseases are related to smoking. a substantial number seriously misunderstand or underestimate the risks. many seriously underestimate or are unaware of the severity. and a significant number of consumers incorrectly do not believe that these health consequences have any personal relevance to themselves." and they actually did a chart. if you can show me 130. and it talked about the difference between what smokers knew and reported and what the rest of the population did. i think -- oh, there we go. right. and the question was: "it is been said that smokers have more of certain illnesses than nonsmokers. would you say this is definitely true, probably true, possibly true or not true?" and you look over at the smokers, 55 percent, the majority, said either that it was not true; they did not know or was only possibly true that people who smoked had more of certain illnesses. i think if i can get you back to the powerpoint. "the data also indicate that smokers are more likely to have incorrect beliefs about the relationship between smoking and lung cancer than are nonsmokers. and among all smokers, 28 percent did not believe smoking caused lung cancer while among heavier smokers." david clayton falls in this category. among heavier smokers, a pack a day or more, nearly a third did not believe or know about the link. in the yankelovich study, 38 percent of smokers believed that they still have not proven a link between lung cancer. this is evidence that you will have about whether david clayton knew. so you not only have evidence from smith gavin, gloria clayton, but you also have public knowledge documents that you can look at and i encourage you to. but you also have the engle finding you can utilize now, which says that they concealed or omitted material information that was not otherwise known. what they were withholding, everybody did not know. so what was the evidence that he knew? it is on the other side, right? reader's digest? i suspect that mr. geise will stand up and show you reader's digest. well, you do not have any evidence that david clayton ever saw a reader's digest. in fact, you have evidence of just the opposite. smith gavin said he never saw him with a reader's digest. his wife said she never saw him with a reader's digest. there is no evidence that he ever read or saw a reader's digest article. daniel horn, the guy who said if you shouted from a rooftop, you would not be telling anything you do not know, that anecdotal testimony? newsweek, the caution label? well, what is the evidence about whether the caution label was informing people? you will have that as well, p-269-08, which is the ftc report after the caution label was put out. and you remember what the caution label said. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous." may be hazardous? there is virtually no evidence that the warning statement on cigarette packages has any significant effect. if cigarette sales are viewed as an index of the effectiveness of the warning statement, one finds that in 1966, more cigarettes where sold than ever before. that is what the evidence is. so then you have to say why did not he know? if he did not know, why did not he know? and that is where we talked about the campaign that the cigarette manufacturers engaged in for decades, to put out this information, to conceal what they knew and you heard tons of it. now, i am not going to go through all of it today. but the frank statement that they put out, which said, we believe the products would make it not injurious to health, when they knew otherwise. there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer. you heard all of this and you will, in fact, have this back with you. howard cullman saying, there is no proof. bill dwyer saying, these are scare tactics. ed horrigan saying, there is no proof. you will remember joseph cullman on face the nation; we believe our products are not injurious. this is a campaign. ann browder and even the president of r. j. reynolds in front of congress. this is the campaign that they engaged in. press releases. you will have press releases back there. some government officials maintain that cigarette smoking is the number one health problem. we believe the number one health problem is the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public, when they knew their own products contained carcinogens. and then they put out these white papers, and i encourage you to take a look at these white papers that they sent out. you will remember what the testimony from dr. proctor was, that they sent these to -- they targeted these to doctors, and at this time, fifty percent of doctors were smoking. all of these targeting doctors. 178,000 doctors were sent these. they engaged in a campaign of deception and denial for decades to encourage people to keep smoking, to create a false controversy and it worked. the evidence shows that it worked not only in the population in general but in david clayton in particular. and also they continued to advertise. cigarettes are most -- are one of the most heavily marketed products in the united states. they spent 13.5 billion, in 2006, dollars on cigarette advertising. that is $37 million per day on promoting their product. cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. it is the most heavily advertised product in america. they spent one billion dollars in 1980 to sell their product. the commission believes that the warning labels have not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude toward cigarette smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisements, particularly the barrage of commercials on television, the commercials which portray smoking as a harmless and enjoyable social activity that is not habit-forming and involves no hazards to health. why did david clayton not know smoking caused lung cancer? because of the defendant's actions. very -- this is their own document. very few consumers -- they know this -- are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature and that nicotine is poison. they know this, that their customers are not aware, and yet they do nothing to tell them. the true article, you will remember that they hired somebody to write an article, by stanley frank, hired by them, that says "to smoke or not to smoke, that is still the question." are cigarettes hazardous to your health like the package says? nobody knows. they knew. this is the most popular men's magazine, and they paid somebody to write the article. what the court will instruct you is as to each of plaintiff's claims of concealment and conspiracy to conceal, i hereby instruct you that you may consider all of the evidence. all right? now, the defendant's going to want to try and say, you cannot -- there is no evidence that one person said anything directly to david clayton; there is no evidence that he read one of those scientific white papers. but the court will instruct you you can consider all of the evidence, all of the evidence of their marketing campaigns, all of the evidence of their campaign denial in order to determine whether plaintiff has satisfied the reliance requirement of those. and you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. the evidence that david's -- that defendant's fraud was a claude -- a cause of david clayton's death. smith gavin's testimony. gloria clayton's testimony that he did not know smoking was harmful. the ftc report which showed the public prevalence of not knowing that smoking was harmful. the ftc report of 1967, which is p-269. rjr's campaign to instill doubt and their enormous advertising expenditures. okay. and on the other side, that he knew smoking caused lung cancer? reader's digest? the caution label? daniel horn? where is the evidence that you have whether defendant's fraud was a legal cause of david clayton's death? again, they are very versatile. they all move around. originally they denied they did anything. they denied that they were concealing anything. they denied it until the engle court found, no, you did. okay. okay. now we admit it. now we admit it. but if we did, does not matter. does not matter. nobody -- nobody relied on what we said. we spent billions of dollars on this campaign. we spent millions of dollars sending out these reports. but nobody listened to us, right? nobody heard us. very versatile. they wanted to ignore them. today in this courtroom, you, the jury, have to hold them responsible for that conduct. do not let them get away with that. we spent all of that money. we did all of those things, did not make any difference, did not have any impact on david clayton. the evidence does not support that. the evidence does not support that. all right. so we believe that the evidence -- again, what is presented to you in this courtroom is what you have to rely on. all right? so we believe that the evidence is that r. j. reynolds' concealment or omission of material facts about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of david clayton's death. we believe the answer to that is yes and that whether r. j. reynolds' agreement to conceal or omit material, in fact, regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking was a legal cause of his death? yes. they are responsible and the actions did have consequences. the next question that will be on the verdict form is comparative fault. state the percentage of fault, if any, that was a legal cause of david clayton's death that you charge to r. j. reynolds tobacco company for david clayton. so what this is -- and we have talked about this before -- if there is going to be some discussion in the jury room that david clayton made a choice; it was his personal choice, this is the place that that should be discussed, not on the earlier questions but on this one. so, again, you have to base your decision on what the evidence is with respect to what r. j. reynolds did compared to what david clayton did. so let us stack them up. r. j. reynolds, findings tell us, i do not have to go through all that evidence again, they denied, concealed and reassured with the intent that american smokers would rely -- with the intention they would rely to their detriment. fortunately for us, it is a habit they cannot break. that is what r. j. reynolds did, intentional conduct, deny, conceal and reassure, the choices that they made. what did david clayton do? he did not quit sooner. started smoking as a kid when he was 14. trusted them, what they were telling him, trusted them, that the product manufacturer would let him know. and tried to quit. every year, 40 to 45 percent of smokers try to quit and less than 40 -- and less than 5 percent are successful. he was not in the 5 percent. that is what he did wrong. there you go. compare that to what they did wrong. compare this personal choice to keep smoking with his education, his background, what they were telling him, to what they did wrong. we contend that r. j. reynolds is responsible. but when mr. geise gets up and talks about choice -- and i expect he will do that, choice is a personal choice. choice. ask yourself, was it an informed choice? did the manufacturer give him the information that he needed to make an informed choice? no. if he made a choice, it was not an informed one. and we contend that r. j. reynolds is responsible for that, that the responsibility has to lie at their door. they are very versatile, very versatile. okay. well, even if you do find that we are at fault, mostly it is him, right? mr. geise: your honor, i think she is commenting on the defense of the case at this point. the court: overruled. mr. geise: okay. thank you. ms. shamp: even if you do find that we were somewhat at fault, all of the things they do to try and keep that responsibility from laying at their doorstep. think about how much he talks about personal responsibility and choices david clayton made and everything they will do to keep that responsibility from laying at their doorstep. you will have the 2014 surgeon general's report, which tells you 20 million people have died from smoking cigarettes. they will deny the responsibility on their doorstep for the actions that they took. so comparative fault, ladies and gentlemen, we contend that if david clayton has any fault, that it is very minor compared to what r. j. reynolds has done. damages now i'll turn to. on the verdict form, you will be asked what is the amount of damages, if any, that gloria clayton has sustained for her mental pain and suffering as a result of her husband's injury and death, the loss of her husband's protection and companionship and the loss of her husband's support and services? now, you remember you heard testimony from mr. spruance who came in and talked about trying to put a monetary value on that last one, support and services. and he talked at length about how he goes about that calculation and that the number was $209,799. okay. on the verdict form, you will have three blanks to fill in. there is no dispute about what the evidence is. mr. spruance said it is 209,000. that is how you put a monetary value on that. these two, ooh. that is a lot. and i will say right now, i'm not an expert at it. but i've thought about it, putting a value on someone's pain and suffering as a result of their husband's injury and death. your collective judgment on what that is worth is what the court says should be your guide, your collective judgment. but you do have some evidence, though, because you have evidence that david clayton's death was -- that dying of lung cancer is very difficult to watch and that she had to watch that and suffer through it. and i'm going to suggest a number to you that should go in that blank. but let me say it is neither the floor nor the ceiling of what you can decide is the appropriate number for that loss. we are going to suggest a number we believe from what a person would suffer from watching that kind of death. and then the second category is the loss of protection and companionship, which are different. those are two different things. one is her mental injury from watching the death from his injury, but the second is the loss of his companionship. and all of the testimony in this case, ladies and gentlemen, is that david clayton was a wonderful man, really, every single person who testified. he was a good guy. and got married when he was 46 to gloria and that they were in love. they never had an argument. you never heard a single person come in here and say they fought or argued, that they -- they were close. in fact, you remember him [sic] saying he drove up to waycross on nights that he was not working just to spend time with her because they liked to spend time. so i'm going to suggest for the pain and suffering as a result and the loss of companionship of $1 million for each of those. as i said, neither the floor or the ceiling for what that value is worth, but that is what we are going to suggest for the numbers to award to those. all right? the other question you will have on question 5 is what is the total amount of any damages lost by the estate for medical bills? and you heard testimony from that, and you will have two exhibits back. it is p-02 and p-05. the medical bills are 47,000 and something. the funeral bill was another 3,000. so that number's 50,874.05 and there is a blank for that on the verdict form. and finally i want to spend the last bit of time talking about the issue of punitive damages. and as i said in voir dire and i'll say again, it is a very important aspect of this case. it is a very important aspect of this case. and the judge will instruct you about what punitive damages are and how they should be awarded. punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence that the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life and the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. the conduct showed an entire lack of care, that r. j. reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences of what it was doing. the conduct showed an entire lack of care that r. j. reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public. the conduct showed a reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. i've talked about a lot of their activities that i think merited the award of punitive damages, but i'm going to limit my conversation to two. when you consider whether punitive damages are to be awarded, the judge has instructed you you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit. so with respect to this, you can consider how many people have been injured by their conduct when deciding whether punitive damages should be awarded. you may consider that. how many people has r. j. reynolds hurt in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the r. j. reynolds' acts as proven in this case. so the two things i want to talk about, ladies and gentlemen, and i think merit it and there is a lot. that is youth marketing. i think this is so egregious that it merits your -- this jury today not giving them a pass in this, this jury today saying, we are not giving a pass on this. this conduct is reprehensible. manufacturers have studied the 14- to 20-year-old market creating a fad, a fad for smokers who are 14 years old and this market is a great bonanza. these are conscious, intentional actions to hook kids. current youth jargon in high school, american history textbooks might be a good start at finding a good brand name and image theme. really? they wrote documents that said for the pre-smoker -- that means people we have not hooked yet -- the visible effects of smoking are largely unknown, unneeded, are actually unpleasant or awkward. the expected or derived psychological effects are largely responsible for influencing the pre-smoker to try smoking and provide sufficient motivation during the learning period to keep the learner going, despite the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness of the period, psychological effects. finally the older establishment is preaching against smoking. the antiestablishment's sentiment discussed above would cause the young to want to be defiant and smoke. thus a brand aimed, a brand aimed, at the young group should not try and promote as a health brand but perhaps should carry some implied risk. in this case, in this case, the warnings on the packages might be a plus. we might be selling more cigarettes to kids because they have warning labels on it. this conduct is reprehensible. and, two, they manipulated the nicotine in their products to keep people addicted. you will have the evidence back with you. their own documents show that a tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for the delivery of nicotine. cigarette smoke should contain sufficient nicotine to supply the necessary requirements and they manipulated the nicotine level in their cigarettes to keep people addicted. you will have the fda patent information back, p-690, of all the patents that r. j. reynolds applied for to increase the nicotine content in their cigarettes by adding it to different things, different types of acids that they can add, different types of various processes to try and add and manipulate the nicotine content. you will have document p-681, lucky 100's, when it was treated with compound w to yield 2.85 percent nicotine, a 21 percent increase. this is the p-435, which is the ingredient list, and you will see all the ingredients in their smoke, including ammonia. and you will remember dr. proctor's testimony about what the purpose was of ammonia, to freebase so that the nicotine would have a higher impact for people who smoked them. under the circumstances of this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted. we believe the clear and convincing evidence shows that punitive damages ought to be awarded in this case. now, remember, at this part of the trial, you do not have to decide an amount. we are not talking about an amount. all you have to decide is whether -- whether or not this conduct warrants the award of punitive damages. and ask yourself, what is the evidence with respect to that question? what is the evidence with respect to whether their conduct merits an award of punitive damages? and i ask you to hold them responsible. as i started by saying today, your service on this jury is a historic right, which is critical to our system of justice, and your role in making a choice today whether to hold them responsible is an important role. now, i'm going to sit down and let mr. geise get up and talk a while. when he is concluded, i'll have an opportunity to come back and talk to you again for a little while just to rebut some of the things he says. i want you to listen carefully to mr. geise, and i expect he will talk a lot about the responsibility, talk a lot about david clayton's responsibility. wonder if he will talk about r. j. reynolds at all? he will talk about david clayton drinking beer on the weekends. he will talk about david clayton's choices about smoking downstairs. i wonder if he will talk about r. j. reynolds at all? we believe the evidence shows that plaintiff's entitled to an award in this case. the evidence. it is not speculation. it is not what you came in in this case thinking. it is not what everybody around might think. but what was presented here, the facts, the testimony, the documents, the evidence, we believe they prove the plaintiff is entitled to a verdict, and the plaintiff is entitled to some punitive damages award. okay? i appreciate your attention. thank you. ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. good morning again. when mr. geise was talking yesterday, i started scribbling furiously, taking notes on how to rebut various things that he said, and then i put down my pen. because it occurred to me that for most of his presentation, he was talking about things that are not things you have to decide. i decided had -- he was kind of nibbling around the edges, talking about things like how many times mr. clayton stopped at rest stops on the way to walt disney world, talking about whether he stopped in may of 1994 or eight months earlier in august of 1993. these are issues that you do not have to decide. you have to decide the issues that are on the verdict form. the question is not whether he quit, not did he try hard enough or whether he was motivated, whether he quit in 1993, '4 or whether he smoked one pack of cigarettes or three packs of cigarettes. those are not things you have to decide. now, we can debate whether gloria clayton -- there was a discrepancy in the way she testified in her deposition and the way she testified on the stand. you will remember when he was trying to impeach her, he turned to page 580 of her deposition. but that is not what you are here to decide. the simple question is was he addicted? did he exhibit the behaviors that addicted smokers exhibit? did he need a cigarette first thing in the morning to stave off the symptoms of withdrawal? did he smoke throughout the day? did he exhibit symptoms of withdrawal when he was not smoking -- agitation, restlessness, anxiety? you know, that was one thing i actually learned in this trial, which i had not known before in dr. werner's testimony, and that is that the withdrawal symptoms from the drug are the opposite of the effects of the drug. and so the effects of cocaine can make you up and excited, and then the effects of withdrawal are to make you down and depressed. i did not know that. so the effects of nicotine are to relax you and calm you, and the opposite effect is the withdrawal that you see. you would be anxious, moving around. you will remember, dr. werner testified that when you smoke for a long period of time, for 45 years, and you start early that you have created these neural pathways that are deeply embedded, that force your body to want that substance. so in my closing, i talked about the evidence and i stacked it up. and i was waiting for mr. geise to put some more evidence on the other side, other than dr. giakas's testimony. and i noticed i said the word a lot during my presentation, the greater weight of the evidence. where does the greater weight lie? notice mr. geise did not use that phrase very much. and he did not use that phrase because he knows that if you stack up the evidence that he does not have the greater weight of the evidence on any of the issues. mr. geise: your honor, i object, beyond the burden of proof. the court: all right. overruled. ms. shamp: your -- the burden of proof of the plaintiff is the greater weight, and so you have to stack up the evidence. and when you stack up the evidence, which side has the greater weight? so that is why mr. geise was talking about irrelevant things, things that do not matter to what the decision is that you are called upon to receive -- to decide. but he did mention some things that i want to talk about because he kept saying things like that we only told you half the story. he mentioned exhibit 50. now, you remember that this was an exhibit that had smoking references, and you will remember that dr. wright said it was created by us -- by counsel. we made this one up and we went through every single medical record and wrote down on here in a chart that you will have every single reference to smoking in those medical records. we did not leave out the ones that said half a pack a day. we have 100 pack a day -- i mean, a 100-pack-year history, got everything. we told you the whole story. when mr. geise put up his slides, did he ever put up a slide that showed the 100-pack history? did he ever put up a slide that said he quit in 1994 after he was diagnosed with lung cancer? those are all on our list. and, in fact, over 25 times it appears in the medical records that he quit in 1994. but more importantly, what mr. geise forgot to mention about the packs he smoked a day was his own witness from the stand, dr. giakas. and you will remember when ms. bryan was cross examining him, dr. giakas said that he believed he had a pack-and-a-half-a-day smoking habit. mr. geise did not elicit that testimony from his own witness on direct, but on cross, he said that, a pack and a half a day, half of the story. we brought you witness after witness after witness. we even went back to childhood friends from moultrie, georgia, and brought them in here. we brought an ex-daughter-in-law from tampa to come here and testify to you and we went through each one. one thing that was shocking to me was when dr. giakas told you how much he relied on the dsm-v. you-all remember that. dsm-v, he is been using it since may. so did he walk through the dsm-v criteria with you? in his testimony, he did not even open to that page. this document he says he needs and to rely upon, did he talk about symptoms of withdrawal? did he talk about whether the smoker smoked despite knowing about health hazards, the ulcer? no. he did not walk through the dsm-v criteria because he knows that that would show david clayton was addicted. half the story? another thing dr. giakas said was -- and this shocked me as well -- smoking behavior has not changed between 1994 and 2014. remember him saying that, smoking behavior has not changed? we know that is not true. 1994 -- in 2014, there is almost nowhere you can smoke. you cannot smoke in buildings. you cannot smoke in the office. you cannot smoke outside. our smoking behavior has changed enormously since 1994 because of restrictions, and those are discussed in the 2014 surgeon general's report and how important those restrictions have been on reducing the amount of addicted -- of people who are addicted to cigarettes and reducing the number of smokers. that is a huge shift in behavior. now, one thing that surprised me, i guess, was when mr. geise was talking repeatedly about free choice, and he was not addicted because of his choice. y'all remember him talking about that, that he was not addicted because he chose to smoke. i think he was forgetting their own document. raegan, can you pull up 363? page 2. 363. you will have this with you. "hardy reminds us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." and that is the truth. defendant added nothing to it. they did not add -- mr. geise added nothing to the defense. the greater weight of the evidence proved that david clayton was addicted. i remember him also when he talked about we told half the story, he -- when he read to you what addiction was, the legal cause -- you will have this very page -- he read you half the charge. he read you the top paragraph. the second paragraph says, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction to smoking cigarettes need not be the only cause. addiction to smoking r. j. reynolds cigarettes may be a legal cause of injury and death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction, and the addiction contributes substantially to producing injury and death. he did not read you that part. so that even if somebody were to believe that he could have tried harder, addiction played a role in his continued smoking and it was a legal cause. now, half the story. dr. -- he -- mr. geise told you that dr. wright had testified in 1500 cases. you remember him saying he is a professional witness? what he forgot to tell you was dr. wright's a medical examiner. he testifies in cases where the state is trying to bring a criminal charge, and he testifies about the cause of death. you have seen it on television. it is always the medical examiner that they bring in to testify. and that is what dr. wright did and he had testified 1500 times because he was a chief medical examiner in dade county. for 30 years, he is been a medical examiner. half the story. mr. geise told you that dr. rice, the one who signed the death certificate, had treated him for lung cancer. absolutely false. dr. rice treated him -- when dr. -- he got to dr. rice, he could not be treated for his lung cancer. you have that note. he said, we will just try to make him comfortable at this point, while he died. the death certificate he talked to you about lists respiratory failure as the number one cause of death, which means, of course, he stopped breathing. just saw evidence of it. and it also lists pulmonary evidence, a blood clot in the lung, and copd. but the only evidence you have as to the cause of the pulmonary embolus is from dr. wright, who says the pulmonary embolus was caused by lung cancer. the death certificate is technically correct, but it just does not say what caused the pulmonary embolus. and the only testimony -- i want to repeat that. the only evidence you have as to what caused the pulmonary embolus is from dr. wright, that it was caused by lung cancer. that is the only evidence in the record as to that. now, mr. geise talked about whether david clayton knew of the risks. he knew that smoking -- smoking caused lung cancer. and that -- i told you he was going to talk about reader's digest. he also talked about the three stooges episode. but you will remember, what we gave you is exhibit 367, which is the actual polling data, the actual polling data about what people knew. he talked to you about smith gavin's testimony. remember, about him coughing and gagging? you heard smith gavin. what smith gavin said, the rest of the story, smith gavin said, sounded like smoke was going down the wrong pipe, that he was coughing. and that is why he said, well, if he stops smoking, he will stop coughing, right? if he stops smoking, he will stop coughing. and one important thing i want to mention was what mr. geise was telling you about things that were put out by public service announcements or things that were put out by reader's digest. we did not, of course, accept tobacco advertising. but not one time did he tell you r. j. reynolds was telling people what was in our own product. david clayton knew because r. j. reynolds told people what was in our product. and you will remember dr. figlar's testimony. remember, he was the guy who testified by videotape? and he said this. he said our obligation to inform about our product is not reduced by the fact that other people have told, by the fact that there is other information about that. that does not relieve us of the obligation to talk about our product, to tell people what we knew. mr. geise did not say one word about r. j. reynolds telling people what was in their product, the people who made the product. another thing that struck me was when mr. geise said that dr. proctor's testimony had nothing to do with david clayton. and i was struck by that, the certainty with which mr. geise said that. it had nothing to do. so who was this campaign of deceit for? who are they trying to convince? who are they selling doubt to? cigarette smokers. can you show p-270? thank you. now, i showed this document to you before -- hold on. wait. i showed this document to you before, and i showed you the top part of this previously. and you will have p-270 in. and what it says here is -- you can bring that part in, "reestablish the cigarette controversy," up top. "reestablished the cigarette controversy." so i was talking to you about what their campaign was, how they were trying to establish a controversy where none existed, but what i did show you is the bottom part. you can bring up the bottom part now. "this program must be massive. we estimate that the pressure of the clearinghouse in media terms exceeds 50 million a year. the chief executive officers of the tobacco companies are well-aware of the advertising principle, share of the money, share of the market. this principle applies to the program of the tobacco industry. an initial powerful impact must be made within eight months." they have spent millions, hundreds of millions of dollars on this campaign. but mr. geise wants to argue, no. he wants you to find that it had no impact, that they were just shooting this message out in the air, that it did not impact david clayton or any other smoker or any member of the engle class, that these messages that they sent out have nothing to do with david clayton smoking. they spent millions and millions of dollars on television, but it had nothing to do with any smoker. it does not make any sense. that is exactly who they were talking about were smokers. he wants you to think it has nothing to do with any kid picking up a cigarette, nothing to do with all of the people who become addicted. you will remember, my -- first part of my closing argument, i told you how much they spent in advertising, and i put up those -- those figures, a billion dollars in 1980 alone, $37 million a day in advertising. mr. geise wants to say, that had nothing to do with anybody smoking. that does not make any sense. common sense. that was the point of these expenditures and it worked. it worked. lots of people kept smoking. now, mr. geise talks to you about the issue of reliance. all right? did david clayton rely on an omission? and you will remember what dr. figlar said about reliance. "do you agree that just as you think it was reasonable for the tobacco industry to take the position, it was reasonable for your customers to rely upon that position, that there was an open controversy about whether cigarettes caused disease? "i think it was reasonable for the public to have considered what was being put out and what the industry was saying. "and do you think it was reasonable for the smoking public to rely upon what you put out? "i would say i think so." and you will remember him giving that testimony. dr. figlar said it was reasonable for the smoking public to rely and they did rely. there is evidence of their enormous campaign, this enormous amount of information they put out that made smoking seem like a harmless activity. do you remember the ftc saying that? and that the smoking public relied upon it. and that is what question 2 and 3 asks you about a legal cause of death is whether what they put out people relied upon. and the evidence is overwhelming that they did. finally, i want to talk about punitive damages. and, remember, mr. geise told you about they were manipulating the nicotine in order to make the product safer and that they are doing all this work to make the product safer? you remember dr. cook's testimony. remember, one of the last questions they asked dr. cook? "today, does reynolds have a research project with the intent of making a less addictive cigarette? can you answer that question? "to the best of my knowledge, i do not believe we do." they are not working to make a less addictive cigarette. you know, as i predicted, mr. geise did not say very much about what r. j. reynolds did. he talked a lot about david clayton, what david clayton did not do, what david clayton did do. at one point, i wrote down, wow, wow, that evidence of fraud and a finding of fraud on behalf of your client, you are going to talk about that david clayton did not give up skim milk? mr. geise: your honor, the findings are not an issue. the court: all right. overruled. she can refer to them. ms. shamp: you are going to talk about whether he drank iced tea? you are going to compare drinking iced tea to smoking cigarettes? maybe it is hard to talk much about what the client did when you have got documents like this. "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit that they cannot break." that is fortunate for us because we can make a lot of money. that is fortunate. "doubt is our product." that is what we are selling. so maybe it is hard to talk very much about what your client did, and so you are -- you are forced to talk about david clayton drinking milk. but he said one thing in his closing that really struck me. you will remember him saying it, both in his opening and in his closing. he said there are some things they did that are just dumb, some things we wrote down that are stupid. remember him saying that? stupid or brilliant? stupid or brilliant? how many cigarettes did they sell as a result of this campaign that they engaged in? how many more people did they keep smoking their product because of the false controversy that they created, that they established when none existed? then it hit me this morning. that is exactly what he is doing today. he is trying to create a false controversy about -- mr. geise: your honor, i object. this violates the ruling for the case. the court: sidebar. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows: the court: yes, sir. mr. geise: we have a ruling in this case, one of the pretrial motions, as far as commenting on litigation strategy and using the documents to talk about what we did in this case to defend ourselves. i believe that is what ms. shamp is doing here, in violation of the court's order before the trial began. ms. shamp: your honor, i think it is a fair comment upon him creating a controversy and i've -- the court: all right. i'm going to overrule the objection. i think you can organize the merits of each side of the case and that is what everybody does. mr. geise: okay. but the commentary would be to use the documents and say, this is what they are continuing to do, this is what they are doing. it is in violation of the pretrial order. ms. shamp: i heard him say he is creating a controversy where none exists. the court: overruled. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court, in the presence of the jury:) the court: you may continue. i'll overrule the objection. ms. shamp: thank you. they are trying to create a controversy in this case where none exists, whether a person who smoked for 45 years, at least a pack and a half a day, that got up in the middle of the night to go get cigarettes was not addicted, that a man who was diagnosed with squamous cell cancer of the lung underwent chemotherapy, radiation, ended up in a nursing home, eventually not able to eat and died, did not have lung cancer. trying to create controversies that do not exist. we brought in witnesses, smith gavin, lee bonner, people who had no interest in this litigation. mr. geise is trying to make you believe that they were not telling the truth, or there was something untruthful about the things that they said. that is not right. but perhaps most convincing of all, lawsuit david clayton, lawsuit david clayton. is that a fair way to represent what we presented to you in this trial? the david clayton that we presented who was a good man, who loved his wife, who took care of his family, is that a fair way to represent him? a man who did not start with many advantages, worked hard and made a good life for himself. david clayton did not deserve to be called "lawsuit david clayton." is that fair or right from the company he trusted, from the company he handed over his money to every day to buy those cigarettes? david clayton lost ten years of life expectancy. you will remember, mr. spruance said that, ten years, ten years taken away from him and his wife. david clayton is dead, as are forty percent of the people who have ever regularly used defendant's product. mr. geise talked to you about all the things that r. j. reynolds has now done, right? disbanded ctr and produced all those documents. ask yourself this question: did they do any of that without being forced to? remember the testimony. all of them, somebody made them do that. that is what your role is here today. they will not do it voluntary. they have to be made to do it. mr. geise asked for one of you to serve as his advocate, i think he said, in the courtroom -- in the jury room. let me ask all of you, all of you, to be the advocate of truth and honesty back in the jury room. the word verdict means "to speak the truth." "ver" from veritas, truthfulness, "dict," like dictaphone. verdict means to speak the truth, and we ask of you today something very simple. we ask you to render a verdict based on the evidence that has been presented to you. we ask you to render a verdict that places responsibility on r. j. reynolds for their product. we ask you to render a verdict that compensates gloria clayton for the loss of ten years of life with her husband, for watching her husband die. and finally, we ask for a verdict finding that the conduct that you heard about in this courtroom is unacceptable, a finding that says you sitting here as a jury find that conduct not okay. i ask when you are discussing punitive damages back there, to base your decision, as the law requires, on what the evidence was in this courtroom about what happened. mr. geise truthfully has not put on any evidence to contradict it, to contradict their years and years and years of lying. they did not admit that smoking caused lung cancer until the year 2000. base your verdict on the evidence about the reprehensibility of their conduct. this is what the charge says about punitive damages. in determining whether punitive damages are awarded, you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility and the harmfulness of their conduct. we ask you to find that punitive damages are entitled in this case. i want to thank you again for your service and for your attention. we look forward to your verdict. thank you.