mr. trop: counsel. members of the jury, good morning. i want to start out, first of all, by thanking you on behalf of robin cohen and the estate of nathan cohen and on behalf of my partners gary paige, tamika jones, alex alvarez, who is not here, but will be back. i want to thank you for your patience in this case and paying close attention to the evidence that came in. a lot of it was kind of complicated, maybe not all of it was exciting, but we know you were here. we could tell by your demeanor that you were paying close attention. we can tell even more by the questions to the witnesses that you were paying attention. we sometimes -- we are sometimes surprised about how you sometimes -- not sometimes, but usually come out with better questions for the witness than we do. we appreciate that -- we know that this is an imposition for you. and we know that everybody here has somewhere else they can be; and, as much as you hate to admit, would probably rather be there than here. but this is an important case and you have an important job, and we appreciate the diligence and attention that you paid to the job. we have kept that in mind and we have moved as fast as we can to put our case on and still put our case on with completeness. the plaintiffs put their case in a day and a half, meaning the witness and the evidence, day and a half. and the defense also moved faster than they had anticipated. you may recall i mentioned a doctor that made $2 million or so in my opening statement -mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. trop: we both moved quickly and we intend to keep that pace up in the second phase. we will move quickly and get to the evidence as precisely and as clearly as we possibly can. and that is the second phase is actually where the story starts, that is actually what this case is about. i think you will find it a little more interesting, not to say this part was boring. but let me talk to you a little bit about what you have seen in this case, okay? and let us start off with a verdict form. this is what we have to prove. and this is what you are going to be asked to do in this case. let us blow that up. you are going to get a verdict form that his honor, judge streitfeld, is going to hand to you, explain to you this verdict form, and i understand the judge has given you certain i nstructions. there is two questions. you only have to answer one of them. the question is going to be: did nathan cohen have lung cancer; and, if so, was his cigarette smoking a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? pretty straightforward. you could have guessed that s what you were going to be asked. if you answer yes to that, that is it, we move on, and he is a class member and we move on to phase two and then you get to hear the case, what it is about. if for some reason -- we submit that the evidence is overwhelming that the answer should be yes, then we move on. if, however, you feel that he did not, then you go to the second question and it is: did nathan cohen have copd; and, if so, was his cigarette smoking the legal cause of his copd? ana if you answer "yes" to that as the overwhelming evidence suggests that you should, we move on to phase two and we get to -- you get to hear the story. we nave to prove this to you beyond a greater weight of the evidence. greater weight of the evidence. we talked about the scales of justice, and the greater weight is 51 percent. not that really high standard like you have in a criminal case. fifty-one percent. we submit to you that the evidence in this phase has been overwhelming that we have proven that to you. we brought you real doctors who were there, who were in charge of his care. we showed you the real medical records in this case. we do not feel that we have to prove it by this great level, but we overwhelmingly proved it. all the defense has is a bunch of could have been. it could have been one of these rare diseases. he did not work him up for rare mediterranean disease among aids patients, you know, things like that. and we have got all the evidence in our favor. we brought in the actual doctors who treated him. we think that it is overwhelmingly in our favor. what you are going to be doing when you deliberate in a case is you are going to be discussing amongst yourselves what is it that you saw, and you are also going to be looking at the evidence. and almost all the evidence is medical records. i just want to spend a minute with you, kind of show you -- i know some people in the jury have some experience with medical records, but i just want to show you how this is organized. it is basically in two binders, and it s in chronological order. so this binder over here, the first one is may of '92 to march of '93. and the second one is march of '93 to november of '94 when he passed away. and it is organized -- i have this fear that i'm going to drop it and all the pages will fall on the floor in front of you. that would not be good. it is organized by admission and you have the dates right here. if you want to go to his cancer admission, which is may 2nd, that is when he was diagnosed with cancer; just pull to the tab, may 2nd, and it is organized in a pretty standard way. the first thing is the face sheet re they have the diagnosis, and that is where they swear that the diagnosis is correct. you go to -- this one happens to have two phase sheets. same thing. we gave you the records the way that the hospital gave it to us. if there is two copies, that is just the way we got them. nothing is more important about that. then you see discharge summary, kind of the summary of the whole admission. admission summary. that is when he first presents, he first gets to the hospital with his complaints. and then you go to radiology and there happens to be a bunch of radiology in this one. those are the x-ray, cat scans, that kind of stuff. and then you get to progress notes. those are the different specialists that come in and see him write progress notes, and they are all there in chronological order by section. and then in this case there is pathology, so you see pathology. and then you will see doctors -- i'm sorry, before were consultations, then pathology, then progress notes and then get to nursing notes, et cetera. and every section, every admission has that kind of organization to it. near the end after there is some miscellaneous medical records that really do not fit into a category, and what we have done is just put them in chronological order. i'm not suggesting any is more important than anything else. you should take your time, as much time you need, look at them all, but that is just the way they are organized; okay? let us talk about this case again. this -we have submitted evidence to you that this is a classic, clearcut case of primary lung cancer that metastasized. put that board up. mr. cohen's history. a history of 50 years of smoking one to two packs a day. that is classic for lung cancer. that is what lung cancer patients do. symptoms: incessant cough, his chest pain, his wheezing, his shortness of breath, weight loss. i'm not going to show you all the medical records. i know you have seen them a bunch of times. you remember what is important. i'm going to show you weight loss because that came up yesterday. medical record. medical record 697. just as an aside, you had dr. kumar say no weight loss, of course, progressive loss of appetite. appetite is down and has lost three pounds. three pounds is not a lot, but that was his first presentation of lung cancer. he is losing weight and the doctors are acknowledging that he is losing weight. dr. kumar spent dozens of hours with those records. hard to imagine that he did not see that, but it is there. his presentation. a lung mass spreading to the outside of the lung and the adrenal glands i'm going to spend a few minutes talking about the lung mass because that is very important. the pathology suggests small cell carcinoma, not some kind of lymphoma or mesothelioma, small cell carcinoma of the lung. and the progression of the disease to the pleura, to the adrenal glands, to the liver, to the skin, to the brain, most likely, and then he just passed away in six months as, unfortunately, was predicted when they diagnosed him with small cell lung cancer. all classic for lung cancer. so let us get to this issue of a central mass. that is probably the largest area of disagreement with the tobacco companies and the plaintiffs and their doctors, about was there a lung mass. and the tobacco companies are taking great strides to try to prove to you that there was no lung mass, there is no mass in the lungs. and why? because they know they lose the case if there is a mass. you know there is lung cancer if there is a mass. so they try so hard to show you that there is no lung mass. and so i'm going to talk to you about lung mass. there was a lung mass. and it is seen first -- this is the first x-ray, the chest x-ray, and it says: suspicion of a rounded mass in the posterior cardiac border. posterior meaning behind, cardiac border meaning near the heart, which is in the middle, a little to the left. suspicion of a rounded lung mass. when they had dr. cole up on the stand, you remember he had a list of all these films that said: look, there is no evidence of a lung mass in any of them. it is true, the first five or six there is no evidence at all of a lung mass because he did not have a lung mass then. it was back in '92 and '93, all of a sudden in may of '94, boom, out of the blue there is a suspicion of a rounded mass on a chest x-ray. now, how did that happen if there is no mass? all these x-rays are clear and then, boom, out of the blue there is a suspicion of a rounded lung mass. now, they poo-poo that and they say, well, you know, cannot really tell in a chest x-ray, things are a little vague. well, they use it -when there is no mass they say: look, there is clear evidence, there is no mass. when there is a mass, they say: you cannot really tell in a chest x-ray. it is a flip-flop defense. it goes back and forth. so what happens next? they see the suspicion of a rounded mass, they have all of these classic symptoms of lung cancer, so they do a cat scan two days later of the chest. who reads the cat scan? a number of people, amongst them a thoracic surgeon. a doctor, not an orthopedic surgeon or a general surgeon, a doctor that all he does is cut open chests, look inside and operate. okay? that is all he does. he looks at films and then he operates on the chest, nowhere else in the body. he is a chest surgeon. and he looks at it and he says: ct scan of the chest showed a more central, just like the x-ray said, three times two centimeter left lower lung . very specific. left lower lung mass. and to three nodules plus 1.5 centimeters each at the superior segment of the left lower lung. the left lower lung mass. and then there is two to three nodules near the pleura, okay, attached to the pleura. a mass, and then the smaller ones. he is very, very specific about it. and then he says: at the left lower lung at the periphery and with contact with the pleural surface, okay? the nodule. so there is a mass and then the little ones at the periphery with contact with the pleural surface, okay? they are trying to say that everything is not only contacting the pleura but outside the lung. it is just not in evidence. it says plan at the bottom. needle biopsy of the -- i think it says several left lower lung nodules. left lower lung nodules. not extra outside the pleura nodules. that is his plan. okay? this is dr. reyna. this is a chest expert who is saying that. all right. they are suggesting -- their experts are suggesting that he just made it up. either he just made it up, got some kind of plan to make these kind of things up, or he does not even know what he is talking about, that maybe he is confusing the written report of the adrenal gland tumor. the adrenal glands are in the abdomen. okay. when you see the medical records, you do not see the adrenal glands, but looking at a chest x-ray, you have to look at the abdomen ct. so you have to think that this thoracic surgeon pulls up the wrong film, right, a film of the abdomen rather than of the chest, does not recognize it, he is looking at the wrong film. he is looking at a completely different part of the body, sees a tumor in the adrenal glands. down here, and writes it and not only writes that there is a mass, mistakenly writes a mass in the chest, then he makes up these two to three nodules that he sees in the outer part of the lung. it is impossible, is not it? it could not have happened that way. so what is their -- but that is what they are saying. he just did not know what he is talking about. and then, of course, there is dr. ucar, the oncologist, who treats cancer for a living. that is all he does. he says the same thing. he says the same thing. and if you look at his, dr. ucar's report, and you will, i know that you will, i know you will, it is in the same admission, may 2nd. it is not the exact same language. it is similar. it reports similar findings, but he is not as specific as dr. reyna is. it is a little bit different. either way, the lung mass is there and the nodules are in the pleura within the lung. just clear. so what do they point to to suggest that there is no lung mass? they point to the ct report by dr. mennis. he is the general radiologist. and dr. mennis sees the ct and he does not use the word "mass," unfortunately. you probably would have a much shorter trial if he said mass. instead of mass he said there is an area of relative coarse, band-like density. okay? he calls it an area of coarse, band-like density. what is density? everybody knows what density is. i do not mean to -- i do not want to appear like i'm talking down. everybody knows what density is. density, it means mass-like, it is dense. the lung is full of air. this air is not dense. this, that is dense. it is an area of density. it is mass like what he is reporting, a relatively coarse, band-like density extending posterolaterally, just like the x-ray said, to the back. so this is extending to the back from the inferior aspect of the left pulmonary hilum. you heard the hilum is kind of near the center here, kind of the center of the chest; right? so it is extending from the center here to the back to the chest wall pleura, where there is some localized pleural thickening. he is saying the same thing. it is starting here and it is extending toward the back where there is some thickening at the pleural area, okay? he does not describe it as a baseball. he describes it more like a tube. it does not make it not a mass. it is still a mass. he just did not say m-a-s-s. he did not say mass. it is still a mass. and still the tobacco companies are -they know they lose if there is a mass. they keep saying no mass, no mass, no mass. all their experts, "no mass." it reminds me a little bit of -- i do not know if there is any boxing fans here, but i see there is one -- sugar ray leonard/roberto duran case fight years ago. when duran is getting near the end of the fight and duran is getting tired and he sits down in the chair and he says "no mas, no mas. i cannot do it any more." that is them, that is their theme, no mass, no mass. there is a mass. it is there in all the reports. there is a mass. and then we go to -let us go to even another report. this is interesting because their experts say if there is a mass, how come you did not see it later? it is 874. this. if you can just blow that at the top part. all right. now, this -- let me just give you a little background. there is only two cat scans of the chest after he is diagnosed. the original one that we just saw and then there is one in september. four months later, okay? same radiologist, dr. mennis, reads both of them. okay. so what does dr. mennis say this time? interval increase in soft tissue density. so interval. since the last time, there s been an increase in the soft tissue density in the left perihilar, hilar region. hilar, around the hilar, on the left perihilar region, predominantly infrahilar in location extending into the posterior lung base. same thing. so it is increased in size here and still extending into the left lung base with band-like extensions noted extending to the posterior lateral thoracic chest wall pleura. the mass has gotten bigger, same place, but gotten bigger, and it is still extending down to the pleura. again, calling it a density, does not use the word "mass." in addition, the mid to upper lung level there is also suggestion of increased pleural density suspicious for underlying pleural metastasis. this is the radiologist. the first time they read it they said: hey, this radiologist knows what he is talking about. he does not call it a mass. here he says suspicious for underlying pleural metastases. suspicious to metastasizing to the pleura. this dr. mennis was a genius the first time they read the report because he did not say mass. they do not like the second report because he talks about it getting bigger and he talks about the stuff around the pleura, a metastasis. and then he says: in addition, there is increased fullness of the right pulmonary hilum suggestive of hilar adenopathy. those are some big words, but important ones. you heard dr. kumar yesterday say one of the reasons there is no -- it could not have been lung cancer -- first of all, there is no mass, which he knows is not right. he says: there is no hilar adenopathy. i do not know if you remember that. hilar adenopathy is the area of the hilum again and adenopathy is the lymph nodes are enlarging. he says you always see that in cancer. so mr. paige brings up, what does this say? this is a ct scan suggestive of hilar adenopathy. and dr. kumar says: well -- he says the fullness of right pulmonary -- he does not really mean hilar adenopathy. remember all that? so the classic things that he says are not there, classic lung cancer symptoms, actually are there but he is got an excuse for both of them. he is saying: well, they do not really mean what they mean. it is kind of the common theme. you know, you see the word and when they do not like what the word says, they say it does not really mean what it says. it does not mean it at all. they do the same thing with the location of the biopsy, that whole issue. where do they take the biopsy from? they are claiming they took the biopsy from outside the lung somewhere. remember all that? because they know if they took the biopsy from within the lung, they lose if its lung cancer; right? they know that, so they try so hard to say: oh, it is not actually from the lung. it is from some area outside the lung attached to the pleura on the outside. so we show the medical records. i know you have seen these, and i apologize in advance if i'm boring you with them, but i think it is important. okay. this is dr. ramirez. this is the interventional radiologist who did the procedure, got the biopsy. aspiration needle biopsy of the left lower lobe, okay? that is the lung. the biopsy of the lobe. well, their experts say, well, he says of the lobe, he does not really mean of the lobe. that is like a general thing that they say. okay, that is the guy that did it. okay. so let us look at the next report. this is an x-ray report from dr. sanders, another radiologist. percutaneous needle biopsy of the left lung. if it is in the lung they lose, they know that, so they say it does not really mean of the left lung. i know he says of the left lung, he does not mean it. in the bottom it says biopsy of the nodules in the left lower lobe. well, they do not really mean in, their experts say. when they say in the left lower lobe, it does not really mean in, it means something a little different. they are playing word games. this is a serious case. they are playing word games to try to get out of it. it reminds me of a story that i've heard a number of times about abraham lincoln. and i do not know if it is true, i suspect that it is. and everybody knows abraham lincoln was perhaps our greatest president. i do not know if anyone would disagree he was one of our greatest. he was also a lawyer and did trials kind of like this. and there is a story about mr. lincoln that he was sitting in his home in his living room with his son, young son and the family pet. the family dog comes into the room and abraham lincoln says to his son: son, how many legs does that dog have? and his son looks at mr. lincoln and says: father, the dog has four legs. and then mr. lincoln pauses and he says: okay, son, if you were to call his tail a leg, how many legs would he have then? his son looks at his dad and says: well, if you were to call his tail a leg, then he would have five legs. and then honest abe turns to his son, looks him right in the eye and says: son, i do not care what you call that dog's tail, that dog has four legs. respectfully, i do not think you should care what they call that language up there. it says in the lung, it is in the lung. they call it a mass, it is a mass. these are the tobacco companies. they have something to gain by letting you think it is not a mass and it is not in the lung. it is. the clerk: five minutes, counsel. mr. trop: thank you. this is a search for truth. that is what this is. all right. there are two completely different stories. there cannot be two truths here. there is one truth. it is your job to figure out what the truth is. there is no two truths here. and i told you, we think overwhelmingly we have proven that with the actual treating doctors and the actual medical records that the plaintiff's story is the true story. but we respect this process. we are officers of this court and we respect it, and we understand that it is possible you will believe the tobacco company's story is true. i'm not suggesting it, but it is possible. and we would respect that decision if you did believe that; however, i have a question. if the story that the tobacco companies tells you is the truth, how come it costs so much money to tell that story? i mean, really. the hundred thousand dollar man. who knows what the real number was. all this money and all these meetings. is that part of the truth? when you and your children are taught as a young person what the truth is and how important it is, you are taught your values, you know, from your parents or from a teacher, maybe, or from a minister or priest or rabbi, close friend. what do they tell you about the truth and the values of the truth? well, sometimes it is hard to tell the truth. sometimes it is lonely. sometimes it takes courage. sometimes it is not the popular thing to do. do they ever tell you it is expensive to tell the truth? i mean, really, what was -- why? you are allowed to keep that in mind and i hope that you do. why all this stuff? mr. paige is going to do the second half of this. i know he gets nervous when i get close to the time. go to the next board because i want to talk to you a little bit about misdiagnosis, their claims. they basically claim that every doctor that saw nathan cohen committed malpractice. and you heard it and one of the jurors here, whoever it was, asked a very good question and brought it out. yes, that is what they are claiming, that basically every doctor committed malpractice. dr. centurion, he was the cardiologist. he originally had -- he was the first person that noted his copd in the chart, even though it was mild, but he did not give him certain heart medication because he knew he had copd; okay? so he was clearly wrong because he is withholding heart medicine to a person with copd who they are claiming did not have copd. and then dr. gonzalez, who repeatedly diagnosed mr. cohen with copd, he is clearly guilty of malpractice because he diagnosed him repeatedly and he treated him with medicine for his copd. and just -- it is just a coincidence that it happened to work, right? so he clearly committed malpractice and he committed malpractice for diagnosing the lung cancer. and then we have dr. vernon, the pathologist who saw the small cell lung cancer and called it a carcinoma. well, they had an expert in here, i do not know, it is not a carcinoma, it is a lymphoma. looks like a lymphoma, which is not a carcinoma, or it is a mesothelioma, that is not a carcinoma. so, he must have committed malpractice because he sees something on a microscope and they are saying mesothelioma looks nothing like small cell. so this guy does not know what he is talking about either. dr. sanders, that is the doctor that saw the rounded lung mass; right? the rounded mass. she does not -- she is really bad. she is up there twice. dr. reyna, of course, made up the story of the lung mass. he is guilty not only of malpractice. it is some kind of fraud he must have been guilty of. ms. parker: objection. the court: overruled. mr. trop: he just made something up and put it up there. he put on these fine details that he pulled out of a hat somehow. dr. ucar, when he was conspiring with dr. reyna -mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. trop: he was conspiring with dr. reyna to come up with a story of a mass, you know, 16 years before there is any thought of a lawsuit or trial on a lawsuit. so dr. ucar, the oncologist, is also clearly guilty of malpractice. he diagnosed lung cancer too. dr. ramirez, the guy that did the biopsy, must be malpractice. he reported that the biopsy was done on something in the lung and it clearly was not, according to the tobacco companies. he does not even know where he is putting the needle. he thinks that he put it in the lung. it must have been somewhere else is what they are claiming. dr. sanders, the other radiologist who reported on the same thing right after the biopsy, she does not know what she is doing. we already saw that earlier with her. dr. antunez, the oncologist treating him with lung cancer, repeatedly seeing him constantly -- you will see lung cancer all over that chart. i did not have enough time to show you all the diagnoses, but i know you will see it. dr. villa, who was here in this courtroom, he treated him for small cell lung cancer. it had to be malpractice. you noticed that he was on the stand auite a while. no one accused him of malpractice while he was here or dr. gonzalez, not to their face. nobody stood here and said: doctor, did not you commit malpractice? but when he left to treat patients who have cancer, when he left back to his office, then they bring the kansas guy in here and says: oh, they are all guilty of malpractice. ms. parker: objection. the court: overruled. mr. trop: they are back there treating cancer patients today. dr. quintana, you will see him, he is an internist that diagnosed him with lung cancer. malpractice. terrible thing going down there in mercy hospital. dr. mennis, he was a hero, great qualifications when he did not write lung mass in may of '94, but then in november of '94 when he says this density got bigger and it is reaching out to the pleura and he had hilar adenopathy, he must have lost his qualifications by then because he was completely wrong about that. malpractice number 12. i did not talk about copd. i kind of ran out of time. all the evidence is that mr. cohen had copd. all the evidence is. there is no pulmonary function test that we know of that said he was below 70, okay? but dr. klotz admitted that it if there had been one, okay, i change my mind, he has copd. so, clearly, all the symptoms and everything were compatible with it, but he is just saying: i do not see that test, so he did not have copd. he did not have chronic bronchitis. now he is hospitalized, he says: i agree, he probably had acute bronchitis, but not chronic because chronic would be copd. he clearly has copd also. i thank you very much for your time and attention. mr. paige is getting impatient over there. i see him with his papers. thank you very much. mr. paige: may it please the court. counsel. mr. reilly. good morning. i really was not getting impatient. i was hoping he could do the whole closing because i know he did a great job. and i have notes here and i think he covered already everything, but i have certain things that i wrote down to say. you probably heard enough. usually they say at this point you probably made up your mind and that is fine as well, but i want to say that what adam trop said is important for both parties. it is important for r.j. reynolds and philip morris, and it is important for ms. cohen. i'm so proud of her for being here. these type of cases are so important. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and i know that as adam said, you guys have your lives and you are doing things, and this is really important. it is so important we do thank you. and in opening, ms. parker said that this about money damages, a claim for money damages; and i assure you, and this is not the time or the place to talk about money. we are more than happy to do that, fairly. we will ask for fair compensation at the appropriate time. ms. parker: objection, your honor. mr. reilly: objection. the court: overruled. mr. paige: but this is really not what this is about. this is about justice, about truth, doing what is right, doing what is fair. it is about treating people with respect, and that is what this case is about. ms. cohen, if you could go back into this jury room and bring her husband back, that is really what she wants. ms. parker: objection, your honor, phase one. the court: overruled. mr. paige: they have a deliberate tactic here for doubt and denying. mr. reilly: objection your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: they come to court and they try to create doubt, reasonable doubt. that is not the standard. that is not the standard. it is not a criminal case. nobody's going to jail. nobody's liberty is at stake. but today they are not selling cigarettes in court. doubt is their product. that is what they sell -mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: doubt and confusion. that is what they do. that is what the cigarette companies do. that is what their defense is. and you heard dr. strauss, they talked to dr. strauss and they tried to impeach him, you are bias against us, you think that we should not do what we do and you think that it is wrong what we do. dr. strauss explained: i see what you have done, i've seen your conduct, i've seen what your product does to people and i see the harm it does, and i know that you for decades until recently denied that cigarettes were addictive. ms. parker: objection, your honor. the court: overruled, ma'am. he is allowed to argue from the evidence. it was raised based upon your questions. mr. paige: so now we are at a point in time in life where they could no longer deny that cigarettes cause lung cancer. they cannot do it any more. mr. reilly: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. paige: so now they come to the court of law, courtrooms like this, and they come up with doubt, confusion, story after story. mr. reilly: same objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: folks, step into the jury room. (thereupon, the jurors exited the courtroom.) the court: these are fair comments. these are fair comments. the defense in this case was that mr. cohen died of extremely, extremely rare cancers that were not worked up as a result of the fault of the doctors in this case, so this plaintiff has the right to suggest that this was a defense to create doubt. that is his argument. he is not personalized it, it is based on the evidence. your continuing objections are unreasonable and obstructive. bring the jury in. mr. reilly: i move for mistrial, your honor. the court: denied. (thereupon, the jurors entered the courtroom.) the court: proceed. mr. paige: thank you. so -- and we have shown you the evidence of how they do this, how they do it. they get a qualified expert, dr. kumar. i was impressed with his qualifications. i respect doctors, i do, but, you know, they are people. i'm a person and i think that they get to do -- they get the respect that they deserve. here's a guy that for over -- i had cross examined him for 15 minutes for him to admit that he has not been in florida for four days just swimming in our pools. he was trying to -- come on, you have made some money, 80, 100,000. just tell us so we could move on. he could not even do that. the guy's -- his initial impression was he did not know whether or not it was caused by smoking; and, after 50 hours of meetings after meetings, he had some really outrageous opinions. and dr. kumar and dr. cole and mr. persinger are probably in some pool in florida talking about another case right now. but you have to decide if you think that is fair and that is right for them to come up with the stories that they told you over the past couple of weeks. and they have a right to raise whatever defense they want. you know, they can do whatever they want. they can blame whoever they want. that is their choice. a choice they made to come to court and do that. they can admit the obvious. mr. trop told you, they can admit the obvious if they want to. nobody is forcing them to say this. when they get to phase two, we are going to admit that mr. cohen -ms. parker: objection. mr. reilly: objection. the court: i do not even know what he is going to say yet. i think that is premature. continue. mr. paige: mr. cohen bears some responsibility. we talked about fault. this is not about fault. this phase is only about the medicine. ms. parker: same objection. the court: overruled. my goodness. continue. mr. paige: you know, when -- and i want to say this, i respect mr. reilly, i work with him and ms. parker. when they object, i do not hold it against them. we went to law school, we learned rules to object. i do not object much. i did not pay much attention in that class. they object, that is fine. i do not take that personally. they can choose to admit the obvious and i was saying when we get to phase two, when we talk about fault and responsibility and choices, we welcome that debate. i cannot wait to talk to you about the choices they made, the reasons they made them. and we will admit responsibility, some responsibility for mr. cohen at that time. you know, we do not have to do that, but we will, we will. and that is what we want. we want to be fair. we will always ask for what is fair and we think that -- and we know that you will do that, you will do what is fair and right and we appreciate that. so adam spoke about dr. cole. i'll just say briefly, you know, he met with the lawyers over again. he said the biopsy was not from the lung. we know that is not so. he said the x-ray did not reveal a mass. we know that is not so. and then he said the thoracic surgeon did not see a mass. we know that is not so. and that, i find -- you may find, you heard the evidence, a thoracic surgeon who is going to go in there and start making up a three by two centimeter mass and little nodules outside, you know, attached to the pleura and describe exactly where it is in the lung; that is not malpractice, that person should not be practicing in our community to just make up a lie like that. and so for you to believe them, you have to believe that dr. reyna is a pathological liar who is saving lives in miami. and that is a decision you will have to make. dr. kumar, he did the same thing. he would not admit the most obvious things, but i want to put up a board that i have for dr. kumar. and initially he said he could not say whether or not it was from smoking. fifty hours of meetings, 45 medical articles provided by the lawyers to him. he lost some of them. i would be interested to know what the ones were that he did not bring with him to his deposition. i would liked to have seen them because the ones i did see were somewhat helpful. and now he from not knowing, he comes to a hundred percent not caused by smoking. can you make that -- so he has these differential diagnoses. he starts out with this pleural lymphoma, you will remember. you see, they are going to throw up whatever defenses. there is six different people here. they only need one person to believe pleural lymphoma, one person to believe mesothelioma, maybe somebody will believe merkel cell. so they do not know who is going to believe what, so they are going to just throw everything at you and hopefully something will stick. with pleural lymphoma, here's a guy who treats -- dr. kumar treats rare diseases. he specializes in rare diseases. and in 20 years in 5,000 cases of cancer, he is seen it three or four times. this is what mr. cohen now has. he is the fifth case. he says that the pyothorax or chronic chest infection is what you will usually see. we know he did not have that. he admitted that. and you would expect it to be an immunocompromised hiv or organ transplant person. so now he is seen it three or four times. mr. cohen is now going to be the fifth, and he is going to have these extraordinary things that nobody has. no chronic infection, no hiv, no organ transplants. but it is okay, he still probably had his pleural lymphoma. it is funny, when we asked him about the small cell, he said, you know, the pathology said small cell. he said, well, you know, it is technically not small cell because he did not have enough to do the staining, so we do not know that. so he will make no effort to try to see what really happened with the small cell. but when we talk about his crazy explanations, he will exclude all the norms, every norm, just to say that mr. cohen has these rare disorders. the next one is this pleural effusion lymphoma which, incidentally, it is not on there. he says you have no mass with that. there is zero mass. it is just in the fluid. and it is with middle-aged men with hiv, people of mediterranean descent, with herpes 8 or with organ transplants. none of them describe mr. cohen. so we know he did not have all this chronic thickening. we know he had cardiac surgery. pleural effusion is from his cardiac surgery. we know that it is in the literature that he read, but he did not want to say anything about that. in fact, i know you do not remember everything, but i read over his testimony last night. there is one question where i asked him about the pleural thickening being from cardiac injury syndrome. it was right in the literature he read. and then he read it or i read it and he said he still disagreed with it, so he would not agree with anything, to help out the tobacco companies. and here's a man who is treating cancer, he is seeing people dying with cancer, and he is going to go this far to help the tobacco companies. you decide what you think would motivate a person like that. the next one, the mesothelioma. eighty percent of them have asbestos exposure. you heard about his work history. he had no asbestos exposure. there is usually local progression, meaning it does not metastasize. he had extensive metastasis. skin metastasis is extremely rare, very rare, he said. mr. cohen had that. and it does not even look like small cell under a microscope. it is these large, ugly cells. he admitted that. so we have now, it is a whole thing, you know, walks like a duck, talks like a duck, it is a duck. here it looks nothing like these things. it does not even make sense. it is actually -- you would have to take your -- we always say -- we want you to really use your common sense. you have to use your common sense. of course you will. this makes no sense. he wants us to take your common sense and do not even use it to follow his rationality. the next one. melanoma. i did not talk that much about it, but nobody ever diagnosed him with a melanoma. he did say it did not appear clinically to be a melanoma. so then we started to talk about merkel cell skin cancer, and he said that this would be extremely rare. it is a red bluish lesion that he did not have. it is mostly organ transplants, and there is two known reported cases in the entire world where people have merkel cell carcinoma and pleural effusion. so now mr. cohen is -- now -- okay, he does not have lymphoma, he does not have mesothelioma, so now he is going to be the third reported case in the entire world who has a pleural effusion with merkel cell, even though he does not have an organ transplant or bluish lesions. i almost feel like i'm wasting my time talking about this because i know you-all heard the evidence and listened to it, but it just does not make sense what he is telling you and it is, you know -- i'm almost embarrassed that we have to talk about it. and the last thing he says is maybe it is an unknown primary. and then, finally, he admitted well, with an unknown primary, if there was an unknown primary that caused his death, the most common cause of an unknown primary is lung cancer. so even if he is right, it was an unknown primary, his 50 to 100 pack years had nothing to do with it because he is going to exclude that because it would hurt these guys over here. you know, another thing he said i thought was important was that a -- in 1994 he had the small effusion, he had those other effusions following his heart surgery. in '94 he had a small effusion. and he said the most likely cause, the leading cause of a metastatic effusion is lung cancer. he said that is a fact, it is a known fact. no one can dispute that. and, you know, he would just discount even though -- he would not discount any of this. he would not say, well, maybe he was the person who did not have hiv who had this disease, maybe he was the one without the organ transplant who had this; but, when we talked about the staining, he says, you know, we cannot confirm small cell a hundred percent without the staining. the adrenal mass was only suspected, so that is not a hundred percent. the brain mass, you know, they should have done a ct when he was in hospice and he was going to die in two days. they should have started wheeling him around the hospital to confirm this brain mass; that is what i would have done because i really care about people, not like dr. villa. you know, it is outrageous, and i thought it was interesting too the other article, the chronic pyothorax. there was one patient reported in the world in japan who did have a pleural lymphoma without the chronic pyothorax. again, mr. cohen would be the second. so he is got all these rare diseases reported from all over the world. i mean, that is why they spent 50 hours and why they go through 45 articles provided by the lawyers, because they are looking for something, somewhere in the literature that they can come to you and say: hey, this is what he is got. it does not fit what they are saying. it just does not fit. it does not make sense and it is just part of their strategy that they have been doing. you will learn about it in phase two. mr. reilly: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. paige: i'm actually pretty much out of my notes. again, nobody is blameless here. we are going to get to phase two and we will be more than happy to get to that debate. look forward to that. dr. strauss, they may bring up the fact that he thinks cigarettes should be illegal because of the things that he has seen and some of the things we are going to show you, but he is not alone in that. ms. parker: objection. the court: overruled. mr. paige: dr. kumar, who is the member of the american society of clinical oncology, you remember i read that, they said the same thing. the society that dr. kumar is in said the same thing that dr. strauss said, that because of what these people have done for decades and what they are doing around the world, that drastic measures need to be taken. and that is why these cases, it is not only about what you-all may have thought it was about when you came in here not too long ago, and these cases are -- they are important, the most important thing that i do, and we look forward to talking to you about that in phase two. i know ms. parker is going to have an opportunity to speak and probably mr. trop will speak again, and i thank you all very much for your time and your consideration. thank you. mr. trop: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, this is the rebuttal part of the closing argument, so i have an opportunity to talk to you about some of the things ms. parker said, and i have a number of things to say. i have a bunch of notes and different handwritings and different types of papers, so i might jump around a little bit, but i think a lot of things i really need to address. and there is one thing that jumps out at me first, and that is at part of ms. parker's closing argument that she suggested that mr. nathan cohen is not deserving to come into court and make a claim, that he is not deserving and that others were. there are other people that are deserving but that mr. cohen is not deserving. he is not deserving like the others. so you have got to ask -- you have been sitting here for a while, you have got to ask yourself -- you have heard the evidence. you see what these people, the people that they bring in to testify, you see what they do. ask yourself in your mind if you think if there is ever, ever, ever been a time where they admitted someone was deserving to come into court? ask yourself. how many times do you think that they ever, ever, ever admitted that? you see what these witnesses do. they come from one courtroom, they are done now, they are going to go into another courtroom. this is just another courtroom for them; this is another jury. they re going to move on and do the same thing over and over again. and i promise you in phase two when their witnesses are up there, i'm going to ask them how many times they have said someone was deserving and the answer is going to be zero. zero. never. mr. cohen is not deserving. ms. parker talked about proof and that we did not spend much time. she said, she broke down that one question that you really have to answer and she said: well, there is really two questions. that is true. there are two questions. we did not spend a tremendous amount of time proving that the smoking caused the lung cancer because there is been no contrary evidence. okay? all the evidence, even their -- even dr. kumar admitted, if it is small cell cancer, it is caused by smoking 95 to 98 percent of the time. actually, i think everybody said 98. i said 95 to 98 during my opening statement. i do not think anybody disputed it was 98 percent of the time. if it were one of those other types of lung cancers, the lowest number we heard was 98 percent of the time. so lung cancer is caused by smoking. there is no suggestion anywhere else that he had lung cancer that was caused by anything else. so we did not spend a lot of time offering proof on that because there is no contradiction at all in the evidence that if he had lung cancer, it was caused by smoking. now, there was a suggestion that we did not put in a death certificate into evidence, and that that somehow is a failure of proof because we did not put the death certificate into evidence. two things. we put -- and you will see the markers on it -- we put the medical records. that is all we put in. this is the medical causation part of the case. we put in medical records. a death certificate is not a medical record. it is really not. they have the same opportunity to put in evidence that we do. and they put some -- they put a bill in for some skin biopsies, not a medical record, a bill. okay. they could put in a death certificate too if they want. there really was not a need to put in a death certificate; but, if we had put it in, they summarized for you, it would have benefited us. it says bronchogenic cancer. it said bronchogenic large cell cancer, but it is lung cancer is what the testimony said. that is what the testimony was, that is what their own chart said. and they made a big deal about it did say bronchogenic large cell, but that is a carcinoma, that is lung cancer. they made a big deal in their closing about the fact that there were some discrepancies about the cell type of lung cancer. it is a distinction. ms. parker says that it was totally the opposite, large cell -- i'm sorry, small cell and adenocarcinoma or non-small cell. it is not totally the opposite. they are actually very, very similar. they are all lung cancers. it is a different cell type. it is a different cell type of lung cancer. but they are all lung cancers and they are all caused by smoking. so, yes, there are differences in the way they described it and they have seized on that and they have said it over and over again. does not make any difference. it did not make any difference to his treatment. they treated him the same way they would have either way. it does not make a difference for your purposes. it is all lung cancer. it is all caused by smoking. then they talked about credibility. and they talked about dr. villa's credibility. and they talked about dr. gonzalez's credibility and dr. centurion's credibility. and dr. villa, of course, dr. villa they have hired in the past. dr. villa. they vouched for his credibility when it benefits them. and they come in and question his credibility in this case and say he is done something wrong. he is the doctor that treated this man that cared for him. and then they talked about dr. gonzalez and dr. centurion played music together and they are friends. so there is some kind of conspiracy or something between the two of them to try to get something by you because they know each other. they have been practicing medicine with each other for 20 years. of course they know each other. they play music together. imagine, r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris tobacco company are sitting next to each other in a table and they are talking about a doctor conspiring with someone. two doctors conspiring with each other. phillip morris and r.j. reynolds back there in the same table saying that someone else is conspiring against someone. i mean, some -- and they talk about dr. gonzalez not having all the medical records. i do not have a transcript right before me, but i know you heard the evidence. dr. gonzalez sat for a three-hour deposition. he testified to it where he went through all the medical records and he testified, he looked at the testing that was done -ms. parker: objection, not in evidence. the court: overruled. mr. trop: they questioned him about it. i know you-all recall that. he did bring just a few pages with him. these were just his personal notes that he was the one that typed them up or had them typed up. talked about the fact that we did not bring the slides in, we did not bring the x-rays in. l, you know, the x-rays do not exist anymore, slides do not exist, but we brought the orts and we actually brought the doctors in that were caring for him. mrs. cohen does not decide who keeps the slides and how long they are kept. she cannot be punished for the fact that the hospital and the doctors follow the procedures that all hospitals and doctors do. ms. parker almost suggested that we have to prove to a certainty what happened in this case. we do not have to prove to a certainty, we have to prove more likely than not what happened. she says: well, the pathology report only said suggests small cell cancer. like that is not enough. the pathology report does not have to say we are certain it is small cell lung cancer. more likely than not, was it small cell lung cancer? you have a pathologist says i know it is small cell lung cancer. that is it. we do not have to prove with a certainty. more likely than not. that is the standard. and then they -- i'm jumping around a little bit. but they talked about the fact that dr. gonzalez did not do this pulmonary function test or we do not have a record of him having done it. it does not mean that he did not have copd. ms. parker said, well, there is a rule that you have to do it, almost implying like it is a law or something. i can assure you there is only one law in this courtroom, and judge streitfeld is going to tell you what the law is, and that is the only law in this courtroom. and i can assure you judge streitfeld is not going to tell you anything about there having to be a pulmonary function test. it is not going to happen. his honor is not going to tell you that. it would have been great if we had it said here. they would have had to come up with another reason why he did not have copd. we do not have it, does not mean he did not have copd. and then they talk about why we did not call mrs. cohen as a witness in our case, implying like we had something to hide or something. i do not know why they said that. i do not even know why they played the video, quite frankly. what did that have to do with whether or not he had lung cancer? can anyone figure that out? you will hear from mrs. cohen in phase two. she will come up to the stand and talk. but the fact that we did not play a video or call her in phase one, when it was only about medical causation and whether or not her husband had lung cancer. she is not a doctor, she cannot talk about that. she knows he had lung cancer, but she just heard it from the doctors. there is no -- there is no other reason why we did not call mrs. cohen in phase one. okay. then they talk about the -- they get into the mass again. i'm not going to get into the mass. i know you made up your mind as to whether or not there was a mass. there was clearly a mass. ms. parker talks about, well, it was not like the classic golf-ball appearance. well, there is a three by two centimeter mass. that is about the size of a golf ball. okay. maybe it is not perfectly round. it was three by two, but a golf ball is like that. that is three by two. it is a golf ball. central solitary mass. that is a golf ball. and then they talk to you about the symptoms and they, again, went over the thing -they still have weight loss. you see the chart. it still says he did not have weight loss and ms. parker said, well, yeah, it does. now the story is, well, of course, it does say he had weight loss, but that was later in his treatment. no, no, no, it was not later in his treatment. it was the very beginning he was diagnosed, may 2nd. i got the wrong one. probably not the most important part of the case, but, you know, the fact is a fact. you were told it was late. the admission summary, may 2nd, 1994, talks about his lack of appetite and his weight loss; not later in his treatment when the cancer was eating away at his organs. right off the bat when he was diagnosed. it was not accurate what she said. and then she acknowledges that he has almost all the other classic symptoms of lung cancer, that he had shortness of breath, that he has coughing, that he has chest pain. and on the list, she says they are caused by something else. they have an excuse for everything. you put -- all the symptoms are there, but they are caused by something else. the pathology was there, but he was not sure of the pathology. the radiology was there -- well, this did not really mean a mass even though it says a mass, and this is a density and it is not a mass. and there is an explanation for everything there. they have got a different excuse why every piece of the puzzle does not fit perfectly and it does fit perfectly. it does. there is no autopsy report. well, again, there is no law that you have to have an autopsy report. judge streitfeld is not going to tell you there has to be an autopsy report in this case. it is true dr. villa said he wishes there was a law or in a previous case he wishes there were a law that there needs to be an autopsy report, but that is because dr. villa comes into court, he hears people tell stories like this. so, sure, he would like to have an autopsy so people cannot come into court and make up stories. you cannot do an autopsy on every person, you just cannot. and they do not. it is rare. dr. strauss. they attributed some quotes from dr. strauss, the man with the bow tie. for whatever reason, they had long, lengthy quotes from some of the other experts, the other witnesses. for dr. strauss they iust had a little blurb on a sheet. they kind of took him out of context. he admittedly does not like what the tobacco companies have done. and he does not like what he sees every day. he goes in, almost always treats lung cancer. a lung cancer expert. he sits with people and he watches them die all day long and sits with their families and watches their families, watches their loved ones die, day after day, thousands of them. he knows that their product did it, ninety percent of them. and he knows other things that they did in the past to keep people hooked and not to tell them the truth. ms. parker: objection. the court: sustained. mr. trop: you have got some billing records in here that talk about some biopsy. there is no -- you know, some superficial skin biopsy. there is no evidence. each of their experts kind of gave up on the skin cancer thing. there is no evidence he had skin cancer. no evidence at all. i mean, zero. i think i've covered most of what i need to cover, but i want to tell you, again, i want to thank you. and this is the only thing that we are going to agree upon, the lawyers from the tobacco companies and the lawyers for the plaintiff, is that you have been attentive and we appreciate your service in this case and we look forward to seeing you and telling you the rest of the story in phase two. we really do appreciate it. and i want to leave you with the thought that you are a group and you will sit and you will go in and deliberate. but you are a group of individuals too. and everybody has a right to be heard and the right to have their opinions considered. and we know you will -- and we know that you will do that. everybody should voice their opinions and come to a consensus in this case. that is important. and i'll leave you with a concept that ms. parker said that you should not consider sympathy for mrs. cohen. and that is the other thing that we agree on. sympathy should not be the basis of your decision in this case. but i'll tell you this, robin cohen did not come into this courtroom for sympathy. robin cohen gets plenty of sympathy at home, that is where you are supposed to get sympathy. robin cohen came into this courtroom for justice. that is what you come into a courtroom for, and that is what she is expecting and hoping. and we look forward to seeing you in phase two when she can tell her story. thank you.