ms. parker: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. first of all, i want to first of all thank you for your service as jurors. i join the plaintiff's counsel in doing that. it was a week ago that you-all were swore in, you took your oath as jurors, and we have all noticed that all have been here every day, day in, day out taking notes, paying attention, good and bad, up and down throughout the trial. we appreciate that very much. i want to thank you not just on behalf of myself, but for our whole trial team; mr. walker, john walker, john yarber and then ken reilly, of course, for philip morris. i want to thank him for allowing me to give our closing statement today as well. i'm going to start by going over the verdict form and tell you about one of the charges that you are going to get from judge streitfeld at the end of the case. let me put that up for you. we try to fix it so everybody can see the chart. this is the verdict form, the same one that you were shown by the plaintiffs. and let me start by saying this is the only thing that you are going to address in this phase. plaintiff's lawyers and mr. paige, in particular, spent a lot of time talking to you about what they thought they were going to do in phase two. that is because they want to get to where they can ask for damages. that is what we are here about. we are here about their claim that they -- mrs. cohen is entitled to money. that is what we are here about. but the only issue that you have here in phase one is whether mr. cohen, whether they have met their burden of proof for mr. cohen, whether mr. cohen fits within these two categories, and they have the burden of proof on that. now, at the end of the case when we finish our closings, so i will finish and then they will have a short rebuttal to it, judge streitfeld is going to read you jury instructions, what the law is. and he is going to tell you that they have -they are the only ones who have the burden of proof here. that is really important. we do not have any burden of proof. i do not have to prove anything to you. we do not have to prove it was pleural cancer, we do not have to prove it was malpractice. this is not a malpractice case. we do not have to prove anything. i do not even have to put up any evidence. the entire burden is on the plaintiffs. and they showed you the scale, the justice scale during their remarks. what they have to do -- you start the case at the bottom like in the basement at ground zero, they have to bring you all the way up to where you answered these questions in their favor. that is their burden. and mr. paige says that doubt is our product, we are all about doubt. that is not right. we are about proof. that is what we are asking for. we are about proof. what is the objective medical evidence? and they have the burden of proving to you. what is the proof? now, on the questions you will see the plaintiff has the burden of proof on every element of every question. they have to prove everything. and you will see here both questions have more than one part to it. did nathan cohen have lung cancer? okay. they have got to prove to you that mr. cohen had lung cancer and everybody agreed lung cancer, that means cancer that started in his lung. and they also have to prove to you that his cigarette smoking was a legal cause -- and that is a legal term, i'm going to tell you about that also as we go along -- the legal cause of his lung cancer and death. they have to prove legal cause, they have to prove cigarette smoking did it. they have to prove every single element of both of those questions. and what does that mean here? when you take that law, they have the burden of proof, they have to prove all of this. what does that mean in terms of this case? mr. yarber is going to help me with the charts here today. thank you. here's what it means. they brought you no pathology tissue, they did not bring any slides, none of those glass slides, none of that tissue. they did not bring any of that to court. that is been destroyed. they did not bring any chest x-ray films or any chest ct films. the only thing that we have is the radiology report. that is a failure of proof. they did not have an autopsy. that is a failure of proof. they did not bring you any pulmonary function tests that were below the cutoff. the only pulmonary function test in this case showed -- ruled out copd. they were over the seventy percent. that is a failure of proof. they did not do any kind of dna testing, they did not do any kind of genetic testing, they did not evaluate his work history. doctor after doctor said -- they did not question him about where he had worked and what his occupational exposures were. and then ask yourself, why did not they bring you the death certificate? that is another failure of proof. this is a wrongful death case, and they did not bring you the death certificate. why is that? they have it, dr. villa. i asked dr. villa about it. it is because dr. villa put something different on this official state of florida death certificate than what he has come to court and what they are coming to court and saying now. so they just acted like it did not happen, did not put it into evidence. there is been a complete failure of proof by the plaintiffs. and so remember during my opening statement i said we are going to focus on the objective medical evidence? when you-all are deliberating and you are thinking about the case when you go back there, you have got to ask yourself: there is a failure of proof here. none of this is in the records. and why is that? there are two simple unavoidable issues here; one is there was no cancer in mr. cohen's lung. i'm going to go over that. there is no cancer in his lung. if there is no cancer in your lung, that is not lung cancer. there is just no such thing. that is a fundamental problem with their proof. the second fundamental problem they have is everybody agreed that there is a test, pulmonary function test, to determine if you have copd. and according to those tests, he does not have copd. his test results were above the cutoff. those are two simple, unavoidable truths about this case. now, what have the plaintiffs tried to bring? they did not bring any of this, but they brought you medical records and some of the doctors. and i want to go over what that testimony is. first of all, remember this chart. that is a chart that dr. cole used. and this is of the radiology studies. and dr. cole went over those studies with you one by one by one. and he explained that there was nothing in the radiology that indicated there was cancer in the lung, but all of the radiology over here mentioned that there were problems in the pleura. if i can have the cell types. remember this chart? these are the medical records. these medical records show they were all over the place, all over the place in terms of what kind of cancer he had. and i suggest to you that the reason they are all over the place is because he did not have lung cancer. this is not a situation where there was a smoker who came in and every doctor looked at it and said that is small cell lung cancer, that is small cell lung cancer. that is not what happened here. they are all over the board. and look at dr. villa, in particular. in his medical record, dr. villa, of course, is the one who came to court. dr. villa said non-small cell. and then on the death certificate dr. villa said bronchogenic adenocarcinoma large cell. so he says non-small cell and then he says large cell on the death certificate. sixteen years later, here we are in court and dr. villa has totally changed his opinion. and now he says, for the first time in this litigation, it was small cell. and i would submit to you that that is an issue of credibility that you are going to need to resolve. you know, no one likes to have to make decisions about people's credibility. it is just not in our natures, but your job as jurors you are going to be given an instruction by judge streitfeld. you are going to have to judge the credibility of the evidence and the credibility of the witnesses. and i'd like to suggest to you that when you are back there considering this, just keep in mind dr. villa -- this is undisputed -- dr. villa said non-small cell, then large cell and 16 years later is the first time he ever said small cell. and even dr. strauss, who is the doctor that they called -- i guess it was last -- when was it? thursday afternoon. thursday morning. getting my days mixed up. even dr. strauss said that dr. villa was careless. that is the word he used. dr. villa was careless. and then dr. antunez. let us talk about him. all right. a number of their -- a number of the things that they talked about during their opening that they are asking you to rely on are from dr. antunez. dr. antunez got the wrong side of the body. every medical record, every witness, everybody said this was on the left. what did dr. antunez say? right. so if you are going to the hospital and you are going to have surgery on your left leg and the doctor does the right leg, that is wrong. and that is what happened here with dr. antunez in this record. this is a guy who does not even have the correct side of the body. he says right. that is incorrect. but that is who they are asking you to rely on. and then dr. gonzalez. remember first thing i asked dr. gonzalez when he took the stand, i said: did you look at all these medical records? remember i took them up here to him? i said: did you review all these medical records? he said: no. he only had that tiny, little folder with only a few pages in it. and the aintiff's lawyers had not even given him the lmonary function test results when he took the stand. remember that? he said -- i said, have you been shown these? this is the pulmonary function test that he agreed was a test. he said, "no." why would a lawyer do that? why would a lawyer put the witness on the stand -mr. trop: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. ms. parker: and then also the mistake about dr. reyna. and i'm going to go over those records with you a little bit later. but dr. reyna is the one who wrote three by two in the lung. and it just happened to be the same day that there was a radiology report that said the three by two was in the adrenal. i'll go over that. those are the kind of mistakes that have been made here. and the lawyers for mrs. cohen are asking you to rely on the credibility of those doctors. and so what happened back in 1994? his doctors agreed back in 1994 none of them were trying to figure out what was wrong with what caused mr. cohen's cancer. there was no lawsuit back then. there is not a single medical record that talks about what caused it or what were the risk factors or anything like that. they did not do anything about that back in 1994. instead, in 1994 they said this gentleman came in, he was already terminal, he refused chemotherapy after that first round of it. that is all. that is all they did. but here we are 16 years later and it is going to be your job to go back, and you are the ones who are going to have the responsibility of determining what he had and what caused it. i also want to note that to explain all of this that the plaintiff's witnesses said, this just does not matter. these details do not matter. they said, well, he smoked, he smoked a lot; and, therefore, he had cancer. therefore, it was lung cancer in his lung. that is the way they just -they jumped to a conclusion, and they were not being careful because it was not an issue back in 1994. they had a patient who came in, heavy smoker, already terminal. again, only wanted one round of chemotherapy. that is all they did. every smoker's medical situation is different. they started their case by putting on general testimony, remember, from dr. burns, and i'll go over that in a minute. just general testimony. remember the first witness came on videotape, and he did not even know anything about mr. cohen because that is the theme of their case. well, he smoked, he had cancer, it must have been lung cancer without looking at the details. there are some smokers who get lung cancer from smoking. we do not dispute that. i said that in my opening statements. cigarettes are not safe. about ten percent of smokers get lung cancer, but that is not what we are here about. that is not mr. cohen. those are people who are deserving of saying that they have lung cancer caused by smoking. and the people that had pulmonary function tests that proved that they had copd, those people are deserving of saying that they have copd caused by smoking; but, that is not mr. cohen. again, our two main medical points are there is no mass in the lung; and, if there is no mass in the lung, it cannot be lung cancer. there is just no such thing. and the agreed upon medical test for copd, everybody agreed on, ruled out copd for mr. cohen. i just want to spend a moment talking about his life -- his other medical issues because those explain some of his symptoms. remember, he had a history of three strokes, he had very high blood pressure, he had high cholesterol, he was overweight. he did not take all of his medicine. he had bypass surgery. he had clogged arteries. those other medical issues explain, for example, why he had shortness of breath sometimes. now, there are two different questions on the verdict form, and i'm going to start with the first one which is lung cancer. i'm going to go over that evidence. remember when we said back in -- i said back in my opening statement and the witnesses said this also. cancer is not just one disease. it is not cancer, cancer, cancer. it is not the same thing. these are all different diseases. and lung cancer is something different than pleural-based cancer. and how you determine what kind of cancer a person has, i think, is undisputed here. i mean, everybody agreed, you have to determine where did those first cancer cells start? where in the body? and if it started, for example, if you have breast cancer, that means those first cancer cells started in the breast. if you have skin cancer, that means those first cancer cells started in the skin. the issue is: has the plaintiff proved that the first cancer cells for mr. cohen started in his lung? i want to go over our list of reasons of why this is not lung cancer. can everyone see that? and i want to emphasize again, reynolds and philip morris, we do not have the burden of proof. we do not have to prove to you that it was not lung cancer. that burden is on the plaintiffs to prove that it did start in the lung, but we did more than that, we brought you evidence. we are the only party who brought you any testimony from the plaintiff itself, from mrs. cohen. we are the ones that played that video deposition for you so you could see that. so i want to go over these reasons, again, just one by one starting at the top. first of all, no radiology. everybody, all the doctors rely on the radiologist. the pathologists said they rely on the radiologist to tell them where the tissue came from. the ogist said they rely on the radiologist to find out where the cancer had started. but the plaintiffs did not bring a radiologist to court. they did not bring a single radiologist. nobody. we are the only person who brought a radiologist, and that was dr. cole. and we know why the plaintiffs did not bring a radiologist, and that is because the radiologist -- radiology in the case hurts them. the radiology in the case shows that there was no problem in the lung. there was no mass in the lung; and, instead, it was in the pleura. now, we have a number of radiology reports that dr. cole went over with you and i showed you that report, that chart we had done with him previously, so i will not go over that again. but let me talk about this may chest x-ray that mr. trop put up on the screen during his opening. in may of 1994 is when there was that chest x-ray that said there was a suspicion, that is what it said, a suspicion of this mass in the lung. that is what it says. but it also says from that radiologist you need to get a follow-up ct. okay? the radiologist said this is not enough, this is only preliminary. i only have a suspicion of it. you need to go get a ct and find out what is going on. and then they got the ct. and the ct showed that the nodule was in the pleura and it was not in the lung. now, if you have a mass in your lung, assuming that that chest x-ray continued, assuming that that was correct, it does not vanish, it does not go away, it does not -- it does not vanish into thin air. if he had a mass, if he truly had a mass on that chest x-ray in may, it would have continued through every one of his follow-up radiology reports, but it did not. it went away because it was not there to begin with. it was a suspicion only that was ruled out by the chest x-ray that the same doctor asked for. and what did the radiology show? well, we have a summary chart for you. again, all of these records are in evidence, so i've listed these dates for you. all these radiology reports said there was a problem in the pleura. cat scan, x-ray, x-ray, x-ray. those are all problems in the pleura. and then remember the radiologist is the one who does the ct-guided biopsy. the radiologist is the doctor who goes in, puts the patient on a table, has the ct scan going at the same time so they can see exactly where they are going into the patient's body. and they have this very thin, fine needle and they use it looking at the screen, the radiologist goes exactly to the spot, exactly to the spot that is suspicious. so the radiologist can get that tissue sample, the cell samples from exactly the place that is suspected of being cancerous. let me put that report up. and, remember, dr. cole is the radiologist that we brought. he says he does those all the time. he is done hundreds and hundreds of those procedures called ct-guided biopsy. and here's the report here. the report here said that the ct-guided biopsy went in and got the tissue sample from the pleural-based nodule. so the first reason why the plaintiffs cannot meet their burden of proof is that there is no radiology to support their position. second reason on our chart there is the pathology. and, remember, the pathology is -- pathologist is the doctor that looks at that tissue sample that the radiologist gets. he is the one that looks at it under the microscope, he looks at the cells and he says what type of cancer he thinks it is and whether he thinks it is cancer or not. so the radiologist went in, did that ct-guided biopsy, got that sample of cells here, took the sample of cells and sent it to the lab, to the pathologist. and what does the pathologist say? this is the report from that ct-guided biopsy from the pathologist, dr. vernon. and it says pleural-based nodules. so, again, we have the radiologist saying i went in and i got that tissue sample from the pleura, from the pleural-based nodule. and then the next step we have it also, the pathologist said: i looked at a tissue sample that was a pleural-based nodule. and what else does the pathologist say? two things. one is he uses the word "suggests." okay? he said it suggests small cell cancer. and i asked the doctors, what does that mean? and they said: well, you say suggest when you do not know for sure. this is not a final, permanent, absolutely certain diagnosis. instead, all the doctor was able to say is that it suggested small cell. and he said: i want to do more stains to know exactly what it is. he says here there is insufficient material, though, to perform those special stains. so the radiologist gets a sample from the pleura, sends it to the pathologist. the pathologist says: i looked at the sample from the pleura and i do not know exactly what it is. it suggests small cell, but i'd like to do these additional tests, something called staining, to find out for sure. but he said: i cannot do it because i do not have enough tissue. and, again, that is another failure of proof in this case. and then, remember also, having small cell cancer does not mean it is necessarily from the lung. remember we asked about all the different other parts of the body where there are small cells, prostate, all those other parts of the body that the doctor agreed to. so nowhere in this report does it say that the pathology sample came from the lung. there is no pathology evidence at all indicating that mr. cohen had lung cancer, so that is our second reason. no pathology. let us go over the next item that we have, which is no lung cancer symptoms. and we have a chart on that. let us go through this. here are the -- can everybody see? here are the different symptoms for lung cancer. weight loss. okay. look at the medical records. the medical records shows that mr. cohen weighed 186 pounds all the way up to after he was diagnosed. he was consistently 186 pounds. now, he lost weight later, okay, after he -- after he had the cancer and was getting sick. we do not dispute that. in terms of diagnosing it, his weight was consistent at 186. coughing up blood. no evidence of that. nobody's even said that that was happening. productive cough. no. remember, everybody said it was a dry cough. that was always the testimony. everything in the medical records, it was a dry cough. that is something different than productive cough. and chest pain. he did have chest pain, but remember he was having angina, clogged arteries, he had had bypass surgery. he also had pleural disease going on at the same time, which you heard is a cause of chest pain. and then shortness of breath. shortness of breath, again, he is got all these problems with his pleura that can cause a shortness of breath. remember all the fluid issues? and also he had that same heart issue going on. so he only had two of the three symptoms. and those two symptoms are explained by other medical problems that he had in his life at that same period of time. and what is the -- let us see. let us go down to the next one which is no autopsy. and i think the most compelling testimony about the importance of the autopsy came from, believe it or not, the plaintiff's own witness, dr. villa. let us look at what he said about the importance of an autopsy. this is the transcript that the court reporter has been taking down of what has been happening in the case. here's what dr. villa said. i'm going to read it with you. (reading): and i believe you said that you believed that autopsies are so important that there ought to be a law that requires an autopsy before somebody can have a lawsuit? you have said that, have not you? yes, i have. that is how important it is to have an autopsy. and then he also said: you have also said that you hope president obama will pay for the funding for autopsies. he said, yes, he thought that president obama should. but no autopsy was done here. that is another failure of proof by the plaintiffs. let us go down to the next item, which is number five, which is the presentation. okay. presentation means how did it look? how did it present? and there are two fundamental problems here as to why this is not lung cancer, why the plaintiff has not met their burden of proof with respect to presentation. one of them, there is no central mass. okay. all those doctors came in and said, you know, if you have small cell lung cancer, the way it presents is you have a central mass. remember when the doctor said it was a golf-ball sized mass right in the center of your lung? we do not have that here. and the other thing is something they call mediastinal adenopathy. not hilar adenopathy, which is what mr. trop talked about this morning, but mediastinal adenopathy. and even dr. villa agreed that this presentation by mr. cohen was unusual for small cell lung cancer. even they said the way he presented was unusual because he did not have a central mass. he did not have a mass in his lung. it was in his pleura. the next item is number six, and that is that mr. cohen stopped his chemotherapy. so why is that important? it is important because he had already had one cycle of chemotherapy. a cycle is not just one dose. it is more than one dose within that cycle. so he had the one cycle and then he stopped. if he had had lung cancer, he would have had a dramatic reduction in the size of his cancer, if it had been lung cancer. and that is not what happened. there is nothing like that that happened to his cancer. instead, he said he does not want to have therapy anymore. that means that his doctors did not have a chance to see that he was not responding to it. and if that had happened, maybe they would have caught their mistake. if he had really had small cell lung cancer, it would have grown like lightening in his chest. remember what the witnesses said about how highly aggressive small cell lung cancer is? that is what they said. it is highly aggressive, highly aggressive. that is why as soon as you get it, you are going to be dead six months later. if that had been the case, mr. cohen's radiology and everything else, all of these other test results would have shown this mass growing all in his chest; but, that is not the evidence. another reason there is failure of proof. all right. let us go to the next item of that lung cancer, and that is the history of pleural disease. remember they all talked about the pleural effusions. there is one after another after another. so much so that remember the witnesses said they had to drain, they had to go with a needle and drain pleural fluid. one time it was the size of a large -- two liter coca-cola bottle. imagine how mucn fluid that would be in a patient s chest. that size bottle of fluid. no wonder he had shortness of breath. but that shows he had problems in his pleura, that there was something going on in his pleura. and then a second time he had to have about three-fourths of a bottle drained from his chest. again, no wonder he had shortness of breath, but that shows there was something going on in his pleura. they were draining from the pleural space. and remember this record. so they drained the fluid and when they did it, they sent it off to be tested. so they drained the fluid and they took a sample of it and they sent the sample down to the lab for the pathologist at the lab to evaluate. and here's that test result. and that is the one that said lymphoma. a lymphoma cannot be excluded. that is his own doctor who said you need to consider whether he had a lymphoma and you need to rule that out. that is not some crazy disease in asia or whatever it is the plaintiffs keep talking about. this is right there in his own medical records, his own doctors said that. and you know what? they did not follow up. the pathologist said: hey, i've looked at this sample of fluid that came from his pleural space; there is something wrong with it. there is something going on in there. it may be a lymphoma. you guys need to go find out what is going on and see if it is a lymphoma and work him up to that. and they did not do it. and this test result here was back a year -let us see, where is the date of this one? this one is february 16th, 1993. it is on the other page. february 16th, 1993. just think, if his doctors had done what they should have done and followed up on this report back in february of 1993, he could have been -- his cancer could have been caught, diagnosed and could have been treated. and, instead, he went all the way from february of 1993 all the way up to may of 1994 before they ever diagnosed him with cancer. that is over a year. his doctors did not do that. that was a red flag that he had pleural cancer right there in his medical records. now, that was the pleural fluid we have been talking about. remember there were also records, though, that showed he had pleural thickening, and there were also records that showed he had a pleural nodule. and let me show you just a summary of those. so it is not just the fluid. it is pleural fluid on multiple occasions, it is pleural thickening, it is a pleural nodule. look at this. all of this radiology, pleural thickening, pleural density, pleural-based density, pleural density. that is what is in evidence in this case. this does not come close to the plaintiff meeting her burden of proof to prove to you that he had cancer in his lung that started in his l and that was caused by smoking. so let us go over their witnesses. let me take a moment and go over their witnesses. okay. the first witness they called was by videotape. remember we gave the opening statements, and right after that the first thing they did was to play a videotape deposition. they played it last wednesday afternoon and part of it ran over to thursday morning, and that was from dr. burns. what did dr. burns say? dr. burns said he is been paid over a million dollars, $1.1 million doing work for plaintiffs in this type of case. he s been doing it for 25 years since the first witness that they brought to you. he also says he knows absolutely nothing about mr. cohen. he says that he had not reviewed medical records, did not know if he was dead or alive, did not know the name of them, did not know anything. he was nothing but a generic general witness to come in here and tell you that smoking can cause lung cancer. and i told you that in my opening, we do not dispute that. smoking can cause some types of lung cancer in some smokers, but not mr. cohen. he said two things, though. he admitted two things during our questioning of him from the cross examination questioning that was on the videotape. one is he said you need to know the cell type and you need to know the location of the cancer before you can say it was cancer caused by smoking. it is exactly what we are saying here. you need to know. and the plaintiff has the burden to prove that to you. and he also said you need this pft to diagnose copd. again, he admitted that on cross examination. their next witness was dr. gary strauss, and he is the gentleman who had the bow tie. remember him? and he said he thought it was immoral to sell cigarettes. he said it was his mission in life to put us out of business. he said it would be a great joy to him if we were put out of business. he said he hoped we lost the case. that is not a neutral doctor coming in here to testify. no wonder he said what he said on the stand. he was a bias witness, and that is something you can take into account when you are evaluating the credibility of these witnesses. he said he had no idea, no idea -- we have a chart for him -- this is the antitobacco advocate. he said he had no idea, no idea where the cancer started, where that biopsy came from, whether it was the lung or whether the pleura. i asked him that and he said: i have no idea. he does not help you at all. he also said -- he used the word "careless." those were his words. he said dr. villa was careless. he also agrees that records here contained errors. so who was the next witness they brought to you? that is dr. villa. why did the plaintiffs bring dr. villa? why did they bring him instead of the other people who had spent more time treating -mr. trop: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. ms. parker: dr. villa testified that he had only seen mr. cohen four days out of 40 when mr. cohen was in the hospital. remember i went through this chart with him? dr. villa was not even on the scene until july; that is after mr. cohen had been diagnosed with cancer; that is after he had that one cycle of chemotherapy; it is after he said he was going to stop the chemotherapy. that is when dr. villa came on the scene here in the hospital. right here. and, remember, when you go back with your deliberations, ask yourself why is it that dr. villa changed his opinion from what he put on the death certificate for mr. cohen? sixteen years ago in 1994 when mr. cohen passed away, dr. villa said something totally the opposite of what he said here. he said on that official state of florida record that the cause of death was adenocarcinoma large cell. let me show that to you just one more time. it was not until this lawsuit that he said 16 years later that mr. cohen had small cell. and so when you are going back evaluating the evidence and evaluating the credibility of the witnesses, i'd like to respectfully suggest to you that you ought to take into consideration if you should rely on dr. villa's testimony when he did not see the patient until july, and he totally changed his opinion now that we are in litigation. so why is it that there are all of these medical records out there of mr. trop and mr. paige putting up on the screen saying lung cancer, lung cancer. why is that? they are all records that say he had lung cancer. and we have not disputed that. that is because of that fundamental mistake that happened in the records and started this snowball effect and it was carried out throughout. let me go over those with you again. and i think what is important here is to remember the dates, okay? i'm going to emphasize the dates, and i'm going through this. this all happened right there on may 5th of 1994. may 5th. may 5th. that is when, that hospital stay is when mr. cohen was first diagnosed with cancer. and he is being worked up and his doctor says: you need two different ct scans. you need a ct of your chest and you also need a ct of your abdomen. so here's the first one. and this is the one of the chest, all right? and this says 5 millimeter by 12 millimeter. it is right there. that is going to be in your -- in evidence in the medical records. five by twelve in the chest and, again, this was the pleural density. pleural density. five by twelve, the pleural ity in the chest. may 5th, same day, of the ct of his abdomen. it says two by three centimeters in his adrenal gland. remember, the adrenal gland is not even in your chest, it is on the top of your kidney in the back. two by three. same day right here, may 5th. may 5th. and then what happens? you have the two by three adrenal gland and this gentleman, dr. reyna, the thoracic surgeon they keep talking about, he says this three by two he says it is in the lung. he made a mistake. dr. villa. when i asked dr. villa about that on the stand, dr. villa said: well, that may have been what happened or maybe he just went down the hall and looked at the radiology himself. maybe he went and had a cup of coffee and talked about it. let us just assume that that happened. would not they have gone back and changed their records? would not the radiologist have said: oh my gosh, oh my gosh, you know, dr. reyna here says it is in his lung. i said it was in his adrenal gland. i've got to fix my record. i was wrong. there is not a thing, not a thing in the medical records from the radiologist changing their reports; that is because the radiologists were right. dr. reyna is not a radiologist. there is no evidence that dr. reyna reviewed any radiology films. and he comes up the same day, may 5th, may 5th, same day, and he puts that two by three that was in the adrenal gland, he puts in the lung. and that started this whole snowball effect. and then the next thing that happened, again, there was one error and they copied it. that is when we have this next record, two days later, may 7th. what does he say? three by two, lower left lobe. that is in the lung. three by two. that came right here. three by two, which was wrong. the radiology report had the three by two in the adrenal. that is why all these doctors are inconsistent about the cell type, because he did not have lung cancer. they could not figure out, they are all over the place. he did not have lung cancer. that is why the radiology reports all say there was a problem in his pleura, but there was nothing in his lung because he did not have lung cancer. this is from the adrenal. this said abdomen. abdomen. and right here it says adrenal gland. adrenal gland. but this doctor wrote it down wrong. two days later, this one copied it verbatim same exact quote. he got it wrong also. so let me put up that cell types chart again. should you have confidence in these doctors? should you have confidence in these doctors whose put the three by two from the adrenal gland the same exact day said it was from the lung? should you have confidence in these doctors who are all over the place in terms of how they describe this type of cancer that mr. cohen had? should you believe these doctors, particularly dr. villa, who swapped non-small, large cell and he waits until there is litigation 16 years later. he does not even remember the patient. remember i said: do you remember mr. cohen? no. and i want to mention something else that you heard during the trial. mr. paige and mr. trop did not mention it this morning, but they go after me. they have time to talk after me. i do not know what they are going to say. let me address this. remember they said as their excuse for dr. antunez, remember there were all these questions about well, he had a heavy spanish accent. okay? well, first of all, that is speculation that that is an issue. but this same doctor where this problem allegedly happened because of his accent, this is one that said non-small cell. look down here. then he says adenocarcinoma. now, is that an issue about someone's accent? non-small cell and adenocarcinoma? i do not think so. and i think it is offensive for them to suggest that that is an excuse why these records here are all over the place. mr. trop: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. ms. parker: now, this is -- the pieces of this puzzle do not fit together for him to have lung cancer. they do not fit. it is because he did not have lung cancer. and as you are evaluating this evidence, i'd like to go over some additional items in the medical records that we would respectfully suggest that you should consider. and mr. trop and mr. paige used the word malpractice when they were giving you their opening statement. this is not a malpractice case. no. we have no burden of proof here. what we are saying that mistakes were made, and you need to consider that when you are evaluating the credibility of these witnesses. there is no lung mass. remember that three by two error, the inconsistent cell types we have gone over. remember dr. antunez had the wrong side of the body. he said it was on the right. everybody else said it was on the left. they did not biopsy, they never biopsied the adrenal gland. they did not do an mri of the brain. they did not biopsy the back. and, again, dr. strauss said dr. villa was careless. and about that back biopsy, pardon me, you have all the medical records in the notebooks that the plaintiffs put into evidence, but we have another record that we put into evidence. and i'd like to respectfully request that you take a look at it when you go back to the jury room. it is our exhibit 1. and this shows that for one, two, three, four different reports where mr. cohen was going in back in 1992 and having biopsies about all these skin lesions. this is not something -- this is not some kind of doubt that we have created. this is the evidence. and the same skin lesion is what showed up on his back toward the end of his life. and they did not biopsy it. and, again, that is a failure of proof by the plaintiff here. and then the last reason on our chart is that the smoke does not touch the pleura. what he had was pleural cancer. now, remember we brought to you that anatomy model to show you? remember we had dr. cole go through this, and remember he showed you this is the heart, these are the lungs and then this on the outside -- i'm not going to take it off, i do not want to break it. the outside is the pleura. remember dr. cole explained all of that to you? let me put it here. and the pleura is cancer that starts in the pleura. the pleural-based cancer is not caused by smoking. nobody disputed that. nobody, not a single witness disputed pleural cancer, pleural-based cancer was not caused by smoking. and, you know, that really makes sense because the smoke if you smoke, the smoke comes down through the bronchial tubes that way. you know, that is why -- it comes down the bronchial tubes in the center of your chest. that is why smokers who are deserving who have small cell lung cancer caused by their smoking, that is why they have a central mass, because that is where the smoke goes. that is where their cancer starts. but cancer that starts in the pleura is not caused by smoking. and even those doctors, even the doctors for the plaintiffs who came in and said, oh, i think he had lung cancer, i think it was -- i think the pleura is part of the lung and all that, even they agreed pleural cancer is not caused by smoking. so if you find cohen had pleural cancer, the answer to your question in the verdict form should be in our favor. we also brought you dr. kumar. remember dr. kumar came yesterday. dr. kumar told us -- i said: have you ever gotten any awards and honors? remember he said 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 he is listed on the best doctors in america. he is at an nci-designated cancer center. he is spent his whole life in cancer research as a doctor. he was at st. jude's hospital, again, another nci cancer institute. nci cancer centers are the ones who deal with uncommon cases. he deals with that every day of his practice. they do not do just run of the mill things. he is a specialized doctor with specialized cancer research backing him. we asked him to review the records so he could come to court and give you his opinion. and let me show you what he said. and this is in response to a question from one of you. you know, remember when you sent your questions back in? here's what dr. kumar said. getting back to your question. (reading): my position is that not everything was done that should have been done in this case to provide mr. cohen the best possible care, and so i do not agree with the care he got and i think he deserved better care. i do not think that the proper diagnosis was made and i think that could have contributed certainly to his demise. again, reynolds and philip morris do not have to prove anything. we do not have any burden of proof here, but we submit to you that the plaintiffs have not -- mrs. cohen and her lawyers have not met their burden of proof to prove to you that he had lung cancer caused by smoking, when you evaluate their testimony in light of all the errors that those witnesses made, all of those errors in the medical records. now, i need to spend -- i'm going to switch gears. i need to spend a few minutes talking to you about copd. plaintiffs are trying -- they have two ways they are trying to get to phase two where they can try and get money; lung cancer claim and also copd. so i'm going to have to spend some time talking about copd. first of all, everybody in the case agreed that there is a medical test that is a standard medical test to determine if you have copd. now, remember they brought dr. gonzalez. dr. gonzalez said he follows it in his own practice and he agreed that the american thoracic society and then this worldwide international organization called gold, he said both of them have established this test for all pulmonologists to use to determine whether or not somebody has copd. and that test is something they call pulmonary function test. here are mr. cohen's test results. remember, everybody in this case has agreed, you have to be below seventy percent to have copd. if you are over seventy percent, that rules out copd. so that is the key, seventy percent. mr. cohen had this test three times. every time it ruled out copd. let me show you the actual test results. and those are in evidence. so here's the record. again, we marked those numbers there. now -- so who did the plaintiff bring to support their claim? who did they bring to try to prove to you to meet their burden of proof that he had copd? they brought dr. gonzalez. okay? dr. gonzalez wrote in his medical reports that these pft tests were, quote, normal. that is what he put in his own records. i have a summary of his testimony i'd like to show you. and, again, dr. gonzalez came to court with just that small file folder, just those few documents, and he had not been provided a copy of those pfts by the lawyers for mrs. cohen. he came to court and i showed it to him and he said i have not seen this. why would that happen? and i think we need to consider that -mr. trop: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. ms. parker: i'd like to respectfully say that you should consider that when you are back reviewing the evidence in your case. he agreed, though, that the standard test was a pft with the seventy percent. he agreed to that. he also agreed in his medical record that those were normal, all three tests were normal. he was not given the test results. and he admitted that under those test results, that is not copd. now, what has the plaintiff said in response to all of this? well, they said: oh, you know what, there might have been some other pft result somewhere on the planet back in the 1990s. ladies and gentlemen, that is speculation. there s no evidence of that, and judge streitfeld when he gives you the jury -the instructions of -- jury instructions at the end of the case, he is going to tell you that you have to evaluate only the evidence in the case. and the evidence is we only have these three pfts and they are all normal and they all rule out copd. anything else is just fanciful and there is no reason to believe there are any pfts. as a matter of fact, when mr. trop tried to get mr. gonzalez to admit that, he said i do not know, i do not remember mr. cohen, i do not have any of my office records. so that is a failure of proof. the clerk: ten minutes, counsel. ms. parker: thank you. why is it that they have this test? it is not just some arbitrary rule that is out there. it is the rule, but there is an important reason for the test, and that is because the symptoms that a patient has, the shortness of breath, can be caused by other things. so you need to test a patient who comes in with shortness of breath. you need to give him this test and say was it copd or was it something else. so just consider this. it is the same type of situation as if you had, say, a headache. okay. so the patient comes in and says: i've been having headaches. well, that is a symptom. but it could be all sorts of different things. you could have a headache because you have a brain cancer. you could have a headache because you need a new prescription for your glasses. you can have a headache because you have high blood pressure. and, instead, the doctor gives you these tests so that they can rule out what it i s. so if you come in with a headache and they give you a brain mri, it comes back clear, that rules out a brain cancer. and then you look at what else it could be. same thing here. mr. cohen had shortness of breath. they did the test and it ruled out copd. so how is it that dr. gonzalez put in all of his records copd? how did that happen? well, remember, mr. cohen had the bypass surgery. they went in when they did the bypass surgery and they did patient history and they asked: did he have any problems, any lung problems? and he said m m.-. m "no." but somehow or another, dr. centurion, another doctor, he is the cardiologist, he put in his report, history of copd. that is inconsistent. we have the hospital admission that says no history of lung problems. and then dr. centurion says, well, he had a history of copd, okay. it is not right. so dr. centurion says: well, i'm about to send him down to have this bypass surgery and we need to evaluate and we need to evaluate him to see, you know, whether his lungs can withstand the surgery. they did two things. they did a chest x-ray and a pft test. when they did the chest x-ray, it came back normal. they did the pfts and they came back normal. and dr. gonzalez, the pulmonologist, put in his record normal. what did dr. gonzalez do after that? well, he saw the record from dr. centurion that said he had a history of copd, and dr. gonzalez just copied that in his own records. and, remember, judge streitfeld is actually the one who asked -- he made a comment and asked dr. gonzalez about this. remember, dr. gonzalez admitted that dr. centurion had called him about this litigation. and he admitted they were friends. and he admitted that they got together and they played music together, and judge streitfeld asked them what they played. and he said one of them played the piano and one of them played the guitar. now, these are people who are friends, as they described it. so under this established standard for copd, there is a failure of proof by the plaintiffs, and that brings us back to the verdict form. one of the instructions that judge streitfeld is going to give you has to do with something they call legal cause. and could i have that one as well? i'll put these both up together. thank you. this is one of the instructions that you are going to be given. and the instruction, what it says right there is that you are going to have to find that the plaintiff has proven that mr. cohen's smoking contributed substantially to his injuries. and, in other words, it says right there that mr. cohen's injuries would not have occurred but for his smoking. and we would like to respectfully submit to you that the plaintiffs have not met that burden. so let me summarize the evidence. here we have a gentleman who was unhealthy, overweight, clogged arteries, bypass surgery, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, history of three strokes. his biopsy sample that they took was not from his lung. his radiology from his chest was clear for his lungs. he had a history of a severe pleural problem, pleural effusions, pleural thickening, pleural nodule. he stopped his chemotherapy after only one cycle. his test results for copd were normal, and his doctors made mistakes. his wife is now coming here in this lawsuit and is asking for money damages. that is the case that you have before you today. one of the other instructions that are included in the instructions to the jury that judge streitfeld is going to give you has to do with sympathy. and i want to bring that up again. remember during jury selection i was asking questions, i asked a question, i said: if there is no evidence, if the plaintiff has not proven their case, if there is no evidence, would you raise your hand and commit that you would not award -- render a verdict in favor of mrs. cohen based on sympathy. and all of you raised your hand and agreed to do that. i'm going to ask you again, very respectfully, when you are considering the evidence, consider the failure of proof by the plaintiff without regard to sympathy to the plaintiff. the clerk: three minutes, counsel. ms. parker: thank you. so when you are back in the jury room, ask yourself: did the plaintiffs meet their burden of proof when we have no evidence of a lung -cancer in the lung, but we have all of this other evidence of cancer in the pleura and where the test results for copd ruled out copd. unfortunately, mr. cohen's medical case did not get the attention that it deserved back in 1994. his doctors then already knew he was terminal, he had already said he was going to discontinue treatment. they were not thinking about a lawsuit. they did nothing to determine what caused his cancer. and now here we are 16 years later. dr. villa, that same doctor flipped -totally changed his testimony, totally changed his opinion of what he put on the death certificate. and ask yourself, again: the plaintiff has the burden of proof, why did not the plaintiff put the death certificate into evidence? so one final thought. when you go back to the jury room, keep in mind this objective medical evidence. i want to thank you very much for your attention this morning for listening to me talk and going over my charts and all. we are in your you know the scales that the plaintiffs howed, the scale during their opening, it is from lady justice. and lady justice is blindfolded. let us see -- i do not see a seal in here. lady justice wears a blindfold and she holds the scales of justice, and she is blindfolded because it does not matter if you are a corporation, it does not matter if you are not popular, it does not matter about that. the only thing that matters when you are reaching your verdict is did the plaintiff meet their burden of proof and what is the objective medical evidence in this case. so thank you again for your attention this morning and i very much appreciate, both on behalf of myself, but also our trial team and mr. reilly from philip morris. thank you.