9 mr. hammer: thank you, judge. may it please the court. counsel. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. folks, this has been a long trial, and i want to thank you very much for your attention you have given throughout the past four weeks. it is been an honor to represent fannie and present her case before you. she thanks you for the attention you gave and for the time that you took out of your own lives. we really respect that. we appreciate that. it is been said trial by jury, the best of all safeguards for the person and property of every individual. thomas jefferson said that back in 1823 and it still stands true today. trial by jury, it is really the great equalizer. it allows people like fannie collar, just a plain old person like fannie to come into court and present her case against large corporations like these tobacco companies. it is an equal playing field. that is what it is all about. you heard the judge say that corporations should be treated just like people. they should be looked at just like people in this courtroom. and we want you to do that because with that, when you want to be treated like people, you have got to act like people. i'm going to talk a lot about how these corporations acted as compared to fannie. because that is what they want you to look at, fannie's choices. we want you to look at the tobacco company's choices throughout the history. you are going to be deciding this case, and it will likely be one of the biggest decisions you have ever made. you hold great power, and with power comes great responsibility. we appreciate that and we respect that. whatever decision you make, we are going to be perfectly acceptable with. now, you have heard evidence in this case that most people do not get to hear. most people do not get to hear about what these tobacco companies have done. mr. geraghty: your honor, that is not in the evidence in the case. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: you have gotten to hear about these tobacco companies, about the history of these tobacco companies, things that they never, ever wanted people like you or the public to ever hear about. that is why they had these internal documents. it is only because of various things that happened over the years, litigation and these kind of cases, that we have those documents to show you. otherwise, they would still be secret. and it is -- the idea is, they controlled a business and pursued a business of addiction and death, and that is what this case is about, addiction and death. it is about fannie collar and the fact that she got addicted and got diseases, and unfortunately she is going to die from those diseases. you are hearing -- you got to hear from fannie collar. you got to hear from fannie collar, which is a rare example in an engle case. she is a living victim of these companies' atrocious acts. you got to hear from her, heard from her own lips what she experienced. twenty-five years ago we did not have the evidence we have today that we were able to present you because those were all secret documents, but now they have seen the light of day and you have seen it. hopefully you took it all in and you understand what these tobacco companies are really all about. because what they are all about is greed. we presented a lot of evidence to you, and you know, it took two-and-a-half weeks now, now it is three weeks that you-all are here. we did not know what you needed to hear. there is tons of documents that you did not see. you heard dr. proctor talk about 80 million documents. we certainly could not bring all those in to you. it would take forever to do that. but we brought to you what we thought would enlighten you on what these tobacco companies are all about. what it is all about is simple. it is about replacement smokers and it is about addiction. that is the nature of this company's business. they look for replacement smokers and addiction. that is what it is all about. they attract the youth to get them started, and they keep cigarettes addictive to keep them smoking. that is what this case is about. these are the dirty little secrets of the tobacco companies, secrets that they never thought would see the light of day, but you got to see them in this courtroom. without youth marketing, without nicotine, there would be no smoking, and it would reduce the epidemic that has become rampant in this country as a result of these tobacco companies. without nicotine that is where we would be, and that would be a great thing. so why do they do it? we saw this document. who ain't for more money? that is why they do it. it is all about greed. you know, they talk about the fact that they just -- hey, we just sell cigarettes. you know, we just sell cigarettes. it is just a cigarette. except that we know from their internal documents that cigarette smoke is just a drug. they know that. they are not in the cigarette business. they are in the pharmaceutical business. it is a drug. it is a potent drug. it is an addictive drug. and they have known it forever and yet they have lied about it forever. they claimed that it was not a drug. they claimed it was not addictive. they claimed there was no problems with it for the longest time, for decades. in another document, remember dr. teague, he was a scientist at r.j. reynolds, he says, we deliberately played down the role of nicotine. that is what he said in their documents. their product is nicotine. that is what it is all about. it is not the cigarette. the product is nicotine. the first question you have to answer is, was fannie addicted to nicotine? to answer that question you really do not have to look any further than their own documents. without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. this is a document from 1972. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. they say, the cigarette should be conceived not as a product, but as the package. the product is nicotine. the cigarette is but one of many layers. think of the cigarette pack as a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine. and they got fannie to do exactly what they wanted her to do, she was smoking a pack a day, a daily supply of nicotine. the truth is, this industry knows very well beyond any shadow of a doubt that nicotine is the absolute center of their universe. it is their life blood. it is their oxygen, and without it they would die. they even reference that in their own documents. it is all about the nicotine. nicotine is the sine qua non, without which there is nothing. we would all lose our jobs and consulting fees without the chemical compound nicotine. however, we cannot be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would like to stop using. they recognized that. but without nicotine, we could be out of business almost overnight. they know that. they know that without nicotine they would die. they know that nicotine is important. can we play that? united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 c2df6556-77db-466e-a3f0-f0271ebefe0f (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) we want to be the detectives just as much as the surgeon general and the ama. we will cooperate in every way. obviously, until they say it is unsafe, tar and nicotine, i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them, and if they are found, they will be removed. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proven to be safe, mr. cullman? i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. hammer: what you just saw was howard cullman in 1963 right after the surgeon general's report was released, that first one -- i'm sorry, 1964, and then joseph cullman on face the nation in 1971, both of them told the american public, the entire country, that if there are any bad elements or ingredients, they will be removed. and we know the most harmful ingredient in these things is the nicotine because it is the nicotine that keeps people addicted. it is the nicotine that keeps people smoking. without the nicotine, people would not smoke. they know that. so why not take out the nicotine? we know they can do it. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. there is no evidence on that at all. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: it will be stricken. mr. hammer: if they wanted to, they could but they do not. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and move to strike. the court: overruled. hammer: you know what, it is never too late to keep a promise. so do it. take out the nicotine and the cigarette would be a hell of a lot safer, but they will not do it. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and have a motion -- the court: sustained. mr. hammer: instead of owning up to their promise to remove the dangerous elements, what do they do? they chose profits over public health. dr. leo abood -- we saw this document. remember, dr. leo abood was a scientist who was working to develop an antagonist to nicotine. what that means is something that would block the addictive effect of nicotine. and they realized, in this internal document, philip morris realized, wait a minute, if we do that, we are in the process of digging our own graves. that is incredible. they do not want to dig their own graves, but they have no qualms, no qualms whatsoever about digging the graves of millions of americans. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and move to strike. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: and i have a motion. mr. hammer: dr. niaura, remember, he was our expert witness, he explained to you that he was interested in the diagnosis of nicotine dependence, also known as tobacco dependence, also known as tobacco use disorder. he told you it is a chronic relapsing brain disease. he told you, nicotine addiction, those are the terms that are used in medical records to reflect nicotine addiction. we even had dr. ticknor on the stand for the defense, remember mr. gdanski showed him the codes, and he finally acknowledged, yeah, well, i guess that is for nicotine addiction. we do not have to look any further than fannie's own medical records to see that she was addicted to nicotine, nicotine abuse, cigarette abuse, tobacco use disorder. remember, that is the record that mr. gdanski used with dr. ticknor. all of those things reflect nicotine addiction in her medical records. now, the tobacco companies, the defendants, they admit that smoking cigarettes caused her lung cancer and emphysema, which is a form of copd. so let us be clear about that. they acknowledge that her smoking caused her lung cancer. they acknowledged that her smoking caused her copd. and yet, the defense will have you believe that she smoked enough to cause her copd and lung cancer but not enough to addict her. that is incredible. that makes no sense whatsoever. it defies logic. think about it, if you use a drug in a chronic fashion, use it daily, day in and day out for many years, is not it obvious you are probably addicted? dr. mannino explained that to you. it is obvious that people who have diseases caused by an addictive drug were, in fact, addicted to the drug. and he explained, to me it is, when i see lung cancer or copd that occurs in longtime smokers, it is easy to connect the dots between their addiction and the development of their disease, lung cancer, copd. it is a no-brainer. he is seen that in all of the research he is done. this is fannie collar. fifty years of smoking. fifty years of smoking. to say she is not addicted, that is crazy. that is absolutely absurd. now, we have to prove this case to you by the greater weight of the evidence, which means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. in doing so, it is a very simple concept. it is strange because as lawyers we take semesters in law school to learn about the burden of proof in both criminal and civil cases. it is kind of a complicated issue but i want to try to make it as simple as possible for you. the scales, they start out even. before the case starts, they start out even. in a civil case, as opposed to a criminal case where you have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt and tip the scales all the way, it is -- you have to prove the case by a greater weight of the evidence, just tip the scales ever so slightly. now, i think we have done a lot more in this case than that. certainly we have presented to you a lot of evidence to show that fannie is addicted. the defense attorneys, they want to try to raise a doubt in your mind about whether she was addicted, whether her addiction caused her disease, whether she is entitled to money damage. they want to raise doubts in your mind about that. however, this is not a criminal case. doubts do not matter. if you have a doubt, okay. well, the benefit of the doubt goes to the plaintiff. and in these cases we have to tip the scales ever so slightly, just like i showed you the scales. so we have to tip the scales, and i think we have certainly done that, but let us think and look at some of the evidence of addiction. you heard about fannie's smoking patterns. she smoked all the time. she always had a cigarette in her hand. she smoked her first cigarette of the day right after she woke up. she smoked in bed. she would get up in the middle of the night to smoke. she smoked in restaurants, and then stopped going to restaurants when they did not allow smoking anymore. she was a chain smoker. she smoked while cooking, through her pregnancies, she stopped going to the movies. without a cigarette, you heard her say she was jangled, irritable, impatient, anxious, could not sleep. she smoked cigarette butts out of her vacuum. i want to talk about that in a second. she smoked after having her right lung removed. she repeatedly relapsed. she had cravings and she still does. she still has cravings. she had a persistent desire to quit, and they were unsuccessful time and time again. she tried over 100 times to quit. you heard that. she tried rationing cigarettes, cutting down, cold turkey, lady's pipe, all of these things. she tried hypnosis, smoking cessation courses, all of the things dr. ticknor talked about, that is what somebody would do who wanted to quit smoking. she tried the patches. she tried the gum. she tried laser therapy treatments. chantix and wellbutrin, prescription drugs, she was taking prescription drugs to help her stop smoking. those are certainly signs of somebody who wants to try to quit smoking and who is motivated to try to quit smoking. you would not do all these things if you were not motivated. they talk a lot about motivation. they talk a lot about choice. this woman tried to quit. she was too addicted. she kept relapsing. that is the sign of an addict. let us think about that. she told you, i got my vacuum cleaner, because i used to go around and clean out the ashtrays. this was the day she was trying to quit, remember. think about this. think about what it means, imagine seeing one walk over to a dumpster or a garbage can or in fannie's case opening up a dirty vacuum bag. we all know what those vacuum bags contain, they are disgusting. thinks about that. you go through those dirty contents, you find a cigarette, not a whole cigarette, not a whole cigarette, but a butt of a cigarette that had been smoked and stamped out in an ashtray, and you take that butt and you light it up and you smoke it. is that person addicted? is that something -- anything rational? in fact, dr. ticknor said to you, when mr. gdanski asked him about, what about that vacuum cleaner incident, he said, well, that was out of character for her. yeah, it was out of character because she was addicted. that is what addicted people do. they do things that reasonable people would not do. what reasonable person would do such a thing? it is disgusting. she told you, i'm ashamed of it. the defense would have you believe fannie enjoyed that butt of a cigarette, right? she is sitting on the floor, going through this dust, she lights up the cigarette, and she enjoyed that cigarette? that must have really tasted good, right? come on, folks, that is a sign of addiction. if that is not, then what is? dr. ticknor just blows that off. tobacco companies would like you to think that is -- fannie chose to do that. that was her own choice. she could have not done it. yeah, she could have not done it, except their addiction drove her to do that. it was not her choice. the tobacco companies talk a lot about choice. the choice of the defendants to market cigarettes known to be both addictive and cancer causing raises the question of fault. you are going to be asked about fault in this case. that should be reserved for the section on fault, when you determine the percentages of fault. when it comes to determining the percentage of fault about the tobacco companies, what they knew about their product, what they did not tell the public, that is important in answering that question. by the same token, the choice of a child, fannie collar at age 12 to start smoking, that also raises a question of fault. those choices, the choices she made throughout her life, maybe she could have tried harder, things of that sort, that also goes to the level of fault. but you should not decide how much either side is at fault when determining whether or not fannie was addicted. you need to keep that out of your decision-making process when you are thinking about addiction. mr. geraghty: your honor, misstates your honor's instructions. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: i would move to strike. the court: it will be stricken. mr. hammer: why am i even talking to you about choice when i'm talking to you about the evidence of addiction? i'll tell you why, because the tobacco companies, they want to pretend that fannie was not addicted. but if you think she was addicted, then they want a fallback position. if she was addicted -- mr. geraghty: i would object to the characterization of the positions. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: judge, this is argument. thank you. if she was addicted, then it was her choice. it was her choice to continue smoking long enough to get sick. therefore, it was her choice and not her addiction that caused her copd and lung cancer, that is what the tobacco companies want you to believe. but you know what, not one piece of evidence was presented to you by either side that fannie collar's addiction was her choice. you know why, folks, because nobody chooses addiction. it is simple as that. addiction is often a terrible side effect of the choice to smoke. just like the addiction some people get from prescription pain medications. no one chooses that addiction either, but it frequently happens as an unintended consequence of the use of the drug. lawful but dangerous drugs often have side effects, like addiction. that is why ordinary people say, be careful. when you are taking those pain medications, when you are taking any medication, be careful, you might get hooked. that is the warning people give. why do people say that? i'll tell you why, because addiction is just like a fish getting hooked. the fish chooses to strike the bait, then gets caught by the hidden hook. the hook starts pulling the fish along and the fish starts fighting the hook. some fish who are hooked just through the side, through the lip, they wiggle away and they get off the hook. fish that are hooked through the gills, they are hooked. they are hooked deep. and they are addicted. they become hooked and they are goners, and the fishermen know that. the fishermen know that that is why you use bait on the hook in the first place. no fisherman would ever tell you that the fish was hooked because he chose to get caught. the fish died because he did not see the hook in the first place. fannie collar, when she was 12 years old, she certainly did not see that hook. she went out in blueberry fields with her friend to smoke that pack of cigarettes. you heard that story. do you think at 12 years old she ever thought she would get hooked on tobacco? of course not. she did not see the hook. the tobacco companies, they did not tell their customers that they thought cigarette were addictive until seven years after fannie was diagnosed with her lung cancer and copd, the year 2000. instead, for decades they repeatedly told everyone that there was a substantial scientific controversy about whether cigarettes were harmful and about whether they could get you hooked. now, there were no labels on cigarette packs until 1966. that was not even a warning. it was a caution. by that time, 1966, fannie was 32 years old. she would been addicted to smoking for years and years. she was hooked. she was hooked bad. she tried to get away, but she did not. being hooked eventually led to her strapped to oxygen. it eventually led to her getting her lung removed, lung cancer, copd. now, the tobacco companies want to tell you being hooked had nothing to do with fannie collar's lung cancer and copd. that is a real fish story. fannie chose to smoke at a time when no one knew the real dangers of addiction and disease that are inherent in these things. nobody knew about that. she started as a 12-year-old little girl in an era when the advertising in the movies never mentioned addiction, never mentioned the harms. they never discussed diseases like copd, emphysema, lung cancer. she would been smoking for about 20 years before the cigarette packs even said, caution, it might be dangerous. it might be hazardous to your health, but it might not be. in that amount of time that hook sets deep, very deep. fannie collar was pulled along by that hook for more than 40 years. folks, she tried to get away. she tried to fight it, but she did not get off. maybe some of you think she should have tried harder, and that is fair, but that is fault. it is not class membership or addiction. right now the defendants want you to believe that fannie was never hooked. if you will not believe that, they want you to believe that being hooked did not contribute to causing her injuries in any way. common sense tells you that is nonsense. the reason we all worry about getting hooked is because addiction starts pulling you along, and it is hard to get away. if you do not get away, you get a horrible disease like copd and lung cancer. that is what happened to fannie. she did not get away in time, and at least one important reason was her addiction to nicotine in cigarettes. that addiction was a big factor in why she did not get away. they ought to know, they are the ones who put the hook right in. the defendants put the hook in cigarettes. they learned that. they keep the customers hooked because that is the name of their business. they keep it that way so that people keep buying more cigarettes. they know that. they want that. they keep nicotine in their products to keep doing that, to keep people hooked, just like they hooked fannie collar all the way to the end. that is the name of their business. nobody chooses addiction. fannie certainly did not choose to be a drug addict. nobody chooses that. the sad thing is the tobacco companies knew that smoking was something that most people would like to stop. they knew that smoking was something that people cannot break. they characterized that situation as fortunate for us the cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. they knew it. they knew it. fortunate for the companies. how unfortunate for the victims. how unfortunate for fannie. throughout the years they acknowledged that nicotine is the center of their universe. they acknowledge nicotine is addictive, and that they were in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. that in designing cigarettes, the dominant spec should be nicotine delivery. that nicotine is a potent drug and the industry is based upon the design, manufacture, and sale of attractive forms of nicotine. and they compare their customers to a rat. compare their customers to a rat, in a cage, pushing a leaver, that is how they talk about their customers. that is what they think about their drug addicts. do they care? of course not. the judge is going to read to you a legal cause instruction. and she read to you and it is going to be in your packet. she told you, addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of plaintiff's lung cancer and/or copd if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer and/or copd so that it can be said but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer and copd would not have occurred. but what is missing on this slide? choice. you are not going to see the word "choice" on the jury instructions. you will not see the word "choice" on the verdict form. that is not on there. you also will not see the question about what she knew when it comes to addiction. it is not what she knew. it is what happened because of her addiction, and because of these company's lies to sustain that addiction. these tobacco companies told each other, we must give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale for them to continue smoking. that is exactly what they did to fannie. so we talked about the legal cause instruction. you see these words. it says a legal cause. not the legal cause, a legal cause. contribute substantially basically means, did the addiction play an important role? but for the addiction essentially means if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked one or more packs per day for more than 40 years and developed lung cancer and copd? that is basically the legal language broken down as simple as possible. what did dr. ticknor tell you? their own defense expert, he came in and he was asked by mr. gdanski, you also agree that if there was no nicotine in cigarettes, most likely fannie collar would not have smoked as many cigarettes as she did, true? fair. is that true? i believe that is true. is not it true, sir, at the end of the day you agree nicotine is a primary reason that fannie collar smoked cigarettes? yes. he acknowledged it. keep in mind, class membership is a threshold question. the engle decision is all inclusive. the judge read to you, all floridians who meet that criteria who were smokers who became addicted and got disease. nicotine addiction had to play an important role in getting to where fannie is today. remember, there is no dispute that smoking cigarettes got her sick. fannie collar was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. there should be no question in your mind. smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of fannie collar's lung cancer or copd, that is been acknowledged. addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes was a legal cause of fannie collar's lung cancer or copd. it is just a natural sequence of events. dr. niaura told you, nicotine addition is the fundamental reason individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases. he was asked, is nicotine addiction a fundamental reason smokers continue to smoke? he said, yes, people would not smoke or use tobacco products unless there was nicotine in them. think about this, 200 hits of nicotine a day. that is what is contained in a pack of cigarettes, the daily dose of nicotine. the daily dose of nicotine that fannie collar was smoking day in and day out, 200 hits. if someone took 200 hits of any other drug every day, would there be any doubt in anyone's mind that that person was addicted? of course not. we talked about the surgeon general's reports, and we made reference to them throughout this case. the surgeon general's reports lay out the most current, up-to-date scientific evidence on nicotine addiction and smoking-induced diseases. it is evidence that is been researched at the highest levels of the government. dr. niaura, remember, he is the guy that wrote in this book the chapter on nicotine addiction. what did the defense do with dr. niaura? they said, well, doctor, you are not doing clinical work. is that enough to say to the surgeon general, oh, wait, we cannot use your writings? no, of course not. he is one of the leading men on nicotine research, nicotine addiction. he wrote the chapter for the surgeon general. it does not get higher than that. he told you that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason smokers continue to smoke. dr. mannino, who we called, remember he drew this out for you on the chart. we put it on the slide here. he drew out this flow chart to show you how addiction causes disease. the point is that the originating element is nicotine addiction, which causes tobacco smoke intake, which causes the damage to the cells, which causes lung cancer and copd. he explained that to you. he took it to you. he walked you right through it. it is common sense. this industry, this tobacco industry, they can abolish the chain of people who have been smoking cigarettes by removing nicotine. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. hammer: thank you, judge. you heard evidence in this case from dr. proctor. the rise in lung cancer was directly related to the cigarettes. that is how those studies were made. that is how dr. wynder and all of the scientific research that was out there, they came to that conclusion, cigarettes caused cancer. why? because before the cigarettes like these, there was no lung cancer. they created it. it is a manmade epidemic, manmade by these tobacco companies. when people use tobacco products over long periods of time, they develop tobacco-related, smoking-related illnesses, they all go together. had she never been addicted to nicotine, would she have developed lung cancer or emphysema? probably not. most likely not. that is what we have to prove to you in this case, probably, more likely than not. we brought in world class experts. dr. niaura wrote the book on nicotine addiction for the surgeon general, a chapter. he wrote a book, a handbook that psychiatrists use. he wrote the book. we brought in dr. proctor. he wrote the golden holocaust, which is a study of the tobacco industry internal documents, and we brought him to you. and he was a writer of the -- the editor of the surgeon general's 2014. and dr. mannino wrote the chapter on copd for the surgeon general. we brought to you world-renowned experts. they have written hundreds of articles, peer-reviewed research, written articles for the surgeon general, go around lecturing around the world about their knowledge. they are world class experts. they brought in to you dr. ticknor, who is a psychiatrist who practices. but what did he tell you? he told you he is never written anything. he is never done any research. he is got no credentials, other than the fact that he is a psychiatrist and treats people. most of his practice is not nicotine addiction. it is entirely different. they bring him in because he is the team psychiatrist for the san antonio spurs. that is great. what did he tell you about nicotine addiction? they brought him in to raise some doubt in your mind. that is why they brought him in. doubt does not count in this case. then, when he was confronted with the nida definition -- so he said the apa, the american psychiatric association, which he is a proud member of, and nida, they defined addiction a certain way. and mr. gdanski asked him, is not it true that you agree that fannie collar, her use of cigarettes caused chronic brain changes? that is part of the definition. it is not true, dr. ticknor, that fannie collar had compulsive use of cigarettes? part of the definition. is not it true, dr. ticknor, that she smoked despite horrible consequences? part of the definition recognized by the american psychiatric association and by nida. and he says, well, doctor, is not it true that fannie by that definition was addicted? he says, no. how is that possible? how is that credible? then he talks about -- remember that rainbow that he made, that rainbow spectrum that he made? he is talking about -- first of all, talking about his testimony. he is testified in about a dozen cases. now, mr. gdanski, here is the collar case, so that is -- he counts through, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, including the collar case. he clearly told the jury once again that that smoker is not addicted to nicotine. that is what he does. the tobacco companies went and found him, taught him how to be an expert witness, and they bring him in. not because of his writings, not because of his research, not because of his scholar, but because they trained him how to be an expert witness. they put this rainbow up and you put -- you do not put fannie anywhere on the rainbow? she is not even on the spectrum? that is correct. you know, at least if he put her under mild or moderate, you could say, okay, well, maybe that is reasonable. at least he is being reasonable. but to not even put her on the spectrum of tobacco dependence, that is absurd. that is absurd. the judge read to you the believability of witnesses. the most important part of this section is reject it. you have the power to reject the testimony of an expert. i say he is not worthy of believing. he just is not. nothing but doubt. that is what he tried to cast on you. let us take a look at the verdict form. was fannie collar addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer or copd? remember, class membership is not about fault. we are asking you to confirm that fannie collar is obviously a member of the engle class. it should be very, very simple to answer that question. folks, if fannie is not a member of that class, then who is? who is? class membership is not about fault. keep that concept in front of your mind as you listen to the defense attorney's arguments. when you are answering question 1, do not get hung up with their arguments that fannie might have been at fault for not trying to quit. on the verdict form there is a question about class membership and then there is -- further down there is a question about fault. two separate issues. please keep those issues separate in your mind as you decide class membership. because you could find that she is a class member even if you think she should have tried harder to quit, because the question is, was she addicted, and did her addiction cause her disease? it is not about the fault of either party. it is not about whether the smoker shares some responsibility. it is not about whether the addict loses total control. it is not whether addicts can quit. and it is not even about reliance on tobacco company statements. that is not part of the class membership. that comes in later, too. these tobacco companies, they want you to focus all eyes on fannie. so do we, but we also want you to look at their behavior throughout this case. they are using millions of pounds of menthol and licorice, theobromine, ammonia in their cigarettes, additives. their cigarettes are full of poisons and carcinogens like arsenic and cyanide and radioactive plutonium. they say she should have quit smoking. they should have quit, too. they should have quit lying. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object for the reasons discussed earlier. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? the court: yes. (thereupon, the following bench conference began.) hammer: judge, this case is all about the tobacco companies lying. the court: they should have quit, too? mr. hammer: they should have quit, too. they should have quit lying. the court: you did not say that. mr. hammer: that is what i just said. the court: they should have quit, too. mr. geraghty: the implication was they should have quit making cigarettes. mr. hammer: no. they should have quit lying. the court: you did not say that. mr. hammer: well, that is exactly what i said. they may not have picked it up. that is exactly what i said. the court: all i heard was, you said it after they should have quit -- mr. hammer: right. they should have quit, too. they should have quit lying. that is a totally appropriate argument. mr. geraghty: your honor instructed the jury that manufacturing and selling cigarettes were lawful activities. they cannot tell us we should stop making cigarettes. it is the third or fourth time he is implied that. the court: all i heard was, she should have quit. they should have quit, too. and then you objected, and he said, they should have quit lying. mr. geraghty: he said that here. mr. hammer: no, that is not what i said here. the record reflects what i said. the court: so after he objected, i sustained. mr. geraghty: all right. well, your honor, he cannot continue to make arguments that we should stop making cigarettes. that is contrary to your honor's instruction. the court: he did not. mr. geraghty: that was the implication. there was a pregnant pause and he waited. mr. hammer: that is clear. can i please continue? the court: yes, it does say that -- 22 mr. hammer: may i proceed? the court: you may. mr. hammer: may it please the court. yeah, they should have quit. they should have quit lying. but lying is their life blood. they say she should have quit smoking in the 1950s. remember that whole thing they were talking about, well, in the '50s when your foster father died and the co-worker's wife died, you should have quit. what did she know then? what did she really know about smoking, cancer, and copd? copd was not even a word back then. what did she know? what if they had stopped lying in the 1950s? what if they would have stopped lying in the 1950s and said, cigarettes do cause cancer? that would have had an effect on her, do not you think? they say she should have quit when her husband mert preached to her about smoking. of course at the time he was smoking three packs a day. he was smoking three packs a day, and they want you to believe that every day he was preaching to her, you got to quit, as he is sucking down three packs a day. how absurd is that? but she should have quit, she was warned. they say she should have quit in the 1960s. when the first surgeon general's report came out and when the caution label went on the cigarette packs, and her father-in-law showed her the warning on the side of the packs, she should have quit. what did she tell us? she was smoking filters. he was smoking camels, unfilters. she thought she was safe. why did she think she was safe? because of the lies they told her. she believed it. what if they would have told the truth in the 1960s instead of going on tv like we saw howard cullman do earlier and say, if there is any bad elements, we will remove them. why? think if he would have gone on tv and said, you know, that surgeon general, he is the doctor of the united states, he is saying it causes cancer and we agree. so ladies and gentlemen, stop smoking. until we can do further research and tell you it is safe, stop smoking. think about that impact. think about that impact. their mantra is choice, choice, choice. they say she smoked herself sick. it serves her right. they blame the victim and absolve the perpetrator. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. the court: sustained. geraghty: i object and move to strike. the court: it will be stricken. you may proceed. mr. hammer: we do not live in a society that absolves the corporations of the responsibility for their products. if you are going to make a product, then you make it safe. that is the american way. in this country corporations are held responsible for the products they make. that is what we are asking you to do in this courtroom. they are making a product. hold them responsible for it. do the right thing. mr. geraghty: this misstates your honor's instructions. mr. hammer: the defense likes to use terms such as "choice" and "decision" when they talk about fannie. what about the tobacco industry? what about their choices and their decisions? they say that fannie smoked despite the risk. but they made the decision to form this enterprise of lies and deceit in 1953. there was a lie about a deadly and addictive product despite the risks to the public. those risks were massive. we have seen the total of those risks. the people in charge of these tobacco companies throughout the years, they made decisions, they made choices between the physical health of their customers and their own financial well-being. there is nothing wrong with making money if you are a corporation. but if you are going to do it, do it the right way. do not kill people. they chose concealment over disclosure. they chose sales over safety. they chose money over morality. they knew that people smoked for nicotine and that smoking kills. knowing that, what did they choose to do? they chose to manipulate the nicotine in cigarettes to make them more addictive. mr. geraghty: your honor, there is no evidence. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: it will be stricken. mr. hammer: if they would been honest, they had all these scientists working in their facilities, working in their labs, you saw these memos written by them internally, just imagine if those scientists -- because they were really good scientists, very smart people, imagine if they devoted their life to curing cancer instead of hiding the truth. imagine that. imagine how different this world would have been if they would told the truth, told smokers the truth. that is all we are asking. you are going to have to determine fault in this case. you are also going to have to determine responsibility, the percentage to apply. here is the verdict. so on question 1, was fannie addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and copd? of course. we ask you to check that box off on the verdict form. this is basically the form you are going to be dealing with. check that box off yes and let us move on to the rest of the verdict form. the next question you are going to be asked about is fault, the percentage of fault of r.j. reynolds, philip morris, and of fannie. now, fannie, quite frankly, she told you, she does not see herself having any fault based on what she knew compared to what they knew. i want to talk about that. as a class member, all of the engle findings apply to fannie collar. the judge read to you the engle findings -- mr. geraghty: your honor, this is not the instruction your honor gave. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: neither is that page, your honor. mr. hammer: wait a minute. all right. i'll move on. you guys have the engle findings. i do not need to read them to you. we will talk about those. everything you need to know about this case about fault is right here. the frank statement in 1954, these companies, except for liggett, they did not sign on to the frank statement in 1954, but they joined the tobacco institute years later. remember the tobacco institute? they were the spokespeople for the entire tobacco industry. so when the judge read to you this thing about the organizations, that includes the tobacco institute. it includes the tirc, the ctr, all of the spokespeople for tobacco spoke on behalf of philip morris, r.j. reynolds, and liggett. they were their mouthpiece basically. in 1954 they took out that full page ad in 450 newspapers across the country, a frank statement to smokers, the truth about cigarette smokers. that is what they wanted to do. and what they said is, we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility. in 1954 they told the public and they told people like fannie, we accept the responsibility. so all we are asking you to do today in this courtroom is hold them to that responsibility that they accepted back in 1954 and continued to accept throughout the years. now, knowledge of harm, and smoking despite that knowledge, like fannie did, that is actually a sign of addiction. what she knew can be relevant evidence to you. you can use it to decide if she was at fault. we argue that her fault is excised or lessened by her addiction. what do i mean by that? meaning i said to you fault does not matter for addiction. however, addiction can certainly matter for fault. because of her addiction, how can you hold her to be at fault? she was addicted, and she was addicted by these companies. if it was not for the nicotine in cigarettes, she would not have become addicted. she would not have smoked the number of cigarettes she smoked. she would not have gotten lung cancer and copd and be strapped to an oxygen tank. the tobacco industry from 1940 to 2004, $250 billion. think about this. the tobacco industry, dr. proctor told you this, spent more on advertising in one day, in one day, than the national clearinghouse on smoking, which was the health organization putting out the message do not smoke spent in an entire year. in one year that the public health community spent, the tobacco companies spent in one day. they drowned out the message. they drowned out the message. advertising drowned out all of the other messages that were out there. the surgeon general, they had no chance against this. of course it drowns out the message. marlboro cigarettes, remember we saw this video. i want to show you -- (thereupon, the video clip was played as follows:) speaker: combined sales reached 105 billion in 1972 making marlboro the best selling cigarette in the world. it has remained the leader ever since. marlboro is far and away the leader in the cigarette industry, and the trend is continually upward. in 1990 marlboro sold more than 344 billion cigarettes worldwide, making it the most widely packaged consumer goods product in the world. (thereupon, the video clip was concluded.) mr. hammer: more packages of this sold than any other consumer product in the history of the world. that is incredible. in the history of the world. they brag about their success. who was in control. who was really in control of this cigarette? was fannie collar in control of this or were those tobacco companies? who was in control? in their own documents nicotine should be delivered at about 1 to 1.3 milligrams per cigarette minimum for confirmed smokers. they knew exactly what they were doing. they knew exactly what they were doing. they controlled every aspect of the cigarette. they manipulated it for inhalability, micro adjusted the nicotine levels, ammoniation to increase the freebased nicotine, glucurone sugars controlling ph levels, adding menthol, adding licorice, all to control the cigarette. what chance did fannie have? remember what dr. proctor told you about inhalability. do cigarettes have chemicals added to them? yes. but also tragically and ironically, the harms of cigarettes, even though they are becoming milder, they were more likely to have been inhaled. it was the inhalation that caused most of the harm. they spent tens of billions of dollars, tens of billions of dollars to design this thing. this is not just some tobacco rolled up in paper. tens of billions of dollars to design this perfect delivery device. what chance did fannie have? let us take a look at the ads. i'm sorry, before we do that -- who controls the amount of ammonia in the marlboro cigarette? that is the manufacturer. they control every aspect of this cigarette. let us take a look at some of the ads. we saw these. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) speaker: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered that question. doctors in every branch of medicine were asked, what cigarettes do you smoke. when you change to philip morris, you will feel better. do not miss the bus, smoking bus, miss the bus, smoking bus. do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris, and here is how you can prove it. let us take a winston break. that is it. winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston has got that filter flavor. (thereupon, the video clip concluded.) mr. hammer: we saw these commercials. we do not have to keep watching them. they made it look like fun. they made funny jokes about it. they do not say that filters are phony and fake. they do not say that this product is addictive and will kill you. they do not say it is going to make you end up in a wheelchair strapped to an oxygen tank later in life. they make it fun. they make it enjoyable. that is the image they portrayed, and people bought into it. so did fannie collar. if there are any truth in advertising, they would say those things. they would say, hey, smoking gives you cancer, so quit smoking. smoking gives you copd, so quit smoking. smoking is going to kill you, so quit smoking. smoking is addictive, so let us help you break the habit. if there was any truth. they do not do that. the defendants, i'm sure you heard it throughout the course of the trial, they talk about the warning labels. well, these cigarette packs, they had warning labels so fannie should have known. the public was warned. the public should have known better. they tell you there is warning labels on every pack, and fannie must have seen them. so therefore, they should be absolved of any wrongdoing, right? it is like their get out of jail free card, free pass. it allows them to kill millions of people. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and move to strike that last comment. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: motion, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: sure, their packs have warning labels on them. they were obligated to put them on under the law. but these companies also had an obligation not to lie. they were obligated to put the labels on, and they were obligated not to lie. if you are going to make a product, do not lie about it. an addict needs a straightforward message, not a mixed message. the mixed message is the warnings tell you one thing on the pack and the industry telling that same addict, it is okay, go ahead and smoke. the filter will take out anything bad. do not worry about it. if it is proven it is bad, we will stop making it. what kind of mixed message is that to an addict? the court: it is been one hour. mr. hammer: thank you. let us think about that. think about this for a second. imagine this, you see a child walking to the end of the diving board above an empty pool. there is a no diving sign. but the kid did not see it. you walk right past the sign, and he is about to dive into an empty pool. what do you do? what would any reasonable person do? they would stand on the side of the pool and yell to that kid, wait, do not jump in, whatever they could to keep him from doing harm to himself, right? you do not say, well, there is a sign there, so if he falls in, oh, well, that is his fault. he did not see the sign. he did not pay attention to the sign. it is his fault. of course not. warning labels, yeah, they were on there. caution label, '70s, 1985. twenty years after fannie started smoking. twenty-four years and 39 years after fannie started smoking. she was hooked by then. she was hooked by then. what are these warning labels telling her? what did she tell you? she told you, i did not really look at the warning labels. i do not look at a box of cocoa every time i make myself a cup of cocoa. let us talk about the obvious. everybody knows what a dollar bill looks like. we touch it every single day of our lives many, many times a day. at least 20 times a day probably we touch a dollar bill. we see it, hold it in your hand every single day. it is in your pocket. does anyone really know what is on the back of a one dollar bill? they bring in signs with the warning labels on it blown up big, huge. we bring you in the cigarette pack that shows the actual warning labels. they do not want to show their logos and the warning labels. they are not proud of it. they are not even proud of their industry enough to show it to you. they hide. they hide in plain site. that is what they do. even though they were required by law to put the warning labels on, they use these warning labels as a defense to say that fannie should have known and, therefore, she should have quit. but meeting the legal minimum does not supplant the moral maximus. think about that. who controlled their business choices? who controlled the level of nicotine? who controlled the manipulation? who controlled the addictive nature? who was responsible for the conduct of the tobacco companies? the tobacco companies. they are responsible for putting fannie in this shape. the industry was not motivated to put lives and health of customers above profit. instead, the industry continued to make choices which had health consequences. what chance did fannie have? what chance did she have? their business model should be, cure, do not cause. we talked about the fact that they are a corporation. you may not discriminate between corporations and individuals. i agree. if you are going to be a corporation and you want to be treated as a person, act like a person. act like a person. you know, we learned everything we ever needed to know in kindergarten. robert fulton wrote a book about it. how do you behave to other people? be decent, be nice, be responsible. do not hurt the other guy. you want to be treated like a person, then do the right thing. do not do it because it is all about money. the tobacco companies and their executives, they celebrated their wins. they celebrated the money they made. that is all they cared about. they put money ahead of lives. they turned a blind eye to the suffering of people like fannie collar. they did not care. they did not give one thought about fannie collar or the millions of americans whose lives they destroyed. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and move to strike that last comment. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: they did not care about fannie. so when it comes down to the verdict form, we already talked about question number 1. when you go down to decide the fault, i would suggest to you -- that is what i would suggest to you: these tobacco companies, they are to blame. how can you fault fannie collar as a 12-year-old little girl sitting there in a blueberry field smoking and continuing to smoke when all they did was lie to her the entire time she smoked? you know, if you think, well, maybe fannie should be held to blame, then you ought to give her very, very little fault in comparison to these tobacco companies. certainly maybe 5 or ten percent at the most. but i would suggest to you, how do you hold her to blame, based on what she knew compared to what they knew? now, these are the engle findings. i particularly want to focus on 5 and 6 here. philip morris and r.j. reynolds, they concealed or omitted material information knowing that material information was false and misleading. and they agreed, all three defendants, philip morris, liggett and r.j. reynolds, they agreed with the other companies and the industry organizations, ti, tirc, ctr, to conceal or omit information regarding the health with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. that is what they counted on. although fannie may not have attributed any particular statement to r.j. reynolds or liggett or philip morris, what did she tell you? she repeatedly heard the tobacco industry in general talk about smoking, talking about the fact that filters are safe, talking about the fact that if they are dangerous, we will stop making them, talking about the fact that smoke filters, it takes out the bad stuff. she heard that repeatedly, not just once. mr. belasic: objection. misstates the evidence, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: she heard that repeatedly throughout the years. she told you that. what chance did fannie collar have against these tobacco companies since they all agreed? and what did dr. proctor tell you, the tobacco institute spoke for all of the defendants. philip morris was a paid member r.j. was a paid member. liggett was a paid member on and off. and the tobacco institute would go on tv and speak for the companies very often. not just one time, very often. we saw examples of that. there is no doubt they concealed information. this is the verdict form you are going to get. there is no doubt they concealed information. there is no doubt they entered into an agreement to conceal it. the findings, which are binding upon all of us, make it clear that they did so with the intention that smokers like fannie collar and members of the public would rely on it. these issues are not in dispute. the horror is they knew it was affecting people. that is the horror. they knew they were lying and they knew people were trusting them and they knew people were dying from their lies and they kept doing it. that is just wrong, folks. fannie told you she trusted them, just like millions of other people. in their own documents it says, our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. that is exactly what fannie told you she heard, but the tobacco industry told us it was not dangerous, and i depended on their statements more than the surgeon general because they were the ones producing the cigarettes and they would have more idea of what was in them than the surgeon general in her opinion. was she naive? maybe. but so were millions of other americans. mr. geraghty: i would object and move to strike the last comment. the court: sustained. it will be stricken. mr. hammer: they admit internally that they are making false statements and misleading the public to sell cigarettes. that is their lies. doubt is their product. doubt is their product. when no one was looking, they did an awful lot of things. it is been said that the character -- character is defined by what you do when you think no one is looking. character is defined by what you do when you think no one is looking. let us look at the character of these companies. when no one was looking, they lied, they misled, they committed a fraud to the public, they formed an enterprise to conceal or omit information, they buried and destroyed documents, they manipulated the product. and then when people came looking for answers, what did they do? did they tell the truth? no. they manufactured doubt. doubt is their product. again, the word is confusion. doubt is our product. the success, they brag about the success of the tirc. it is been a successful defensive operation. they talk about giving smokers a psychological crutch. that is exactly what they did to fannie. exactly what they did to fannie. she told us again, i always depended on what the tobacco industry was telling the public. i did not think you people would be lying. i believed you. in their forwarding memo they said how to free americans from the guilty fear, free them from the guilty fear. that is exactly what they did, they gave them a crutch. lies cost lives, folks. lies cost lives. the tobacco industry, they misled the public about the safety of filters and fannie bought into it. you remember these documents. fannie bought into them. she told you. it was filtering out all the impurities, the illusion of filtration. they lied. based on historical record, dr. proctor told you that the filters caused disease, filters caused death. fannie did not know what these tobacco companies knew. she did not know they formed this enterprise to fraudulently conceal the lethal effects. she did not know they hired scientists and doctors to lie. she did not know that they misled the surgeon general to smear and belittle public health officials, that they targeted children, that they knew fifty percent of smokers would die. she did not know that smoking cigarettes was killing hundreds of thousands of americans. she did not know they manipulated the levels of nicotine. she did not know there were 70 cancer-causing agents. she did not know there were chemicals like arsenic and cyanide and radioactive polonium. she did not know these things. who did? they did. they did, and they kept it from her and the rest of the world. why? for money. dr. proctor talked about the fact that the whole concept, the whole point of the enterprise was to create a deception. and it worked for decades and fannie fell for it. talked about liggett, liggett's activities. they conducted research internally with contract research organizations. but they, generally, like the other companies, they did not say publicly that smoking caused harm. fannie may not have smoked liggett cigarettes, but liggett made a choice to join the ti. before they made that choice, they had an opportunity, they had an opportunity to come out and tell the truth. they could have said, you know what, what is been going on for the past few years with these other organizations, we do not agree with that. instead they jumped right in. jumped right in. why? because they saw how much money those other companies were making. that is why they did it. you saw the document from liggett. they knew cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous. there should be no confusion about the confusion, folks. there was no doubt or confusion internally that cigarettes caused cancer they knew it. there should be no doubt about the doubt. we talked about reliance. we have shown by a greater weight of the evidence that fannie relied to her detriment on the defendants' concealment and agreement to conceal. of course we did. the lies told by philip morris and r.j. reynolds and the other members of the agreement, like liggett, they influenced fannie collar just like tens of millions of americans exactly as they planned. that is what caused fannie's lung cancer. she relied on those statements. (thereupon, the video clip was played to the jury as follows:) speaker: this is 20/20. we asked philip morris, r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson and lorillard to appear on this program. none would. they told us to talk to the tobacco institute. the institute said ann browder would speak for them. the jury has not come in. it may not be harmful. you are not convinced. it may be or it may not be. we do not know. (thereupon, the video clip was concluded.) mr. hammer: that is what they are telling the public in 1983, despite what they know in their internal documents. fannie collar was this industry's perfect customer. their internal documents set out their plan for smokers like her, and she followed that plan to a tee. she did exactly what they wanted her to do, just like millions of other people. she switched to filtered cigarettes. she relied on their statements and she continued smoking for many, many years. she was swept up in the effects of their lies and deceit and concealment, along with millions the others. she was influenced by their conduct. she told you that. consider the scope of that conduct. targeting kids as replacement smokers. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and have a motion. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: advertisements, counter messaging, disinformation packets, health reassurances, and a campaign of death. what chance did fannie collar have? they promised to stop making cigarettes if it was determined that they were harmful. they made that promise. they did not stop it. they lied about that too. fannie told you she heard that and relied upon it. you heard the jury instruction on these two topics. agreement to conceal -- and let us go to the verdict form. i'll ask you, did fannie rely on this misinformation? did fannie rely on these lies? did fannie rely upon their campaign of doubt? their lies? of course she did. did it cause her to keep on smoking, keep on being addicted, to get disease? of course. that is why i ask you to check off "yes" to all of these boxes, including liggett. including liggett, rjr, philip morris. they all agreed hand in hand to lie to the american public and perpetuate that lie for decades. we are also going to be asking you to give fannie money for her pain and suffering. everything you need to learn about fannie you can see from her medical records. copd exacerbation. think about this. fannie got lung cancer in 1993. they said, yeah, but she is cured. she is cured? they took out her lung. they cut her open like a can opener to take out her lung. she went through radiation treatments for 8 weeks. she had complications, had to be hospitalized for 45 days. she is cured, as if she took some magic pill and she is all better. really, folks? that is what they want you to believe. she is fine. she is cured. she is got copd. she is had it since 1993, and it is only going to get worse. only going to get worse. the medical records. she is got severe obstruction as late as 2013. severe obstruction. she is going to be tied to this thing. she does not like it. do you think she likes sucking oxygen through a tube? do you think she likes that? she told you she was active. she was vibrant. she loved life. she loved life. she told you she is not going to stop. she does not want to be in a rocking chair. and then, basically, dr. suen told you everything you need to know. you heard from dr. suen, her treating pulmonologist. he takes care of her even today. i'm not going to play that. remember she was asked -- dr. mannino was asked by mr. geraghty, do you think she considered her disabled when she was able to walk three miles after her surgery? do you think she considered herself disabled? that is such an unfair characterization of fannie's disability. such an unfair characterization. we saw the zest for life fannie has. we saw that. she is not going to give up despite her disability. we encourage people with disabilities to fight, not to give into it. what fannie is doing, walking like she did, riding her bike, that should be commended, not disrespected. she does not want to live in a rocking chair. she is going to enjoy her life as best as she can, but she is fighting with every breath. you saw that. on the verdict form you are going to be asked, what is the total damages of the medical bills, and you heard fannie say that she incurred in excess of $200,000. we are going to ask you to award her that $200,000 as reimbursement for the medical bills she is incurred. what is the total amount of damages? how do you put a value on somebody's life? how do you put a value on what she is going through and will continually go through in the future? how do you put a value on a lung? they took her lung out. she is not cured. they took her lung out. how do you put a value on that, on the pain and suffering she is endured and is going to continue to endure until her last breath? how do you put a value on that? i would suggest $15 million as a fair and reasonable amount of money to compensate her for the loss of a lung, for copd and the future she is going to be facing for the next hopefully nine years according to the life tables. it may be shorter. it may be longer. another nine years of sucking on oxygen from a tube, and it is only going to get worse. it is only going to get worse. they do not care. they do not care. we are not here only asking you to compensate fannie for her pain and suffering, which will get worse. we are also here to ask you to consider punishing these tobacco companies. punitive damages. the judge read to you the instruction. look at the things they did. they cannot even talk about what they did. they will not address it. you stand at a unique moment in history. you have the power and authority to do something today in this courtroom. you have to see it clearly. we have to prove to you by clear and convincing evidence that these acts these tobacco companies committed over the years should be punished. i think we certainly have done that with the evidence. you have to remember, this is an industry that is a master of illusion. they have done it for decades. this is their judgment day. it is their day of reckoning. it is time to make an accounting for the past misdeeds. you have got to ask yourself, should they escape punishment? of course not. today i'm calling on you to make an expression of moral condemnation for the insidious -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object -- the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: -- and move to strike and i have a motion. the court: it will be stricken. mr. hammer: what they did was reprehensible. it does not meet with the bounds of human decency. mr. geraghty: same objection. mr. hammer: it is about corruption. mr. geraghty: same motion, your honor. the court: overruled. reserved on the motion. mr. hammer: it is not corruption. it is not greed. it is not morality. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: motion. mr. hammer: these companies, they have a survival instinct. the health of their profits is the only thing important to them. they do not care about the customer. they do not care about fannie collar. they are addicted to their products. they enjoy making money. it gives them pleasure and satisfaction. their conduct needs to be examined. these companies, they took over -- reynolds took over, took over lorillard recently. and philip morris, when they took over liggett's brand of chesterfield, what do you hear? remember chesterfield? liggett's attorney stood up here and said, well, we put a label, nicotine is addictive on our cigarettes. what did you hear? philip morris bought that pack -- those cigarettes up. the first thing it did was took the label off. it took the label off. you must decide as to each defendant the punitive damages warranted to punish them and as a deterrent to others, so that other corporations do not do the things that these tobacco companies did for 50 years. so that others do not do what they did. that is the only way things can be right. the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking, and they should be punished for it. twenty million people have died. they talk about 60 million people have quit. twenty million people have died. numbers, can you conceptualize 20 million people dead? the population in this country has been decimated by this tobacco industry. this epidemic, it is been driven by greed and corruption. let us think about it for a second. 20 million people dead. there is about 20 million people in the state of florida. mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. this argument is under williams and state farm. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: you know what, 500,000 people are dying each year today. do they care? not a bit. do you know why? because it is all about money. truth and consequences. it is about truth and consequences. when you engineer your product to cause addiction, there should be consequences. when you target children, there should be consequences. mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. mr. hammer: when you lie to the american public, there should be consequences. when you offer up false solutions -- the court: sustained. mr. hammer: -- there should be consequences. when you offer up filters that do not work, there should be consequences. when you commit fraud, there should be consequences. when you hurt one person, there should be consequences. when you kill millions, there must be consequences. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would move to strike the last comment. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: a manufacturer has to tell the truth about its product. they have to. that is the responsible way to do things. that is the responsible way to do business in this country. if you do not, you need to be punished. it is as simple as that. protect. do not addict. protect. do not addict them. they talk about the base of their business is the 14- to 24-year age group. they talk about inducing a pre-smoker or a non-smoker to become habituated, deliberately playing down the role of nicotine. they referred to younger adults as replacement smokers. as young as 12 years old. twelve years old as replacement smokers. that is their target. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and move to strike that comment. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: fannie collar, she was one of those replacement smokers at 12 years old. because we know the younger a person is when they start to smoke, the more likely they are to continue to smoke as adults. the tobacco companies knew that. they knew that. internally they knew that. they dehumanized the customer. they called them crops. crops. this is the jury instruction. the frank statement. all you need to do is look at the frank statement. let us take a look close at it. remember the frank statement? this was in 1954. let us look at it basically line by line. we accept an interest as a basic responsibility paramount. their own documents. who ain't for more money? we always have, and we will always cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public. but the campaign of smearing and belittling them, trying to smear the scientists who are doing the real research. one by one these charges have been abandoned for lack of evidence, they tell the public, and yet inside they say overwhelming evidence to indict cigarette smoking. they knew it inside, and they are telling the public, oh, no, it is not true. the tirc, they set up a scientist with unimpeachable integrity and national repute, and yet in their own documents they say it was set up as a shield and a front. and let us face it, we are interested in evidence which denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. is that being truthful? the court: five minutes. mr. hammer: they said if our product is harmful, we will stop making it. what did fannie tell you? in the late '50s, as i recall the tobacco companies were or the industry was telling people if we switch -- if we had any doubts about cigarettes being harmful to our health, we should switch to filters and there would be no problem. and if they ever found out they cause cancer or other disease, they would stop making cigarettes. she relied on that, as did millions of others. they buried the research. they buried it. remember this graph? this was shown. it talks about the rise in cigarettes. rise in cigarettes, and the rise in cancer. this is how they put together that link. remember? 1954, that was a pivotal moment in tobacco history. that is when they linked up arms and decided on this campaign of doubt and lies and deceit. just imagine, just imagine if they would told the truth. fannie collar was 19 years old. imagine if they would told the truth. if they would really meant what they said, if it is harmful, we will stop making it. or if they took out the frank statement and said -- told the truth. imagine what would have happened? fannie collar would not have gotten sick. lung cancer would have been extinguished over the years. we would not be here in this courtroom. that is why they should be punished. punitive damages. i would ask you to check off yes, yes, and yes to each of these companies. they need to be punished. they need to be punished. i ask you to check those boxes off, and we will come back for another day, present evidence real quick to you, and then you decide how much. these companies need to be punished. not only for fannie's sake but for everybody else out there. 21 mr. hammer: the defense just said to you fannie just quit in '93. she quit in '93 after being hospitalized, having her lung removed, going on oxygen, and then going through radiation for eight weeks, and she just decided to quit. that was a decision? no. she just had surgery to remove her lung. she was just told she had copd, and she was placed on oxygen for a period of time to recuperate. she went through rehab, and then she went through radiation. yeah, i guess that is her decision. she was properly motivated by that kind of surgery. that is what they want you to believe. yes, she was. that is some pretty darn good motivation. guess what, she did not choose to smoke all those years. it was her addiction that drove her smoking. that is what you have got to understand. that is what they want you to just poo poo away, no big deal. they want to talk about all the times that she tried to quit before that and say, well, dr. suen said if she was properly motivated. remember, dr. suen became her doctor in 1993. he was not seeing her all those years beforehand when she was having difficulty quitting. they talk about dr. suen. let us put up dr. suen. can you play dr. suen's testimony? because really everything you need to know about fannie collar and her condition dr. suen told you. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) q can you identify any other place in the chart for me where you documented an opinion or your observation on your part that ms. collar had copd, mild or otherwise, prior to january 14th, 2005? a i know that, you know, the -- at the time of her surgery, you know, the lung that was removed was analyzed, and that there were changes of emphysema, pulmonary emphysema in the lung specimen. so even, you know -- even back in the '90s we knew there was -- she did have copd. she may -- i've counseled her multiple times to quit smoking, and there were periods of months at a time where she would not smoke, but she did go back to smoking again. yes, i just do not remember for how long she was smoking free at the time, but she always relapsed back into smoking during those years. with her, you know, i know that she has struggled with trying to quit smoking. so i did talk to her about pharmacological aids, in this case chantix on this visit, and i've also prescribed wellbutrin on other occasions. q do you see anything in this -- either of these exhibits that documents any withdrawal symptoms that she claims to have been suffering from at that time? a i did not document that, but i do have a recollection that she did tell me about withdrawal symptoms. q what specifically did she say in that regard? a my recollection is that she had -- felt like she had a craving for smoking. i remember her using the term feeling jittery or filling more anxious, you know, during that -- when she gets those feelings of wanting to smoke. (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. hammer: so he told you she was relapsing. he told you she was craving. he told you she had copd. not what they have just told you. she had all those signs of an addiction. all of the signs of an addiction. and he prescribed wellbutrin and chantix. but she could have quit any time she wanted, that is what they want you to believe. this woman was addicted. they say she went back to smoking because of meeting up with ben. you know what was missing on mr. geraghty's timeline that he painstakingly blew up for you and went through? no mention of gail on that timeline, her daughter who was diagnosed with a deadly disease and then died 18 months later, which spun fannie right back into that addiction. he conveniently left that off his timeline, did not he? you know, all throughout this case they made a big issue about fannie's mom slapping her. remember that? it was a big issue in opening statement and all throughout the trial. dr. ticknor, what did he tell you? well, i did not really make note of that. that was really not a significant time in her life. the reason is because -- fannie's mother slapped her because she said it was not ladylike. no other reason. she did not want her to smoke. her dad said, just do not let mom find out. smoke with me. so that is another mixed message she is getting not from the tobacco companies, from her own family. she continued to get those mixed messages. they talk about the fact that she said, i only heard it one time. well, let us take a look at the slide of -- i think it is 144, dan. testimony from fannie collar, do you have that? in the late '50s, as i recall, the tobacco industry was -- or the industry was telling us that if we switched -- if we had any doubts about cigarettes being harmful to our health, if we switched to filters, there would be no problem. and if they ever found out that they ever caused cancer or any disease, they would stop making cigarettes, and they are still making cigarettes today. then she told you in that same line of questioning, slide number 145, please. this is mr. geraghty asking her questions. you told us yesterday very clearly that the first time you ever heard of that was in 1966. she answers, i think we had a misunderstanding. i thought you were talking about the warning on the pack, which is 1966. 1966 was the first time i saw the warning. my father-in-law showed it to me. he was smoking camels at the time. i was already smoking filters so i felt i was safe. mr. geraghty, so you made a mistake yesterday and you want to change your testimony? no, i do not think it was a mistake. i misunderstood what you were saying. that is what she told mr. geraghty. this whole thing about how she smoked marlboro first and then switched because -- never smoked winston and started smoking marlboros when she met merton, no. let us look at her testimony, slide number 138. i bought winston while mert was smoking camels. that was her testimony in court to the defense counsel. then that was a pattern you had throughout your life? no, i would not say it was a pattern. i bought winstons while mert was still smoking camels. then on slide 139, please. no, i started on winstons. this is, again, defense counsel questioning. then ultimately switched to marlboros? yes, when mert switched to marlboros. let us talk about what we are here about. fannie collar is absolutely addicted. she deserves to be a member of the engle class. the issue is, was anything they said or did important to fannie collar? certainly in 1954, instead of saying, we take an interest and basic responsibility in our customer's health over all other things in our business, instead if they i would have said, quit smoking in 1954 because the scientists are right, smoking causes lung cancer, we would not be here. if they lived up to their promises of, if it is proven that it is unsafe, we will stop making the product, we would not be here. if they did not lie about filters and the fact that it takes out the bad stuff, we would not be here. if they did not lie about the addictiveness of the product and the fact that it causes cancer, we would not be here. it is as simple as that. we would not be here because fannie would not have lung cancer or copd. those lies are what caused her to get those diseases. yeah, obviously her smoking caused her to get those diseases, but her addiction caused her to smoke all those cigarettes. she became addicted because of their lies, because of their lies, as did millions of other people. so were their lies important and relevant? yeah. would that information that they concealed have been substantial for folks to hear, for fannie to hear? of course. what if they had kept their promise to stop making them? lives would be different. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. hammer: sadly, all too often in the choice between the physical health of consumers and the financial well-being of business, concealment was chosen over sales over safety and money over morality. these tobacco companies who knowingly and secretly decided to put the public at risk solely for the purpose of making products and believed that illness and death of consumers was an appropriate cost to their own prosperity, that is wrong. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: motion. mr. hammer: their conduct needs to be continued to be examined. this is not old news. this goes back to the 1950s and continues. we are just starting to understand the scope of how deep these -- mr. geraghty: your honor, that is not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: some of our country's best scholars, including dr. proctor and the students he is teaching out at stanford, are still studying these documents and finding more and more. he told you that. it is important for us to understand what happened because those who forget history are doomed to repeat it. we all know that. that is a lesson we have learned. if you forget about history, society is doomed to repeat it. we cannot let that happen here. that is why punitive damages are so warranted, because when we talk about deterrents to others in punitive damages, we are talking about letting other corporations know that this behavior is not acceptable. that is what it is all about. the jury instruction on agreement to conceal, real quick, slide number 78. it says, each party to an agreement to conceal or omit material information is responsible for the acts or omissions of any other party to the agreement to conceal or omit information so long as the acts or omissions were in furtherance of the agreement to conceal. accordingly, the defendants are responsible for their own acts and for the acts of the other tobacco companies and organizations, meaning the ctr, the ti and the tirc, taken in furtherance of the agreement. that is why all of these companies should be held responsible. they all agreed to conceal this information from the public. they all agreed to conceal this information from fannie collar. yet, can fannie collar point to a company and say, oh, this one told me this on this day, this one told me that on this day. no. they shaped how america felt about cigarettes. they formed the country. they formed the country's opinion about cigarettes. they formed fannie's opinion about cigarettes. she did not know. wait, they want to say she knew. she knew it was harmful. she had to know. her uncle -- i mean, her father-in-law told her. her own father told her. the person she worked for told her. she had to know. well, why did not they know? why did not they know? how did they go on tv and say, we do not know, it is not proven. how did they do that year after year, decade after decade, how did they do that and get away with it? they have gotten away with it. but today in this courtroom you can say no more. that is the power you have. they have shown you their callused and cynical attitude. what these companies did was cold. it was calculated. it was premeditated. they knew exactly what they were doing, and they were doing it all for money. let us take a look at the punitive damages instruction, also, slide number 85. to ask you to punish these companies for their conduct, that is what we are asking you to do because that kind of behavior should not be tolerated by people like you, by juries like you. one of the things you can consider in assessing reprehensibility or wrongfulness is the harm suffered by fannie, as well as the rest of the american public, that is what this instruction tells you. conduct causing loss to fannie was so gross to show disregard of human life or the safety of persons exposed to the elements. total disregard for the safety of people. total disregard that they were harming people throughout the decades. total disregard. they want to talk about the warnings. let us take a look at pt 3870. they want to talk about the warnings, they see how effective and impactive the warnings can be. let us take a look. this is the ftc report to congress in 1967, just after the first caution label went on cigarettes. let us take a look at what the federal trade commission said, please. effectiveness of cigarette labeling. there is virtually no evidence that the warning statement on cigarette packages has had any significant effect. that is the ftc, a government agency talking about the warnings that they say, fannie should have known. they are effective. that is enough. that is all we needed to do. come one, folks. the ftc report says warning labels are not effective. fannie told you when she was shown the label by her father-in-law, what did she tell? she told you, i saw it but i was already smoking filters. he was smoking camels. she told you that. i felt i was safe. why did she feel she was safe? because of what the tobacco companies were telling her. that is why. let us look at how the industry reacted to their warnings. they said, when scientists said smoking causes disease -- their own warnings to the tobacco companies, when scientists said tobacco smoke, cigarettes cause disease, what did they do they? they ignored those warnings and they kept lying and manipulating. when smokers started to get sick and die and the lung cancer rates went up, they ignored those warnings and they kept lying and manipulating. when the surgeon general said smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases, they ignored those warnings and they kept lying and manipulating. when the government said that there was an epidemic, an epidemic caused by cigarettes, they ignored those warnings and they kept lying and manipulating. why? because they are greedy and they are profit minded. that is what it is all about. dr. proctor told you, slide number 120, they are extremely profitable. there is no more profitable industry. slide number 121, there is a certain sort of invisibility that the industry has. that is very important for their whole strategy. essentially making themselves invisible and all attention on the smoker and the cigarette. no attention on themselves. you know what, in this courtroom you heard -- [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. hammer: thank you, judge. dan, slide number 122, please. dr. proctor told you that for roughly every million cigarettes smoked in our society there is one death. he told you they make millions of cigarettes a day. they have machines that make 10 million cigarettes a day. they have got tons of those machines. despite those millions of deaths, do they care? no. they keep making millions of cigarettes from machines that make millions of a day, which result in millions of dollars to these companies and to these defendants. they do not care. they do not care. and dr. suen told you she always relapses back. is that control? no. did she have control as she opened up that vacuum cleaner and dug out a cigarette butt? is that control over her smoking? of course not. that is addiction. they said, well, she was a chipper, because you know, after her surgery she only smoked occasionally and then started smoking with ben. well, what did dr. mannino tell you about that? slide number 141. he was asked: doctor, you do not agree, based upon the medical records that we have reviewed, the pattern we just saw was that of a chipper? he said: no. this is a person who is addicted, who is trying to quit. fannie collar was not a chipper. she was addicted. you know, dr. ticknor, he talked about this 60 million people that have quit. remember that discussion mr. gdanski had with him? let us take a look at that. slide number 126. the stat you talked about, you actually do not know the basis of it, the formulation of it, the makeup of it, the demographic of it. i do not. you just came prepared to give one number? yeah, it is the number i'm familiar with. this is the expert they brought in. he has no idea how they came up with that number. that is just the number they gave him. say 60 million quit. that is good enough. then he tells you addiction does not cause disease. i've never seen a case where addiction causes disease. how convenient. we have to prove that addiction caused fannie collar's disease. they bring in a witness to you that tells you addiction does not cause disease. let us take a look at pt 1913. this is a document from december 1982. and in this document what do they say about expert witnesses? our medical scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lack credibility and integrity. their own documents. basically they say our expert will say whatever we want them to say. you know, in 1953, slide number 128, they linked arms and walked together at the plaza hotel. they recognized that this is the way the world ends. not in a bang, but a whimper. it is something almost too terrible for most of the industry's men to realize, even though the very heads of the great corporations themselves signalized the end of the old days, when they linked arms and walked together because that was unprecedented. as it was pointed out many times, they were competitors, but when they saw their business threatened, they linked arms, they joined forces and decided to lie for the next 50 and 60 years to the american public and people like fannie collar. why? ann browder, number 129, please. she went on tv many different times. you saw her -- i forget what year we showed first. can we show that, dan. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) speaker: we know cigarette smoking is bad for our health. why does the tobacco institute continue to promote smoking? speaker: well, the tobacco institute does not promote smoking. it promotes the right of an individual to make a decision to smoke and then supports that individual in making that decision. and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. certainly i am not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people and some of the problems that they might have, but i do not think that there is a causal relationship established between cigarette smoking and any disease. if there were, diane, i do not think there would be a cause without the effect or the effect without the cause, and we all know that happens. (thereupon, the videotaped testimony of the witness was concluded.) mr. hammer: 1983, speaking on behalf of all of the tobacco companies, philip morris, r.j. reynolds, liggett. still, we do not know as late as 1983. let us take a look at pt 2412. this is a document that is in evidence. let us go to that page i asked you to turn to. why do they do it? why do they do it? they say let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied. all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. that is what this is all about. that is what drives it. that is their life blood. that is their oxygen. they need it. they want it. that is all they care about at the risk of killing millions of people. you know, the truth is fannie will die a slow and miserable death. sad to think about it, and i hate saying it in front of her. she is going to end up gasping for air. and despite her best efforts, she is going to suffocate. that is what happens to people with copd. that is what is going to happen to her. they want to say it is all because she was not motivated to quit. what was their motivation to lie? we know the answer. bigger bags of money to take to the bank. they knew it. their motivation, pt 1525. unless some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not conceive that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes. their own documents. their lying did not stop. it continued throughout the years. it continued all the way through the years leading up to fannie lung diagnosis. and it went to the highest levels of government. we saw this once before, and i want to show it to you again, in 1994. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) i'd like you to rise and those who will be testifying as well, will you to rise. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth? please consider yourself to be under oath. let me give my question on the matter of whether or not nicotine was addictive. let me ask you first, i'd like to go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive? i heard virtually all of you touch on it. yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. johnson. congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definition of addiction -- we will take that as a no. again, time is short. i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. i do not believe the nicotine from our products are addictive. i believe nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. this is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus. not by some, but all of the scientific community will you ever be convinced, and what evidence are you waiting for? let us have the microphone passed over. yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now. so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven. (thereupon, the video clip was concluded.) mr. hammer: a year after fannie collar is opened up like a can opener to remove her lung, they are still going to congress, going to congress, raising their hand and lying. that is as reprehensible as it gets. the court: you have like 3 minutes. mr. hammer: thank you, judge. for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliant, conceived, and executed over the years, helping us to win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, that has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health effects without actually denying it. they talk about fannie saw one statement. let us put up her testimony at 142, please, dan. that is not what fannie said. she told you when you use the tobacco industry term, the combination of all of the tobacco companies. i think when mr. belasic got up here and he said to you that was only one statement, remember? was it only one statement that you heard over the years or many, many statements over the years? there was more than one. more than one statement. yes. there was more than one statement. she told you that. i ask you, do not erase fannie's name from the history of this atrocity that these tobacco companies created. posterity should remember things. you can make that happen today with your verdict. inscribe her name in the law books of florida, maintaining her name in the proud engle class to which she belongs. the engle class has done so much to bring -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object and make a motion. the court: sustained. you have about 1 minute. mr. hammer: this litigation has brought tobacco companies -- mr. geraghty: i object, your honor -- the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: -- and make a motion. mr. hammer: history has brought the tobacco companies' deception and lies to light for you all to see. fannie deserves to be remembered. she deserves to be remembered. she deserves to be a member of the engle class. she does not want to be. she wishes she did not have to be. but these companies, their lies, their deceit, that is what caused it. because if they would have been truthful over the years, things would have been different. six people can change history. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and make a motion, your honor. the court: sustained. and you are out of time. mr. hammer: we ask you to return a verdict for fannie collar, check off the box for punitive damages, and we will come back one more day to talk about how these companies should be punished. i want to thank you for your service and your attention. this case is now in your hands. thank you, on behalf of fannie.