10 mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. as you know, my name is bill geraghty, and along with terry sexton, we represent philip morris usa in this case. i think i can agree with mr. hammer, it has been a long trial, and at times i'm sure it was probably tedious and the examinations, i'm sure, took longer than you all would have liked for them to take, but we are toward the end of the process. what i'd really like to start with is to thank you for your time. this has been an incredible sacrifice of your time to be here and everybody appreciates the fact that you have taken that time to help us to resolve the issues in this case. we would not be able to have civil jury trials if we did not have people like you who are willing to make a sacrifice of your time to be here and help us resolve this case. let me simply say i think on behalf of everyone, judge cox, the lawyers and the parties, that we really appreciate it. we know you have been paying attention. so thank you very much. we are getting very close to the end of the case, which i'm sure is music to all of your ears at this point. it is almost time for you to head off to the jury room and deliberate. judge cox told you that she will give you an actual verdict form and a set of instructions and you will use that to decide the issues in this case. but before you head off to deliberate, i'd like to take this opportunity to summarize the evidence that we have heard over the last two weeks. now before i do that, let me say something about the findings from the earlier class action. you heard about those findings. i am not here to debate those findings. but there is also no debate, ladies and gentlemen, those findings do not tell you how to answer any of the questions on the verdict form. that is because, by your verdict in this case, by your review of the evidence you have heard and your verdict in this case, you decide whether those findings have any applicability to fannie collar and the lifestyle choices that she made. mr. hammer: objection. that is a misstatement of the law. can we approach? the court: yes. (thereupon, the bench conference proceeded as follows.) mr. hammer: judge, once the jury determines she is a class member, those findings absolutely do apply to fannie collar. that is a misstatement of the law. the court: i thought it said -- mr. hammer: it is a misstatement of the law. i'd ask for a curative instruction. the court: if so, sustained. mr. hammer: i'd ask for a curative. mr. geraghty: your honor, you told them in your instructions that they cannot use the findings to decide whether she is a class member or not. the court: right. that is true. geraghty: right. so they get to decide by answering that question whether the findings apply to her. the court: then you need to say that instead of what you just said, that the findings, based on her lifestyle. mr. geraghty: i do not want to get interrupted every two minutes. all he has to do is object. i came up once during his. mr. hammer: it is a misstatement of the law. mr. geraghty: it is not a misstatement of the law. the court: you object, and i'll overrule. you do not need to run up here. mr. hammer: if it is a misstatement of the law, i'm asking for a curative instruction. what mr. geraghty said is that the findings have no applicability to fannie collar. mr. geraghty: that is not what i said. mr. hammer: that is untrue. mr. geraghty: that is not what i said. the court: that is not what he said. mr. geraghty: i said, you decide by your verdict whether those findings have any applicability. if they decide she is not a member of the class -- mr. hammer: look at the transcript. that is not what he said. the court: i'll sustain the objection and instruct the jury. 8 the court: ladies and gentlemen, as i told you earlier in the trial, the attorneys do not give testimony. the testimony in evidence comes only from the witness stand and the evidence. the attorneys' arguments are intended to aid you in understanding the evidence and testimony. you may proceed with your argument. mr. geraghty: thank you. after all, ladies and gentlemen, this case is about fannie collar. when i spoke to you during my opening statement, which was about two weeks ago, i told you that the plaintiff would spend a lot of her time talking to you about statements and ideas made by philip morris, r.j. reynolds and liggett, many of which were made, 30, 40 and in some instances more than 50 years ago. we told you we would not try to defend all those statements. philip morris, r.j. reynolds and liggett made statements and had ideas that today no one would say or think. but i also told you that if that was all this case were about, if all the plaintiff had to prove was that cigarette company executives said inappropriate things, we would not be here. we would not have spent the last two weeks together in this courtroom, but we did, ladies and gentlemen. we did that because this case is not about all cigarette smokers. it is not about whether we think people should or should not smoke cigarettes. this case is about fannie collar. it is about her life and her decisions. that is why, when you actually get the verdict form, you will see that every question on that verdict form asks you specifically about fannie collar, not all cigarette smokers and not the general public. so what have you heard in this case over the last two weeks that is undisputed? well, you have heard that fannie collar is well educated, intelligent, strong-willed and independent. she chose to live her life the way she wanted. her attitude about smoking was no different. as far back as 1955, when fannie collar was 21 years old and working at the adjutant general's office, her attitude was, it is not going to happen to me. i'm going to live until i'm in my 80s. i'm not going to slow down until i'm in my 80s. this is what fannie collar told her co-worker back in 1955 when that co-worker told her, you know what, you should quit smoking. my wife, she smoked cigarettes and she died of cancer. this is what fannie collar told that co-worker back in 1955 at the age of 21. now, we are going to walk through all of the cigarette events in ms. collar's life because this case is about her. i will show you that everything we told you, everything we told you about ms. collar at the very beginning of the case, has turned out to be true. i talked to you at the very beginning of the case about the sources of evidence, the sources of evidence. i asked you to pay close attention to those sources of evidence. so what did i mean by that? what i meant was that everything you saw during the course of this trial came from either what ms. collar herself told us in her deposition, what she told her doctors in her medical records, many of which were written long before the lawsuit was filed, what her doctors told us, and what her family members said, who also gave depositions under oath in this case. as i told you in my opening statement two weeks ago, many of the things that ms. collar told us during the course of this trial have been contradicted by what she told her own doctors and her medical records many years before she filed the lawsuit, by what she said in her own deposition in this case under oath and by what her own family members told us in their depositions. i told you that you would get to be the judge of the facts. you would get to be the judges of the facts in this case. you would get to decide what testimony you ultimately chose to believe. judge cox gave you this instruction. she read it to you, but you will get a written copy of the instruction when you retire to deliberate. judge cox has already told you that in evaluating the believability of any witness you may properly consider any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case. by "interest," we mean a financial interest in the outcome of the case. you may consider the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all of the evidence in the case and in light of your own experience and common sense. you can accept or reject any testimony you are hearing in this case in whole or in part. ladies and gentlemen, that is your job and your job alone as the jury. let me tell you the best example of when ms. collar told you one thing here in court, but said something completely different when she was not thinking about this lawsuit. you will probably recall that ms. collar told you about an episode in which she claimed that she nearly drowned in her pool. she said it was scary and she has not been swimming ever since. on thursday, when i asked ms. collar about it, she confirmed that this episode happened sometime before her deposition, which was on april 15th of 2014. let me remind you of the testimony that ms. collar gave. this was last thursday. i was asking the questions. does that refresh your recollection that the first time you told us about this episode where you nearly drowned in the pool was on april 15th of 2014? her answer was: yes, but that was not the day that the episode happened. and then i said to her: i understand that. the episode occurred before you told us about it on april 15th of 2014, right? she said: right. that is what she said. two months after ms. collar told us about this on april 15th, her medical records showed that she was swimming in her pool again. so i asked ms. collar right after this, i asked her these questions. minutes later, is not it true that approximately two months after you told us about this episode where you nearly drowned, that you were actually swimming in your pool? answer: no. is not that true? her answer: no. no, that is not true? her answer: no, that is not true. i have not been in the pool. that is the testimony that ms. collar gave under oath from that witness box less than a week ago. that is what she told you. now, here is the medical record, ladies and gentlemen. i tried to show it to you during ms. collar's examination. mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: you actually saw this medical record the day before ms. collar testified. i put it up on the screen and i showed it to dr. mannino the day before. again, this medical record, i'm going to show it to you in a second, it is dated june 30th of 2014, two and a half months after that date. can i have the elmo, please? so you can see real quick. it says barry gordon. he was a chiropractor that was treating ms. collar for neck and back pain. it is got her name at the top. she came in about a week earlier, on june 23rd, complaining of neck and back pain. let us look at what ms. collar told dr. gordon on june 30th of 2014. it says, patient reports that she is better. she states that she was able to swim over this past weekend, where she had not been able to swim before. that is what ms. collar told her doctor. that is what she told her doctor when she was not thinking about the lawsuit. it contradicted what she told you from this witness stand when she swore to tell the truth. the testimony you heard less than one week ago. when i handed the record to ms. collar, she said, where did you get this? mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: so what else did ms. collar tell you? well, she said in 1966 she heard a statement from the tobacco industry that if you were concerned about your health, you should smoke filtered cigarettes because they were safe, absolutely safe. that is what she told you. but you already know that by this time ms. collar had been smoking filtered cigarettes, filtered marlboro cigarette for nearly 10 years, going back to 1955, when she met and married her now ex-husband, merton collar. what did she tell you about this statement that she claims she heard? she said it did not make any impression on me because i had already been smoking filtered cigarettes for 10 or 11 years. i'll show you the testimony. this is ms. collar's testimony. this was thursday afternoon as well. is not it true that the statement that you have now told us about several times, is not it true that that statement did not make any impression on you because you were already smoking filtered cigarettes at the time you claim you heard this statement? her answer was: right. right. so you had already been smoking filtered marlboro cigarettes for years before you ever heard this statement that you have been telling us about for the better part of the day; is not that right? and then her answer: the first time i heard about it was in 1966. eleven years after she told you she started smoking filtered cigarettes, when she met and married her husband. now, you know that the very next day, this was thursday, the very next day, friday morning after she had an opportunity to go home, to think about her testimony, to consult with her lawyers. mr. hammer: objection, judge. that is totally improper. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: i would ask for a curative instruction. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are not to consider the only -- only the testimony in evidence of the witnesses and exhibits not the arguments of the attorneys. if you will disregard the last statement. mr. geraghty: you know that the very next day after she made this statement under oath on thursday afternoon, ms. collar went home, had the opportunity to think about her testimony. and when she came back on friday morning, she said, well, you know, i was wrong when i said this. i actually heard this statement sometime in the 1950s. that is what she said the very next day. are you surprised that she changed her testimony when she came back the next day? ms. collar wants you to believe that this statement she claims she heard caused her to ignore all of the warnings about the dangers of smoking that she received in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, right on up to the present. ladies and gentlemen, that story is not plausible. because who can rely on a statement in 1954 or 1955 when you do not hear the statement until 1966? who can rely on a statement like this when you hear over and over and over and over again from people in your life that the filtered cigarettes you are smoking are going to cause you to develop lung cancer and copd? mr. hammer: objection, judge. no evidence of that in this case. mr. geraghty: ladies and gentlemen, think about this. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: you heard dr. proctor testify, he was here for several days. given what you know about dr. proctor, the number of times he is testified, the amount of money he is been paid, do not you think if there was a specific statement, a specific statement that supported what ms. collar told you, that dr. proctor would have showed it to you? after all, he told you there are 80 to 85 million pages of documents and videos from the tobacco company files, all word searchable he told you. we asked fannie collar did you ever discuss this statement, this statement you claim you heard about filters with your family, with your husband, merton collar, with your foster sister, christine coffin, with any of your doctors, with anyone? every single time she said no, she never discussed the statement with anyone, not one single person. why not? because the truth is and the evidence you have now heard shows that the very first time that fannie collar ever told anybody that she heard a statement from the industry that filters make cigarettes safe was after she filed this lawsuit in which she is now asking you to award her $15 million. hammer: objection, judge. misstates the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: ladies and gentlemen, you did not leave your common sense outside that door when you came here two weeks ago. judge cox told you you can use your common sense and your personal life experiences to decide whether or not you are going to believe the things that ms. collar tried to tell you. two weeks ago when i gave my opening statement, i told you this case was about two words: control and responsibility. i asked you as you listened to the evidence to ask yourself the following series of questions, and we are going to walk through all of the significant events in ms. collar's life here in a moment. i would ask you again to just ask yourself these questions as you listen to the summary of the evidence. who was in control of ms. collar's lifestyle choices? who was in control of her decision to smoke cigarettes? who was in control of ms. collar's efforts to quit smoking? who controlled her motivation to quit? was ms. collar addicted? if so, was she someone whose addiction was so strong, so substantial that it overpowered her ability to quit smoking? and finally, ask yourself, did ms. collar rely on anything that philip morris, r.j. reynolds or liggett said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking? after hearing all the evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, you now know fannie collar was not paying attention to anything cigarette companies were saying. she was not waiting for philip morris to tell her, smoking is dangerous, you need to quit. fannie collar and only fannie collar was making those decisions in her life. there is no dispute. she is intelligent. she is well educated. she is strong-willed and independent. she did not listen to what anyone told her about the dangers of smoking. that is what the evidence is you have heard. ms. collar wants you to believe that she smoked for 35 years thinking that by having a filter on the cigarette it was absolutely safe. that is what she told you. but the undisputed evidence is in 1955, her co-worker told her, you should quit smoking because my wife, my wife smoked and she developed cancer. in 1957, her own foster father, raymond dowd, a heavy smoker, dies of cancer. she was caring for him in the last months of his life. throughout the decade of the 1950s, her ex-husband merton collar was preaching to her about the dangers of smoking. in 1964, her foster sister, christine coffin quits smoking when the surgeon general's report is released. in 1966, her father-in-law, he quit smoking when the first warning label goes on cigarette packs. he shows it to her. ladies and gentlemen, the list goes on and on and on. did fannie collar listen to any of these warnings? these warnings came from people that she loved, that she respected, that she trusted. you already know the answer to the question. of course ms. collar did not listen. she continued smoking no matter what anyone told her. she was the kind of person that was going to smoke no matter what anyone said to her. that is why she told the co-worker back in 1955, it is not going to happen to me. i'm going to live until i'm in my 80s, and i'm not slowing down until i'm in my 80s. when her husband, merton collar, said fannie, you should not smoke. what did she tell her own husband? mind your own business. it is my decision whether or not i smoke. that is what she told her own husband. after hearing all the evidence, you know that fannie collar has chosen to live her life the way she wanted. her attitude about cigarette smoking was no different. the truth is ms. collar did enjoy smoking cigarettes. for many years, she was simply not interested in quitting. she enjoyed smoking. cigarettes relaxed her. they helped her focus and concentrate. they helped her cope with stress in her life. every single expert you heard from in this case told you people find cigarette smoking and the effects of nicotine to be pleasurable. they release dopamine. it makes you feel good. so why do you think ms. collar said -- she just denied, did not want to admit that she enjoyed smoking. of course, ladies and gentlemen, you heard that when ms. collar was finally motivated to stop smoking in 1993, she quit for 13 or 14 years with no cravings and no urges to smoke. that is what she told you. the truth is ms. collar could have quit smoking any time she wanted to. frankly, ladies and gentlemen, you heard that from the very first witness who testified. you may not recall, but it was dr. suen, ms. collar's own treating pulmonologist, from right here in vero beach. you saw his testimony by videotape. we took his deposition in the case. what did dr. suen tell you? this is dr. suen's testimony from two weeks ago on tuesday. if a smoker is not well motivated, in your experience, is there any likelihood that the smoker will successfully quit smoking? dr. suen said: it is very much less likely if they are not motivated. question: nobody can do it for you, in other words? his answer: right. question: would you agree that ms. collar quit when she was sufficiently motivated to do so? i believe so, yes. that is from dr. suen. he is been treating her since 1993. he probably knows her better than anybody you heard from during the course of this entire trial. he has no interest in the outcome of this case. he told you fannie collar quit smoking when she was motivated to do so. frankly, ladies and gentlemen, that is all you really need to know to decide the issues in this case. in this country we have the right to make decisions for ourselves, even decisions that today with the benefit of hindsight we might all say were not in her best interests. we believe in free will. that is a fundamental principle upon which our country was founded. you do have the right to make your own decisions in life. but with that right comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those actions and those decisions. you have not heard anything, any evidence in this case that nicotine somehow robbed fannie collar of her free will. no evidence. you saw her testify on the stand. she is an intelligent, well-educated and strong-willed person. now, let me take one more moment and talk about the burden of proof. you have seen medical records. you have heard testimony for the last two weeks. fannie collar bears the burden to prove by the greater weight of the evidence all of her claims in this case. so what does that mean? it means that ms. collar and her attorneys were required to bring you more persuasive, more convincing evidence than the mountain of evidence, the literal mountain of evidence that we have presented during the course of the last two weeks that demonstrates that ms. collar was always in control, that she was not some hopeless addict, and that addiction was not the legal cause of her disease. we are going to walk through the significant events in her life in just a minute. and as we do that, you will see that the plaintiff has simply failed to carry her burden of proof in this case. that is what you have seen over the last two weeks. so let me show you the timeline. everything on the timeline are things you have heard about during the course of the evidence over the last two weeks. let me kind of orient you here for a second. the timeline of events in ms. collar's life, can everybody see that? everything above this blue bar here in the middle, these are all things that occurred in ms. collar's life. everything below the blue bar are things that occurred here in the united states with respect to cigarette smoking and health. so let us start at the very beginning. you heard that fannie collar was born in 1934 in waterville, maine. she was raised by loving foster parents. her foster father, raymond dowd, was a funeral director and owned a general store. her mother was a homemaker. you heard her mother was very strict. her mother set the rules, and she expected her children to follow the rules. now, mr. hammer said, i heard mr. hammer say, that cigarette companies hid the fact that cigarette smoking could be addictive and could cause disease for more than 50 years, and people in this country had no idea that cigarette smoking could be dangerous or addictive. well, based on the evidence you heard over the course of the last two weeks, you know that simply is not true, and it is certainly not true as far as fannie collar is concerned. long before fannie collar was born, you heard dr. proctor testify, dr. proctor told you that cigarette smoking, tobacco use and smoking was associated with lip, mouth and oral cancer going back to the 1700s and 1800s. that is not even on the timeline here. not even on the timeline. he told you that as far back as the 1850s and 1860s people were smoking roll-your-own cigarettes. they were inhaling those cigarettes and they were addictive, just like cigarettes told today. that is what dr. proctor told you. he told you in 1899 the state of florida banned the sale of cigarettes. banned the sale of cigarettes in 1899 in part because they were considered to be dangerous and addictive, particularly to young people and women. that is what dr. proctor told you. if we could bring up the florida health notes real quick. you saw the florida health notes -- this is florida health notes. i showed this to dr. proctor during my examination. the date is july 1906 to june 1907. more than 100 years ago the florida department of health said that today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as a very worse form of tobacco addiction. that is in 1907. you heard if we go back, well over 100 years ago, people in this country were referring to cigarettes as coffin nails and cancer sticks. they were saying that people had nicotine fits, and smokers were nicotine feigns. these were terms that were being used in this country well over 100 years ago. so it is no surprise, ladies and gentlemen, when we get to the late '40s and early 1950s fannie collar told you she heard "coffin nails" used as a term to refer to cigarettes. she heard cigarettes referred to as "cancer sticks." she described herself as having nicotine fits back in the 1950s and 1960s. that is what she told you. she told you, i considered myself to be addicted as far back as the 1950s. that was not hidden from her. of course she did on the stand say, well, coffin nails, cancer sticks, i just thought those were old wives' tales. but this was someone educated as a nurse. and she told you, i never bothered to ask anybody. that is what ms. collar told you. as we move into the '30s and 1940s, you heard that there are articles published in magazines, including reader's digest, that discuss the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. i talked with dr. proctor about some of those. could we bring up the next one, please? reader's digest, november 1924, the article is called "does tobacco injure the human body?" in 1924 tobacco was injurious to the human body. its use sometimes induces cancer. can you show us the next one from 1938? reader's digest, august 1938, the article is "so you are going to stop smoking?" here is what it says. "sooner or later nearly every cigarette smoker discovers that he is not smoking by choice but by habit, and the habit is probably harmful. so he tries to break free from it, but he find that he does not know how. sometimes halfheartedly, sometimes earnestly, he wrestles with his addiction, but in vein. his self-control has been perilously undermined by a mere mechanism of habit." these are the kind of articles that were being published in reader's digest magazine in the 1920s, '30s and '40s, when fannie collar was growing up. she said her family had these magazines in her home, and her father sold those magazines out of his general store. as we move into the early 1950s, you heard about some of the scientific research that was being published that specifically linked smoking to lung cancer. dr. proctor told you that these studies made front page news in newspapers and magazines all across the country. he told you that so widespread was this information that by 1954, ninety percent of the american public had heard that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer. this is one of the articles he showed you from life magazine. that famous story, "smoke gets in the news," published december 21st, 1953. they showed the mice getting cancer on their backs. i asked dr. proctor: ninety percent of the people who were surveyed in june of 1954, about six months after this study, said, yes, they had read or heard that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung. his answer was: that is right. that was dr. proctor. so let us move back up above the blue bar here. we are in this period of time. you know in the mid-1940s fannie collar's foster father, brother and sister smoked cigarettes. you know that her mother hated smoking, and her mother did not smoke. fannie collar told you she tried cigarettes for the first time in 1946 at the age of 12. her and her friend take a pack of cigarettes, they split the entire pack. she coughed. she was dizzy. she was lightheaded. she said it was not pleasant. within a month or two after, her mother caught her smoking a cigarette and slapped her and told her, do not smoke. ms. collar said that was the only time her mother ever laid a hand on her. while she continued to sneak cigarettes here and there, she said she did not do it very often because she was concerned about being caught by her mother. that is what she told you. in 1948, she attends an exclusive private high school called the erskine academy. you heard that she was a very good student. she was on the honor roll. she was in the nursing club. that brings us to about 1952, when she graduates from high school. she wanted to become a nurse. you heard that she attends nursing school. ms. collar told you that when she was in nursing school, what did she study? pharmacology, biology, chemistry. she studied the sciences. she learned how to read and write medical records. she understood how to take care of patients, administer drugs. she learned all of that while a nursing student at the age of 18 and 19 years old in 1952 and 1953. she then decides to attend business school, and she graduates from a two-year business program in just one year. that is what she told you. at this point she moves back in, she is living with her parents in 1953 and 1954 and she says, i was smoking about two or three cigarettes a day while i was driving back and forth from my parents' home to gates business college. she is living with her mother. she is not smoking at all around her mother. this is when she is 18, 19 and 20 years old. in 1955 -- we are going to move forward on the timeline. in 1955 she meets and marries her husband, merton collar. he is a cigarette smoker too. mr. collar is smoking marlboro red, a filtered cigarette. ms. collar said after they got married, she switches from unfiltered old gold cigarettes to her husband's filtered marlboro red. mr. hammer: objection, judge. misstates the testimony. mr. geraghty: i'll show you the testimony. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: this is ms. collar's testimony. this was on friday, i believe. ms. collar basically said, you know, i never really bought cigarettes. i simply smoked the brands that the people i was living with bought. she told you that was the pattern with her father. that was the pattern with her husband, merton collar, and that was later the pattern with her boyfriend, ben sweeney. here is her testimony. if you were living with somebody else and they bought the cigarettes and you smoked what they bought, true? her answer: pretty much. all right. and you let whoever was buying the cigarettes chose the brand, correct? her answer: yes. and you just smoked what the purchaser smoked, right? most of the time, yes. and you were not going to complain about the brand because the price was right? remember, she chuckled about that. that was her testimony. so while ms. collar made the decision to smoke, the evidence is clear that throughout her entire life, she let other people choose the brands of cigarettes she smoked. she also told you: well, i remember that at some point after i switched from the old golds, i was only smoking about a half a pack. and at some point after i switched, i started smoking a full pack of the marlboro red filtered cigarettes. she told you she remembered that. she was aware of that. dr. proctor told you it is common sense. smoking two cigarettes is worse than one. smoking 20 cigarettes is worse than 10. that is back in 1955. we talked earlier about how ms. collar claims that for 35 years she believed smoking cigarettes was absolutely safe. well, here are all of the things that people told her in the 1950s and in the 1960s. in 1955 you heard about -- do you remember the co-worker? the co-worker says, hey, you should quit smoking. my wife quit -- excuse me. my wife smoked, and she died of lung cancer. i do not want the same thing to happen to you. that is what her co-worker told her. let me just show you that testimony. this was on thursday. when her co-worker told her, you know what, you should quit smoking or you are going to end up like my wife, this is when she said -- you said to him, it is not going to happen to me. her answer: right. you said, you know what, i'm going to live until i'm in my 80s. that is right. i did say that. i remember now. initially, ms. collar did not recall this, but when i asked her about it, she said it jogged her memory. you said, i'm not going to slow down until i'm in my 80s, right? right. this was in 1955? right. that was ms. collar's testimony under oath on thursday. around the same period of time you heard that her husband, merton collar, is telling her the same thing from the moment they met in 1955. plaintiff's own expert, dr. niaura, told you, dr. niaura told that you merton collar preached to his wife about the dangers of smoking. that is what dr. niaura told you. ms. collar would tell him, mind your own business. it is my decision whether or not i smoke. here is dr. niaura's testimony. this was mr. sexton was asking the questions, as you may recall. and when mr. collar would preach to ms. collar in the 1950s to quit smoking, she would tell him to mind his own business; is not that right? answer: yes. ms. collar told mr. collar when he was preaching about the dangers of smoking that smoking was her decision? her answer: yes. that was her answer. but just two days after dr. niaura testified, dr. niaura testified i believe it was on tuesday to this, two days later, on thursday, ms. collar got on the stand and she said none of this is true. none of this is true. she said her husband never preached to her about the health risks of smoking, and she never told him to, mind your own business. think about it, ladies and gentlemen. dr. niaura is ms. collar's own expert. you heard him tell you that ms. collar's lawyers gave him all of the depositions of all of the witnesses in the case so he would be in a position to talk to you about her. dr. niaura read merton collar's deposition, and he told you that this is what merton collar said in his deposition under oath. ms. collar came in two days later and said none of it is true. do not you think that if what ms. collar, what fannie collar was trying to tell you was true, and not what dr. niaura here said under oath, which i've put on the board, do not you think merton collar would have come in here and said -- [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. plaintiff's counsel gave dr. niaura all of the depositions in the case. dr. niaura told you he read those depositions. he told you that merton collar said, i preached to my wife that she needed to quit smoking as far back as the '50s. she responded to him, mind your own business. it is my decision whether or not i smoke. dr. niaura told you that. ms. collar took the stand two days later and told you that what her own expert said, her own expert who had read all of the depositions, was wrong. dr. niaura was right. what ms. collar told you on the stand when she denied all of this, that was not the truth. not the truth. later that same year -- we are moving forward here -- you heard her father, raymond dowd, a long-time, heavy smoker is diagnosed with cancer and passes away. so despite going to nursing school and learning the sciences, despite what her husband told her, despite what her co-worker told her, ms. collar told you, you know, the idea that cigarette smoking might have been associated with my father's cancer never crossed my mind. it just never crossed my mind. but, ladies and gentlemen, all you need to do, all you need to do is look at ms. collar's own actions. she told you that within a few years of all of these events happening in the late 1950s, she says, for a period of time i switched from smoking filtered cigarettes to a lady's pipe. she told you about the lady's pipe. she said, my brother, eddie, told me that pipe smokers do not actually inhale the smoke, they hold the smoke in their mouth. why was ms. collar interested in switching from cigarettes to a pipe? because, ladies and gentlemen, she knew whether the cigarette had a filter on it or not, that she was inhaling smoke into her lungs and she knew that that could cause lung cancer and other diseases. that is why she did it. actions speak louder than words. so that brings us to 1964. in january of 1964 you heard the surgeon general of the united states issues a landmark report that says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis, which is a form of copd. this is 1964. we showed you -- this is in evidence. this is the front page of the portland sunday telegram on january 12, 1964. "cigarettes cause cancer says report." ms. collar told you her and her husband were living in portland, maine, the day -- the exact period of time when this report was released and that newspaper article was published. that is what she told you. we showed you harry reasoner and the coverage from cbs news. so, you know, every american, including fannie collar, was told in 1964 cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. this was more than 50 years ago. almost 30 years before ms. collar was diagnosed with lung cancer. dr. proctor told you '64 was the turning point, the beginning of the end of cigarettes in this country. that is what he told you from the witness stand. we showed him the chart. i think mr. hammer actually showed the chart. from 1964 there is been a steady decline in the number of people smoking cigarettes in this country, to the point where today, the percentage of people who smoke, is what it was back in the early 1930s during the great depression. that is what dr. proctor told you. ms. collar wants you to believe that she was the only one who missed this, the only one who missed this. she was living in portland, maine, but she said, well, we did not really watch the news. we were probably snowshoeing at our summer cottage by the lake. that is what she told you. we know one person who did not miss this story. we know one person who did not miss this story. that was her older foster sister, christine coffin. you heard in 1964, her older sister, who she was very close with, who she smoked cigarettes with, quit smoking when she heard this news. she quit smoking when she heard this news. they smoked cigarettes together. of course they would have naturally -- ms. collar would have said, christine, you are not smoking, why are not you smoking. hammer: objection. misstates the evidence. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: it is a reasonable inference, your honor, based on the evidence. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: all right. okay. we know ms. collar did not miss what happened two years later in 1966. you heard that in 1966 when ms. collar was 31 years old, congress passes a law that requires that every pack of cigarettes carry a warning label that says "caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." ms. collar said, i was aware of this warning label. i saw it. i understood exactly what it meant. it did not tell me anything i did not already know. here is her testimony. now, this warning label in 1966 did not tell you anything you did not already know; is not that right? her answer was: right. and we know that because her father-in-law, a heavy cigarette smoker, her father-in-law, a heavy cigarette smoker, he shows her the warning label and he told her, i'm going to quit. this says cigarette smoking causes disease. i'm going to quit. her father-in-law quits in 1966. ms. collar said that her father-in-law's decision to quit in 1966 was his decision, but she made no effort to quit when that warning label appeared. ladies and gentlemen, this same warning label went on all packs of cigarettes, unfiltered, camel cigarettes, filtered marlboro red cigarettes, no distinction. that is what the evidence shows. ms. collar knew smoking was dangerous. she is 31 years old. she is healthy. she enjoys smoking. at this point, her attitude is it is not going to happen to me. that brings us to 1970. let us move forward on the timeline. four years later. 1970, a new warning label goes on all packs of cigarettes. the warning now says, "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. you heard ms. collar's testimony. she said, yeah, i understood that as of 1970 the surgeon general has determined that smoking is dangerous to your health. i said, if you really heard something different from the cigarette companies, why did not you ask somebody? why did not you ask your doctor? did not do it. did not think to do it. in 1971 all cigarette ads are taken off of television and radio here in the united states. and then one year later, in 1972, every cigarette ad in a newspaper or a magazine or a billboard is required to carry this same surgeon general's warning. that is as of 1972. now, mr. hammer tried to tell you, he used the word "drown." he told you all of the warnings and all of the health messages that we have been talking about, all of those over the 20 years prior to this point somehow were being drowned out by statements made by cigarette companies. that is what mr. hammer told you. but the evidence you have heard shows just the opposite. remember what dr. proctor told you. dr. proctor told you that between 1964, when that very first surgeon general's report came out, and 1979, somewhere in this period of time, 30 million americans quit smoking. 30 million. that is two million people every single year. they have heard the same information as ms. collar. many of them would be considered addicted, according to the standards that dr. niaura and dr. mannino told you. but millions make the decision to quit and they quit for good, despite all of the statements that mr. hammer talks about, despite all those statements. but not ms. collar. you heard the facts. she saw the warnings. she understood what they meant. she is healthy. she enjoys smoking cigarettes. at this point, she is not truly motivated to quit smoking. that brings us to 1976. you heard that ms. collar starts working for an elderly woman named margaret gardener. ms. collar was hired as ms. gardener's personal nurse. shortly after she starts working for ms. gardener, ms. gardener is hospitalized for congestive heart failure and a heart attack and she quits smoking. why does ms. gardener quit smoking? her doctor told her to quit. the same doctor that ms. collar was talking to so she would know how to take care of ms. gardener, so she would know what medications to give her, so she would be able to take care of her after she was out of the hospital. at this point, ms. collar actually said, yeah, you know, i know from my experience as a nurse, that doctors would tell people who had heart attacks that they should quit. people who have congestive heart failure, they should quit. ms. collar heard that. somehow she did not think that that applied to her, that it also was not harmful to your lungs. once ms. gardener quit smoking, you heard fannie collar said, i never smoked around ms. gardener. it would be unethical. it is common sense. if you are a nurse or a doctor, you do not smoke around your patient. so she hardly ever smoked during that seven- or eight-year period she worked for ms. gardener. occasionally, she would go back out on the patio and have a cigarette. but she controlled where, when, and how much she smoked when the circumstances, her job circumstances, required it. dr. ticknor told you that is not addiction. that brings us to the early 1980s. you know that she gets separated from and divorces mr. collar. that brings us to 1985. there is now a series of four rotating warnings that go on all packs of cigarettes as of 1985. one of those warnings says, "surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy." it says right on the label that smoking causes two of the diseases, the two diseases we have been talking about during this trial. what did ms. collar tell you? for eight years, from 1985 to 1993, for eight years i smoked cigarettes with these warnings on them and i never looked at the warning once, not once. in the late -- you know that merton collar first moves to florida, and at some point ms. collar says, i want to move to florida too. and she decides to move in with her ex-husband, and they move into a home here in vero beach together. in about 1990, merton collar quits smoking for good. you heard the testimony. merton collar quit smoking. dr. niaura told you this. he was coughing. his lungs ached. he attributed those things to the fact that he was smoking cigarettes. that is what dr. niaura told you. ms. collar told you a different story. she said, oh, no. merton did not quit because he was concerned about his health. he had allergies for most of his life, and the smoking bothered his allergies and that was really it. i asked her point blank: are you telling us that mr. collar never said to you, fannie, i need to quit because i'm concerned that cigarette smoking is affecting my health? she said, absolutely positively he never said that. she said she was the one that actually encouraged him to quit. but then when we confronted her with her deposition, what did the deposition show? she admitted that mr. collar quit, and she continued to smoke. we asked her in the deposition, did you encourage him to quit? and her answer, pretty profound: i left him alone. i left him alone. you know, for this period of time, for like the next four, five years, between '89 and '93, she works for a construction company, netto construction. the boss does not allow anybody to smoke in the office. she runs the entire office. she is got to answer the phone. she is got to be inside the whole day. she said, maybe occasionally i would step out and have a cigarette. but again, for four or five years she controls where, when and how much she smokes. now, ms. collar claims that she tried to quit many times before 1993, but she also told you that those efforts to quit smoking had absolutely nothing to do with concerns about her health. so you have to ask yourself, was she really trying to quit? well, she told you she went to a smoking cessation clinic. she did say that on the witness stand. but she said the people at the smoking cessation clinic that she attended did not explain to her that cigarette smoking causes diseases like lung cancer and copd. she said, in fact, i do not think they knew that cigarette smoking was bad for your health. ladies and gentlemen, we brought someone who ran smoking cessation clinics twenty-five years ago, dr. ticknor. why do you think there are smoking cessation clinics? what did dr. ticknor tell you? do they tell people at the smoking cessation clinic that smoking causes lung cancer and copd? of course they do. why? dr. ticknor explained it to you. you want to motivate people to change their behavior. to motivate them, you need to explain to them what are the benefits of quitting smoking. what are the consequences if you continue with this behavior. i told you in my opening statement that ms. collar never used nicorette gum or nicotine patch. i told that you. she admitted on the stand, i never used a patch or the gum. the court: it is been one hour. mr. geraghty: she declined a patch when it was actually offered to her in arizona in 2009. that is the only reference to the patch or the gum in all of the medical records in this case. ms. collar's family, dr. niaura told you this, neither merton collar or either her son mark or earl recall a single day before 1993 where she ever stopped smoking for an entire day. ms. collar told you, other than that one time where i quit smoking after hypnosis for about three days, other than that one time, i do not think i ever stopped smoking for more than a few hours before 1993. that brings us to july of 1993. let me go to the last page of the timeline. you know in july of 1993 ms. collar is diagnosed with lung cancer. she starts to cut down, and she quits smoking the day that she goes into the hospital. that is what she told you. now, mr. hammer suggested to you that she was in the hospital for 45 straight days, but i asked dr. mannino all about that. mr. hammer: objection, judge. i did not suggest anything. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: that is improper. mr. geraghty: there was a suggestion at some point during the trial that she was in the hospital for 45 days. mr. hammer: objection. you just sustained that objection. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: you saw the medical records, ladies and gentlemen. you know that after being in the hospital for about two weeks, ms. collar was discharged and she was out of the hospital for 13 days and did not smoke for any of those days. dr. mannino told you that when i showed him the medical records. the good news is, as you heard, the surgery was successful, and after the complications associated with her ulcer, the doctors told you that she was cured of her cancer. for the next 13 or 14 years, from 1993 to about 2006, ms. collar never smoked another cigarette. she testified that she did not feel like she wanted to smoke a cigarette. she had no cravings or urges for 13 or 14 years. her own doctor -- i showed you dr. suen -- he said she quit when she was motivated to do so. in 1997 she moves out of merton's house. eventually she meets ben sweeney. you heard about that. you know that mr. sweeney is a cigarette smoker too. they start to spend a lot of time together. they go out to dinner. they go out to clubs. they go dancing. and ms. collar would have a cigarette with ben sweeney. first it was just a puff or two. then she would bum cigarettes. she would smoke one, two, three cigarettes with him. the plaintiff would have you believe that ms. collar started smoking again because she was addicted, but that is not what the evidence shows. you saw the medical records. she told you, i would go days. mr. sweeney might give me a cigarette or two, but i might go two or three days without seeing mr. sweeney. i would not smoke when i did not see him. that is what she said. she was a chipper just like dr. mannino told you. he told you chippers are not addicted. that is from their own expert. these records are all in evidence. there is a particular composite pmu, it is 43999, but these are all of the records in that 2006 to 2009 time period where she is talking about how much she is smoking, a half a pack a week, has not smoked for over a month, has not smoked in 16 days, has not smoked for a week, smoking a quarter of a pack, two to five cigarettes a day. that is what she told her doctors in her medical records. the truth is, and the evidence has shown, ladies and gentlemen, that ms. collar started smoking again because her boyfriend smoked and she enjoyed smoking with him. they went dancing two or three times a week. they had fun together. now, did her smoking increase when she heard about her daughter? certainly. certainly. there is no dispute about that. but her decision to resume smoking in 2006 was an informed decision by an adult with knowledge that smoking was dangerous and addictive. she did it anyway, though. you know that in june of 2009, after going to arizona with ben sweeny, had an exacerbation of her copd and the light bulb again goes off with ms. collar. i have to stop smoking. i've been doing it for the last three years, but i have to stop. i had an exacerbation of my copd. all these records, they are all in evidence. she told all of these doctors, i quit in june of 2009. so that brings us to the present. ms. collar is now 81 years old. you heard her own doctor say she is been cancer free for more than 20 years, and she is been cured of her cancer. you know that she is been diagnosed with copd, but her own doctor, dr. suen, told you that her lung function was pretty stable for many years after her surgery until she decided to resume smoking again in 2006. you heard dr. suen also tell you that her breathing is stable and that her condition is well managed with medication. ms. collar has other health issues which you have heard about which is not unusual for someone her age. the truth is at some point we all slow down. we cannot always do what we want. but fortunately, you know that ms. collar's health issues have not prevented her from living an independent lifestyle. you have heard that ms. collar sleeps with oxygen at night, but she does not use oxygen during the day to perform most of her day-to-day activities. she drives to see her friends, to all of her appointments. before mr. sweeney passed away, they traveled frequently. they went to maine in her rv. they went to arizona. she did not use supplemental oxygen when they did that. she is traveled recently to biloxi, mississippi and sarasota, florida, both times traveling without oxygen. that is the story, ladies and gentlemen. that is the story that brings us here together and has brought us here together for the last two weeks. now, with the time i have left, i would like to talk to you about the questions on the verdict form. this is the first question you are going to be asked on the verdict form. was fannie collar addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or copd? so that is the first question. this question can really be broken down, ladies and gentlemen, in two parts. was fannie collar addicted to cigarettes, part one. and part two, if so, was her claimed addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and copd? if your answer to that question is no, that is a verdict for the defendants. if you answer yes, that is a verdict for the plaintiff. so was fannie collar addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? let me remind you, the court has not given you a definition of addiction or a set of medical criteria to determine whether ms. collar was addicted. so what is the evidence you have heard? plaintiffs first brought you dr. niaura. dr. niaura decided that ms. collar was addicted almost one year before he ever spoke to her. he is not a medical doctor. in fact, he is not even licensed as a psychologist. he told you he is never diagnosed anyone as addicted. that is not what he does. the first person he ever said was addicted was fannie collar herself. mr. hammer: objection, judge. misstates the evidence. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: he claims he used the dsm-v, but he never showed it to you. he never explained to you why he thought she was addicted under the dsm-v. the plaintiff also brought you dr. mannino, a pulmonologist, who does not see patients very often and very rarely sees patients who are smokers. that was dr. mannino. he admitted just a few years ago, i'm not an addiction expert, but he changed his mind. he changed his mind for purposes of this case. dr. mannino initially tried to dispute this, but he eventually acknowledged that he decided that ms. collar was addicted before he had read a single page of her medical records or any of the depositions. he told you he had a 10-minute conversation with mr. gdanski, and mr. gdanski told him fannie collar smoked cigarettes and had lung cancer and copd. dr. mannino said, you know what, that is good enough for me. she must be addicted. ladies and gentlemen, ask yourself, is that the way we diagnose people with illnesses in this country? of course not. of course not. but what did dr. mannino admit when i crossed him? he said, people who do not smoke every day are not addicted. we call them chippers because they can control where, when and how much they smoke. and you know that there were many years when ms. collar did not smoke every day. she said that was the case when she was smoking with ben sweeney. addiction is one of the key issues in this case, ladies and gentlemen, but plaintiff's expert concluded that fannie was addicted before they had all the facts. so that brings us to ms. collar. she repeatedly told you that she thought she was addicted and she tried to quit many times, but she could not recall more than one occasion before 1993 where she tried to quit for more than a few hours. so when you evaluate ms. collar's testimony that she was addicted, bear in mind that the same person who is telling you that she is addicted is the same person who just asked you for $15 million. mr. hammer: objection. improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: she refuses to admit many things that your common sense tells you must be true. much of what she said is contradicted by what she told her own doctors in her own medical records many years ago. we brought you dr. ticknor. you know based upon what you heard dr. ticknor say, and the evidence in this case, ms. collar is not addicted. dr. ticknor is a board-certified clinical psychiatrist, a medical doctor. over the course of his career, he is diagnosed thousands of people with addictions to all sorts of substances. he has run smoking cessation clinics. every week he sees about 20 to 30 people who are there because they would like counseling to quit smoking. he is diagnosed many smokers as addicted. unlike the plaintiff's experts, dr. ticknor actually took the time to get to know fannie collar. he read all of her medical records, all of the depositions. he had a two-hour-and-40-minute psychiatric examination with her and then he filled out a very detailed report and provided it to everybody. he gave you a real set of medical criteria to determine whether fannie collar was addicted. the dsm-v, we put it on the screen. he explained it to you. he walked you through his analysis in detail. dr. ticknor told you ms. collar was not addicted to cigarettes. so at the end of the day, ladies and gentlemen, you have to ask yourself, is the plaintiff's evidence sufficient in a court of law or should something more be required? like tangible, credible, believable evidence from someone who does not have an interest in the outcome of the case. i think, ladies and gentlemen, based upon the two weeks we have spent here, the answer should be obvious. the answer should be no, fannie collar was not addicted. but even if you believe that she was addicted, your work is just beginning because that still leaves the second part of this question. was her claimed addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and copd? you saw the instruction on legal cause. and i'll admit, frankly, it is a difficult instruction to follow, even if you are a lawyer. so let me give you an example that i think will simplify the whole process. we all live here in florida. we have beautiful beaches. we have lots of sunshine. we all know that exposure to sun -- [#deleted objection dialogue#] [#deleted recess#] 22 mr. geraghty: all right. let me try again. so you have a blemish or a mark on your skin, you go see the doctor -- hammer: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: you have a mark on your skin. you may be concerned about it, and you say to yourself, what do i do about it? do i do anything about it? do i let it go or have it looked at or continue? some people will go see the doctor. mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: some people go to the doctor. they have it checked. other people do not deal with those things. they let it go. so that is simply the point i'm trying to make. so in the example i'm talking about, exposure to the sun is the medical reason why you get the blemish that may develop into skin cancer, but the legal cause in the explanation i'm giving you is the fact that you did not pay attention to the problem. you did not have it looked at by a doctor. you let too much time go by. so a problem that could have been addressed and perhaps nipped in the bud early on becomes a bigger and bigger problem to the point where you are dealing with a serious case of skin cancer. that is what i mean in distinguishing medical cause from legal cause. in a case like this, ladies and gentlemen, the question of legal cause really boils down to the question of quitting smoking. quitting smoking. ask yourself, based on all of the evidence you have heard in this case, was fannie collar's claimed addiction so strong, so substantial that it stood in the way of a committed and determined effort on her part to quit smoking? mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: the evidence in this case is undisputed that fannie collar could only recall one occasion, just one occasion where she quit smoking for more than a few hours before 1993. it was not until she was diagnosed with lung cancer and told by her doctor, you need to quit, and then of course she did. she quit when she was motivated by what her doctor told her. you know, the evidence is undisputed, she quit smoking for the next 13 or 14 years. she had no cravings to smoke and no urges to smoke. she resumed smoking in 2006, smokes for about three years, and then what happens? she is told by a doctor in arizona, she is had an exacerbation of her copd. she quits again in 2009. why? why, because she had the exacerbation of copd. she knew she had to quit. dr. ticknor told you what ultimately determines whether someone will quit smoking is motivation. where does motivation come from? it does not come from chantix or wellbutrin. it comes within each and every one of us. that is where motivation comes from. that is not just what dr. ticknor told all of us here in the courtroom. he told you that is what he tells his patients, motivation. who else told you the same thing? dr. suen told you ms. collar quit when she was sufficiently motivated to do so. would you agree? i believe so. that is from the doctor that knows her better than anybody, from right here in vero beach. if you decide that fannie collar could have quit smoking whenever she was truly motivated to do so, then addiction is not a legal cause of her disease. hammer: objection. that is not the legal standard. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: your honor, i'm simply responding to his arguments. rather, ladies and gentlemen, the legal cause in this case is ms. collar's decision to continue to smoke cigarettes -- mr. hammer: objection, judge. that is not what i said. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: rather, the legal cause in this case, ladies and gentlemen, is ms. collar's decision to smoke cigarettes in the face of all the warnings that we talked about, year to year, decade to decade, 35 to 40 years, and her decision not to make a committed and determined and motivated effort to quit until 1993. that, ladies and gentlemen, is the one and the only legal cause in this case. frankly, you do not have to look any further than plaintiff's own experts. despite everything mr. hammer told you about nicotine and receptors and brain changes, what did dr. niaura and dr. mannino ultimately acknowledge? they told you anyone can quit smoking if they are motivated to do so. 60 million americans have quit smoking in this country. the overwhelming majority have quit cold turkey, without any assistance whatsoever. most of those people would have been considered, according to dr. mannino and dr. niaura, as addicted. nevertheless, they told you that they quit and they quit cold turkey. the nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent those 60 million people from understanding that smoking causes lung cancer and copd and from exercising their free will to stop smoking. during the last two weeks you have heard no evidence that ms. collar was any different. there is no dispute. she is intelligent. she is well educated. she is independent and strong-willed. the truth is that for most of her life ms. collar wanted to smoke cigarettes and had no real interest in quitting until after she was diagnosed with cancer. she told her husband, mind your own business. it is my decision whether or not i smoke. that is not addiction talking. that is a strong-willed, independent person saying, hey, this is my decision. ms. collar claims she was addicted, but addiction did not force her to smoke. she smoked because that is what she wanted to do, and that is what the second part of this question -- was her addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or copd? that is what that second part of that question is all about. you have heard the evidence. you know that fannie collar was always in control, not philip morris, not r.j. reynolds, not liggett, not the nicotine in cigarettes. your answer to this question should be no, and your verdict should be for the defendants in this case. now, i do not think you will get as far as question number 2 on the verdict form, but since mr. hammer talked about it, let me simply respond. you will be asked to state the percentage of any responsibility for ms. collar's lung cancer and/or copd. that is question number 2. so what does it mean to accept responsibility for the decisions we make in life? well, imagine we -- there is been a lot of testimony about alcohol. people drink alcohol. many of us have had the experience. imagine a person who drinks and one night they drink a little too much alcohol. they have a few too many drinks, and the next day they wake up with a hangover. we have all had the experience. you wake up, eyes are blurry, bloodshot. mr. hammer: objection. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: the person goes to the mirror. they look at themselves in the mirror and say, you know what, i'm only 5 or ten percent responsible for that decision i made to have all those drinks last night. nobody says that. nobody says that, ladies and gentlemen. was anyone else responsible for the decisions that fannie collar made, the decisions she made to smoke cigarettes for 35 years? the answer is of course not. in 1955 her attitude was, i'm not going to slow down until i'm in my 80s. that is what she said when she was 21 years old. today she told you she goes to the convenience store and buys her son mark cigarettes and cigars, today. she told you on friday, who knows, i may go back to smoking again. she said that after everything that we have heard over the last two weeks. the facts of this case show loud and clear that fannie collar got up every single day, made her own decisions in life, and no one else made those decisions for her. accepting responsibility means simply that, accepting full responsibility for the consequences of the decisions we make in life. and that is what you should put down if you get this far on the verdict form. there should be no doubt that fannie collar is one hundred percent responsible for the decisions she is made during the course of her life. now, again, i do not think you are going to get this far on the verdict form, but mr. hammer discussed question numbers 3 and 4. they are kind of companion questions, if you will. mr. hammer: objection, judge. misstates the law. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: question 3 says, please, state as to each defendant whether ms. collar reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement or misinformation made by that defendant which concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance on a statement or misinformation was a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or copd. that is a mouthful, right. then there is a companion question 4 on the next page that is worded almost -- mr. hammer: objection. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: can we approach if need be? the court: yes, approach. mr. hammer: they are individual questions. the court: approach. mr. geraghty: do you want to approach? 18 the court: what is your objection? mr. hammer: these are not companion questions. each question is an independent question. mr. geraghty: they are worded almost exactly the same, judge. mr. hammer: it does not matter. they are not companion questions. they are each independent questions. mr. geraghty: it is argument, your honor. the court: you can argue that on your rebuttal. mr. geraghty: he talked about fishes and hooks and he is complaining -- the court: it is not the law. i am the one that instructs them. 10 mr. geraghty: the point i'm trying to make, ladies and gentlemen, if you go over to page 2, question number 4 looks very similar to question number 3 except there is a reference to, in furtherance of defendant's agreement to conceal or omit material information. so the language of the two questions, you will see, are very, very similar. the concept that they are trying to convey is very similar. let me make two quick points. if you answer yes to either question 3 or question 4, the whole concept of responsibility goes out the window, and the plaintiff is asking you to award her one hundred percent of any damages if you decide to award damages. mr. hammer: objection. misstates the law. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: now, what questions 3 and 4 are really asking you, ladies and gentlemen, is, did fannie collar make any decisions about cigarette smoking because of a statement made by a cigarette company that omitted information? ms. collar claims that in 1966 she heard a statement that if you were concerned about your health, you should smoke a filtered cigarette because it was safe. first, you know she was smoking filtered cigarettes for 10 or 11 years before she claims she ever heard that statement. she told you, this is the same testimony i showed you earlier, that statement did not make an impression on me. that statement did not make any impression on me. that is what she told you. the same year she claims she heard that statement, 1966, was the same year that warning labels go on all packs of cigarettes, filtered and unfiltered. that is the undisputed evidence in the case, ladies and gentlemen. the truth is, there was no evidence that anything the defendants said or did not say caused fannie collar to start smoking or to continue smoking. after all, look at ms. collar in 2006. when at the age of 72, after not smoking for 13 years, she begins dating ben sweeney, and she starts smoking cigarettes again. she knew that she had lung cancer and copd in 2006. she chose to smoke anyway. now she wants you to believe that she would not have made that same decision back in the 1950s. well, the decision she made in 2006 demonstrates that is not true. she did not listen to her co-worker back in 1955. she did not listen to her ex-husband, merton. she did not listen to her foster sister, christine coffin. she did not listen to her father-in-law. and she certainly did not listen to her own doctors. ms. collar did not listen to what anyone told her. so what makes anyone think she would have listened to tobacco companies? the answer to both questions 3 and 4 should be no. the answers should be no. now, i want to talk briefly about compensatory damages. again, i do not think you will get this far on the verdict form, but i need to respond to what mr. hammer told you. he asked you to award $15 million for the decisions that ms. collar and only ms. collar made to smoke. that is an incredible sum of money. for some families, $50,000 is a lot of money. [#deleted objection dialogue#] 7 mr. geraghty: $50,000 a year is a lot of money, a lot of money, ladies and gentlemen. it would take 20 years earning $50,000 a year just to make $1 million, just to make $1 million. it would take 300 years, 300 years earning $50,000 a year to get to the 15 million number that mr. hammer asked you for. no one doubts, no one doubts that ms. collar's lung cancer and surgery were difficult. all you had to do was watch ms. collar when she testified to know that she has a lot more life and energy than many people who are 81 years old. you know she is been able to do a lot of things that other people her age are not able to do. she was dancing with ben sweeney two or three nights a week just a few years ago. if you actually get to the issue of damages, there should be no question, ladies and gentlemen, that tens of thousands of dollars, let alone millions of dollars should be out of the question and off the table. these facts are undisputed. ms. collar smoked for 35 years. she got lung cancer. but fortunately, she was cured of her lung cancer. you heard her own expert, dr. mannino, tell you that she was very fortunate that she survived stage 3 lung cancer. but despite all of that, after not smoking for 13 or 14 years, ms. collar dates ben sweeney, and at the age of 72 she decides to resume smoking because they were having fun and enjoying life together in their golden years. after having an exacerbation of her copd she then quit smoking again in 2009. dr. suen, her treating pulmonologist, told you that her condition today is stable and well managed with medication. but despite all of that, on friday ms. collar told you, i cannot say i will not be back to cigarettes again. yesterday her own lawyers read to you the mortality table that ms. collar is expected to live nine more years to the age of 90. the truth is that despite having lung cancer and copd, she is going to live a lot longer than most of us in this courtroom. mr. hammer: objection, judge. improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: given the evidence you have heard in this case about fannie collar, fannie collar's case, there is no basis to award damages. now, the final question on the verdict form asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the defendants in this case. i want -- if you answered no to that question, you will never get to the issue of punitive damages. let me talk briefly to you so you understand what issue you are being asked to decide. you are not being asked to decide the amount of punitive damages. the issue here today is whether based upon clear and convincing evidence the plaintiff has shown that she is entitled to punitive damages. so do not spend one moment thinking about the amount. the question before you is whether fannie collar has shown under the evidence and the law that she is entitled to punitive damages. the court: you have two minutes. mr. geraghty: i'll probably take one or two more, but thank you. if you decide that she is, there will be another phase of the trial. the parties will present evidence. we will have additional arguments and then you will get to the amount stage. now, i want to make sure that if you get to this issue, you clearly understand what it is you will be asked to decide. when you look at the instructions, you will see that clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a much higher burden of proof than the greater weight of the evidence. with respect to punitive damages, you will see that the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the issue. in other words, you need to be really, really, really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate. based on the evidence in this case, nothing the defendants did or did not do, said or did not say harmed fannie collar. philip morris, liggett, and r.j. reynolds sold cigarettes. the judge told you making, selling, and advertising cigarettes is not a basis for liability. the court instructed you that that is the case. fannie collar always had the information available to her to make a decision about whether she wanted to smoke cigarettes or not, whether she wanted to quit or not. she always had the ability to quit whenever she was motivated to do so, and the evidence you have heard in this case demonstrates that that is so. she simply did not want to quit smoking until it was too late to avoid her lung cancer and her copd. you have heard no evidence during this trial that the defendants said or did not say anything that caused her to begin smoking or to continue smoking. dr. proctor spent several days talking to you about the culture of smoking and the tobacco companies, but he admitted to you he knows nothing about fannie collar. he knows nothing about what she knew and what she did. given the evidence you have heard, ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiff simply has not met her burden of proof. there is no basis for the award of punitive damages in this case. so your answer to that question, if you were to get that far, should be no. now, i'm going to sit down in about a minute. i'm in the home stretch at this point. you are going to hear from ms. st. peter-griffith. you are going to hear from mr. belasic. after that mr. hammer will have one more opportunity to speak to you. that is because, as you heard, the plaintiff bears the burden of proof. so he gets the opportunity to speak to you one more time in what is called rebuttal. i do not know what mr. hammer will say, but i can imagine he is going to say some things that are very critical of philip morris and r.j. reynolds and liggett. i'm pretty sure of that. but as you listen to the things he says, ask yourself, what does this have to do with fannie collar? what does this have to do with ms. collar and the decisions that she made, a strong, intelligent, and well-educated woman who, you know, lived her life exactly the way she wanted to live it, who enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and who was not motivated to quit until 1993? the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, we do enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. we have the right to make decisions and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interests, that can have serious health consequences. with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences. in the end, ladies and gentlemen, that is what this case is all about. are we going to hold philip morris and r.j. reynolds and liggett legally responsible, legally responsible for the decisions made by a strong, intelligent, and independent person? that is what this case is all about. based on the evidence you have heard for the last two weeks, the answer should be clear. based on the evidence you have heard in fannie collar's case, in this case, the evidence supports one and only one true verdict. that, ladies and gentlemen, is a verdict for philip morris, r.j. reynolds, and liggett. so this is my last opportunity to get to speak to you, and all i really want to do is leave you with a deep, heartfelt thanks because i know i spent a lot of time questioning witnesses and you probably said, oh my goodness, when is he going to sit down? i'm going to sit down for the last time. i really sincerely appreciate your time, patience, and attention to everything we have done during the course of the last two weeks. thank you very much. ms. st. peter-griffith: may it please the court, counsel, ms. collar. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, i'm ann st-peter griffith. it is my privilege to be representing liggett group llc in this matter. i want to say it is been a pleasure to be before you in this courtroom. and on behalf of myself, ms. kaschel and liggett, we thank you. we understand that you made a tremendous commitment in your jury service. mr. geraghty and mr. belasic's closing arguments provide you with a roadmap to checking no as to each question on the jury verdict form. we agree. please remember that it is plaintiff's burden of proof here as to each defendant. the evidence regarding liggett in this case has been pretty clear. ms. collar never smoked a liggett cigarette. she was never addicted to any liggett cigarettes. liggett's products played no role in causing her lung cancer or her copd. moreover, mrs. collar could not identify a single statement that she either heard or read or relied upon from liggett. now, you will remember she made reference to a statement that she heard from the tobacco institute. ms. collar did not show you that statement. she never told you who said it or where they said it or how they said it. she knew she heard it around 1966. ladies and gentlemen, even if you believe that she heard or relied upon that statement, you need to know something else. there was no evidence of liggett's membership in the tobacco institute when the statement was made, even if it was. mr. hammer: objection, judge. objection. misstates the evidence. the court: sustained. ms. st. peter-griffith: dr. proctor told you that liggett was on and off as a member of the tobacco institute. plaintiff did not establish when liggett was a member. ms. collar has not -- mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? the court: yes. 10 mr. hammer: liggett cannot distance themselves from the conspiracy. they are part of the conspiracy by virtue of the engle findings. the court: she can argue whatever she wants. if she says that you did not find that they were off and on -- mr. hammer: you cannot distance yourself from the engle findings, that is what they are doing. in a very nuanced way they are arguing that they are not part of the engle findings. you cannot negate the engel findings. the court: you can argue that on your rebuttal. mr. hammer: they cannot do it, judge. the court: you can argue that on your rebuttal. on the jury verdict there is a question about whether or not they were part of the conspiracy. so overruled. 5 ms. st. peter-griffith: ms. collar has not carried her burden of proof to show either that she relied upon a material statement concealing information or that liggett's participation in any agreement to conceal caused her injuries. now, there is only one document that plaintiff showed you regarding liggett, the l&m document. plaintiff's expert acknowledged that liggett did not join the tirc and did not attend the plaza hotel meeting. it did not sign the frank statement. beginning around the end of the 1960s, liggett's market share plummeted -- mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: there is no evidence of that. ms. st. peter-griffith: i'd like to take a few moments to discuss with you what liggett put into evidence. this information is what the -- was not elicited from dr. proctor on direct. it is right here. i'm not going to put it up on the screen in the interest of time, but you are going to be able to take it with you into the jury room. the evidence shows a number of things. liggett's 1963 submission to the surgeon general. it is pretty big. it is heavy. it discusses a link between carcinogens in cigarette smoke and lung cancer, as well as other diseases. liggett's extensive submission also included a chapter on habituation and addiction. everything that is substantively in the l&m document is right here, except in much, much more detail. liggett turned this submission over to the number 1 public health authority in the country, the surgeon general. some of liggett's research was also published in other publications as well. as these documents show, by 1966 liggett had a ten-year relationship working in productive collaboration with the public health authority, productive collaboration. as early as 1954 liggett was working with the american cancer society. its investment in research was extensive, more than any other companies. now, to be sure, other companies were also doing research. in fact, dr. proctor discussed philip morris's compendium that it compiled of research of all defendants as well as other companies. now, you heard about liggett's on and off again tobacco -- membership in the tobacco institute, liggett's ctr membership was under four years, and liggett contributed only a minuscule amount of funding to each organization, under 1 percent. there is no evidence of liggett engaging in youth marketing. and by 1978 liggett was selling generic products and not advertising. dr. proctor told you that his advertising opinions did not apply to liggett. liggett voluntarily turned over its documents, and starting in the '90s it disclosed its ingredients on its cartons. beginning also in the 1990s liggett placed addiction warnings on all of its products and packaging voluntarily. dr. proctor told you that liggett should be commended, commended. this is hardly conduct demonstrating participation in an agreement to conceal, and it certainly does not reflect by clear and convincing evidence that liggett should be subjected to punitive damages. ladies and gentlemen, there is an old lawyer's expression that mr. geraghty told you about. jurors do not check their common sense at the courthouse door. common sense tells us that many aspects of plaintiff's case do not add up. for all of her years of smoking, ms. collar said that she did not look at the warnings on cigarette packs, after that initial time that they were pointed out to her by her father-in-law. even after being cured of smoking-related lung cancer, she said that she would believe that cigarettes are harmful when they stopped making them. as the judge has already instructed you, manufacturing, selling, and advertising cigarettes are lawful activities. think about that. trust your common sense. ladies and gentlemen, it is understandable to empathize with someone who is dealing with illness. however, despite what might be natural feelings of sympathy, when we began this process, you took an oath as jurors to follow the evidence and to base your decision only upon the evidence. the judge will instruct you that in reaching your verdict you should not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion, or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. liggett and the other defendants are not responsible to ms. collar because she relied upon any statement attributable to an agreement to conceal. ms. collar made her own decisions, and accordingly we ask that you render a verdict in favor of my client, liggett, philip morris, reynolds. on behalf of ms. kaschel, liggett, my client, the defendants, defense counsel, i just want to end by saying again, thank you very much for the careful attention that we know you are going to pay to the evidence and for the sacrifices that you have made in your service on this jury. thank you. mr. belasic: thank you, your honor. thank you, ladies and gentlemen, for all you have done both for the parties in this case and, frankly, for our system of civil government. i've got about 20 minutes to go over a few of the issues. i'll be the last defense lawyer to speak, and then mr. hammer will speak. i predict mr. hammer will show you a lot of documents and tell you how bad they are for the defendants. what i'm going to talk about, no amount of documents, good, bad, or otherwise, can change. this morning you were hearing about what mr. hammer said was a fish story, ms. collar was the fish and addiction is the hook. around that time he said a couple of phrases that i wrote down. one of the things that he said is that when she was trying to quit over these years, she was, quote, too addicted to quit. well, we all know the evidence shows that is not true. she quit for 14 straight years. she took the stand and said that from '93 until 2006 or 2007 she quit, zero cigarettes. dr. niaura said that she quit for those 14 years, zero cigarettes. she also had zero craving. the evidence, again, was directly from ms. collar. when she was on the stand during cross-examination, mr. geraghty said, is not it true that during those 14 years you had no craving? she said it was not. you saw the evidence, that mr. geraghty had her read her sworn testimony, the sworn testimony that she gave before trial. she had no craving. so we know, too addicted to quit, that is not right. it was just the opposite. it was the other way around. she was too capable or so capable, so capable of quitting that nicotine -- whether you call it a nicotine habit or a nicotine addiction, she was so capable of quitting that nicotine cannot be a substantial contributing factor. we know she could quit. when she was properly motivated, she did so. we know she went back to smoking. after 14 years without a cigarette, at the age of 72, 72, at a time went the companies were saying on their website that smoking caused lung cancer and copd, she started smoking when she dated ben sweeney. mr. hammer: objection, judge. can we approach? 12 mr. hammer: i do not think reynolds presented any evidence as to when they actually put that on their website. mr. belasic: dr. proctor -- this guy is doing this over and over again. he is got to stop doing this. i'm going to call him out in front of the jury. dr. proctor said it. the court: he did. mr. hammer: i want that reflected on the record, he is going to call me out in front of the jury. the court: yes. mr. hammer: and you know what, they will do that because they know i will never move for a mistrial. those are the things they do, judge. i just want to point that out to the court. mr. belasic: this is the third time in a row he has falsely claimed that something was not in evidence. the court: all right. dr. proctor testified as to all of this, and there is lots of it in evidence. overruled. 11 mr. belasic: ladies and gentlemen, as i was saying, it came from dr. proctor, the witness that the plaintiffs called as their very first expert witness, dr. proctor was asked by mr. gdanski, when did the tobacco companies start telling people it caused lung cancer, copd, was addictive? starting in the late '90s. so five, six, seven years later, when she is dating ben sweeney as a 72-year-old woman, at a time when the companies are warning everyone their products cause disease, their products are addictive, she went back to smoking. a few years later she decided to quit, and we know that she has quit for the last five or six years. so too addicted to quit, that is not -- just not true, it is exactly the opposite of the real evidence in this case. one of the other things i heard this morning is, you were repeatedly asked the question, what chance did fannie have? what chance did ms. collar have? well, the evidence from her and the evidence from her experts is that when it comes to quitting, she had a one hundred percent chance. when she was sufficiently motivated, she had the ability to quit. and there is no dispute, dr. niaura they brought, dr. mannino, dr. ticknor, our evidence, there is no dispute, when she was sufficiently motivated, she was capable of quitting because everyone in this courtroom knows that she did quit. there was a lot of discussion about dr. suen, and i want to say a couple of things. you know, you heard a lot about 8,000 pages of medical records or thousands of pages of medical records. you saw a lot of references to different doctors. in this case only one doctor for the plaintiff testified, only one doctor actually treated her, and that is dr. suen. he has seen her for 22 years. let us see what dr. suen said. does dr. suen say nicotine overpowered her? does dr. suen say nicotine was the substantial contributing factor because it made her smoke and she could not quit? he told you, she quit when she was motivated. here is what he said. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) q what was your impression of ms. collar's awareness that smoking was not good for her health during the 21 years that you were treating her? a i think she knew smoking was a problem for her, so i think she understood that. q would you agree ms. collar quit when she was sufficiently motivated to do so? a i believe so, yes. (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. belasic: that is her doctor. that is the only doctor that actually treated her. the only doctor that treated her for 22 years. the only doctor that saw her. she could quit when she was properly motivated. nicotine, whether you call it an addiction or a habit, was not a substantial contributing factor in her disease. everyone agrees that smoking was the cause of her disease. but she could quit. nicotine did not make her smoke so that she got a disease. you know, i heard the analogy to a fish story. to me, the plaintiff's case sounds a lot more like the runaway car that we all hear about. mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. belasic: you hear movies, whether it is a runaway train or a runaway car, the guy is in the car at the top of the mountain and he is going down, and the brakes are cut or there is something wrong with the steering wheel, it is been tampered with. no amount of motivation, no amount of personal choice or decision can save our hero then. when there is a runaway car, you cannot steer, you cannot brake, that crash is inevitable. but the evidence in this case is that fannie collar was not strapped behind the steering wheel of a runaway train. she could control her smoking when she did. she could put the brakes on and slow her smoking down. mr. geraghty reminded you, for seven years when she worked for ms. gardiner, she could only smoke a few cigarettes a day. she had to work the whole day there. she was able to control her smoking. she was able to put the brakes on so much that she could stop the car, we know 14 years, no cigarettes, and no craving. the last five or six years she is quit for good. she says she has craving. we know she can stop the car. she could stop the car at any time. none of their experts, none of their experts ever told you that her addiction or her habit or her behavior was such that she was prevented from quitting at any time. she quit for 14 years in '93. there is no evidence she could not quit at 83 or 73 or 63. her own expert says, when she was properly motivated, she is able to quit, nicotine or not. i also wanted to show you what he says about her copd. this is 2014, the medical records that mr. hammer showed you this morning, the most recent one was 2013. let us see what her condition is as of august 2014. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as 5266d922-96e3-46b2-98de-23842feca467 follows:) q do you agree that plaintiff's signs and symptoms for copd have been and remain well managed by appropriate medication? a yes. (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. belasic: you have heard a lot about the different warnings she got over the years. i do not want to discuss those just generally. but on the issue that mr. geraghty introduced to you, you are going to be asked, did she rely on a statement or misinformation? did she take action in reliance on a statement or misinformation? we know dr. niaura said this. he would read merton collar's sworn testimony. merton collar, he warned her every day. ms. collar said that never happened. we know all about the co-worker who said his wife got cancer. ms. collar said she did not want to turn out like that. he told her, i do not want you to turn out like that. we know she saw the warning but one of the things she says, that it did not tell her anything she did not already know. we know her father quit -- or her father-in-law quit. so here is these statements. i just want to go over again what -- statements 3 and 4, each of these questions that you are going to answer says whether ms. collar reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement or misinformation by a defendant which concealed or omitted material info. same thing. number 4, did she rely to her detriment on a statement or misinformation that concealed or omitted info? as mr. geraghty was pointing out in both of these, it is two parts. it is did she rely, and then look what is in the second half of the sentence, whether such reliance on a statement or misinformation was a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or copd. same thing on question 4. you have to decide, did she actually see a statement, believe it, and then rely on it? and if she did rely on it, did that reliance on a statement actually cause -- was it the legal cause of her lung cancer? what does reliance mean? what reliance means is, plaintiffs have to prove that it can reasonably be said that but for the reliance, the injury would not have occurred. is there any evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that if the tobacco institute had not said something in 1966 -- which is what ms. collar claims she heard, she said in 1966 the tobacco institute said something, is there any evidence in this case that if the tobacco institute did not say it, that she would not have developed lung cancer, any evidence that she would not have developed copd, any evidence at all by the plaintiff that she would have quit smoking? even though she took the stand and told you that she could not quit smoking all those years, there is not any evidence that would allow you to answer yes to those questions. the fraudulently conceal instruction is the same thing. they have to prove that but for the reliance, she does not get lung cancer and she does not get copd. what she told us is, many years after she started smoking and many years after she switched to filters, she saw a statement from the tobacco institute, and as mr. geraghty told you, she said it made no impression. he put the board with her sworn testimony up there. same thing for material information. that is in the question. they have to show that but for concealment or omission of the information, she would not have acted as she did. well, here is the evidence that tells us pretty clearly and it shows pretty clearly, she did not rely at all. when she told her husband -- and again, this is from merton collar's sworn testimony that dr. niaura told you, so either dr. niaura and merton collar got it wrong -- because ms. collar says, well, that never happened, but this is the testimony of her expert, based on the sworn testimony of her husband, she tells him, it is my decision to smoke. mind your own business. she never tells him, hey, i saw something and i'm going to keep smoking because i'm relying on it. this supposedly happened every day. dr. niaura said it was part of her husband's daily routine. does it make sense that if she was basing 30 years of smoking behavior on a statement that she supposedly saw from the tobacco institute that she would not once mention it to the man she is lived with for the last 40 years? does that make sense? mr. geraghty asked her if she had ever heard any statement by the companies, and she said, again, it was the industry, and it was this tobacco institute, 1966. she said she would never heard a statement, could not remember anything from philip morris or r.j. reynolds or liggett. what did she hear? what she said was, tobacco institute, 1966, something about filters and something about smoking not being bad for you. i put down here, she does not even claim she heard any statement before 1966. now, how can i say that? because mr. hammer showed you a slide that showed her saying, well, i think it was '59. well, she said she thought it was 1959, and then she was questioned about it more. and she said she remembered that it was 1966 when the surgeon general's warning came out. mr. geraghty showed you his boards with her sworn testimony. she said, sir, it was 1966, when the warning came out, when her father-in-law quit. to be fair, we gave her one more chance. the very last question she was asked by a defense lawyer, ms. collar, it was me, and the very last question i asked was, i said, you told us what you heard in 1966. do you have any memory of hearing anything from anyone in the tobacco industry before 1966? if she did, she could have and would have told us. that was the last question. she said, no, nothing before '66. so there is no way she relies on that to start smoking. there is no way she can rely on something that did not occur in '66 until 1955. nobody has a time machine. this is not a question of trying to confuse an older woman about dates. she herself said this did not happen until years after she switched. mr. geraghty showed you, she flat out said when asked, it made no impression. these are her words. it made no impression on her. plaintiffs have to prove that -- not only that she relied, but that she relied on a statement and that that was the legal cause, but in this case their own plaintiff has said it made no impression on her. when we were asked -- when she was asked, she said she had never told her husband or her doctor that she relied on a statement. so in 40 or 50 years on and off of smoking, in all of the warnings, in all of the discussions she had with her husband, with her father-in-law, when she talked to her sister, anyone she talked to, with all of her doctors, there is not a shred of evidence that she ever once said, you know, i'm relying on a quote from a tobacco company. i think cigarettes are perfectly safe. right at the start when mr. geraghty examined her, she agreed that she said from '58 to '93, for 35 years she thought that cigarette smoking was perfectly safe. if that was true, do not you think she would have mentioned that even once. as mr. geraghty says, there was no evidence in this case that she ever claimed to have relied on anything a tobacco company said until this lawsuit was filed. she never told her doctors. she never told her husband. she never discussed it with anyone, even when they were asking her, why are you smoking? you should quit. now, i said, we do not have a time machine, but what if there was a way we could do an experiment and find out, well, what would happen if the tobacco companies had said, you know what, we agree, smoking causes lung cancer. we agree it is addictive. what would happen? what would fannie collar do? we know. dr. proctor told us in the late '90s the companies began saying that smoking causes lung cancer, copd, it is addictive. these were public statements, a big deal. six, seven, eight years later ms. collar smokes anyway. it did not matter to ms. collar whether r.j. reynolds admitted in a newspaper or in a magazine that smoking was addictive. the evidence is that had nothing to do with why she smoked. it had nothing to do with why she went up again. in the end, the plaintiffs failed to present their proof. their burden of proof is to show that she would have taken different action if she had not relied on the statement. there is no proof she would have stopped smoking if the companies had said something differently. she did not even claim it herself. there is no proof that ms. collar would have avoided her lung cancer if the companies had said something different. you know, this is not a case where you can say, look, if you would have told me there was mold in the house, i would not have bought it. mr. hammer: objection, judge. mr. belasic: that is not this case. she did not present any evidence -- the court: overruled. mr. belasic: -- to meet the legal instructions and the burden she has. the truth is, we know that even when the companies said it caused cancer, it did not change her mind. she went back to smoking at age 72. so for that reason you should vote no on each of questions 3 and 4 because ms. collar did not reasonably rely on a statement or misinformation, and she certainly has not proven that reliance on a statement was a real cause of her lung cancer. no expert said that. ms. collar does not claim that when she took the stand. you should vote no on questions 3 and 4. i want to emphasize something that mr. geraghty mentioned. when you get the verdict form, at the end of questions 3 and 4 there will be an instruction. it says, if you find for ms. collar on 3 or 4, if you vote yes on either 3 or 4, that percentage fault, if you even reach it, that percentage fault where you have to determine what percentage she is responsible for, what percentage r.j. reynolds is responsible for, that will not apply at all. that percentage of fault will be wiped out. there will be no reduction. again, we do not think you should even get this far because the evidence is that whether you call it nicotine or behavior or habit or addiction, it was not a substantial contributing factor. it was not the legal cause of her disease. in the end, when she told her husband, it is my decision to smoke, that was not a word that a tobacco company lawyer put in her mouth. that was her own expert dr. niaura saying what her own husband told her and what he heard her say. nobody put those words in her mouth. she believed it was her decision to smoke. and it was. it was her choice. when she made that choice, it was her responsibility. let me leave you with this. what was different -- during the 14 years that she quit smoking from '93 to 2007 or so, what was different about nicotine? there was not anything different about nicotine. what was different about the effects of nicotine for her? it was not. what was different is that she did not smoke in year one and year two and year three. what changed was her mind. she changed her mind in 1993 and she said with clear motivation, that i was not going to smoke again. when she changed her mind, when she changed her behavior, when she made a decision that dr. suen, her own doctor, says was motivated, suddenly she did quit. all that talk of nicotine being substantial or nicotine controlling you, she was not smoking at all. when you are asked to decide legal cause, think about that. nicotine had no effect. nicotine was not a factor. she did not smoke at all when she changed her mind, when she made that motivated decision. it is been a long trial. i thank you again for your service.