closing argument mr. furr: thank you. thank you, your honor. may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. furr: counsel, mrs. cox. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. there is only one possible place i can start talking to you today and that is to thank you for your service. but i want to be clear what i'm thanking you for because i always wonder when lawyers begin by thanking jurors for their service, most of the jurors would say this was not exactly the assignment i volunteered for. i was called here to select, i may have enjoyed my experience, but it was not something i voluntarily did. so i want to be clear what i'm thanking you for. i'm thanking you for the patience you have had throughout this trial and for the attention that you have given all the evidence. and let me just go straight to what i'm trying to get at. this is a case about mr. roland cox and unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. the case has taken way too long. this case should have just taken a couple of days; not a couple weeks. the reason it is taken too long, with all due respect to counsel, is that the plaintiff has spent day after day after day reproving the engle findings using generic evidence instead of focusing on the issues in this case. mr. cox and unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. notwithstanding that it is taken too long, i do hope you enjoyed your service because the jury is the heart of our justice system which is the greatest justice system in the world. no question in my mind. and there is really too reasons why it is such a great system. number one, when somebody in our society feels wronged, they can access the courts, they can bring a legal claim. it is a fundamental right we have. it is in our federal constitution. it is in our state constitution. we believe in giving people an opportunity to prove when they have been wronged. but on the other hand, we require them to prove their case. you cannot just make claims and walk away for having made claims. you have to prove your case. i want to go back to the jury selection because during jury selection we all talked about how you have to prove your case. you do not do it with rhetoric, first all. you do not do it with emotion or sympathy. you do not do it with speculation. how do you have to prove your case? you have to prove your case with evidence. you have to prove your case with facts. you have to prove your case under the law. you have to use the instructions that the court has provided us that shows you how you have to prove your case, and you have to answer very specific questions. you just did not see any of that this morning. and the reason is that there has been a complete failure in this case by the plaintiff to prove the actual claims that are being made in this case. the case is about roland cox and unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. that is what i'm going to focus most of my time on because that is what we are here to decide. as you are going to see on the verdict form, the verdict form questions are actually going to have to do with mr. and mrs. cox. not with smokers. i mean, you cannot prove claims about mr. cox by talking about other smokers. you cannot prove claims about unfiltered pall mall cigarettes by talking about other cigarettes. so i'm going to spend most of my time on that. but just like i did in opening statement, i do feel the need to respond to some of the claims that have been made this morning so we can sort of sweep that cloud away from us because it is obscuring the real issues that you are here to decide. so we need to address this so we can set aside and focus on the job that y'all are here to do. you heard from opening on that nicotine addiction undermines self-preservation. but that has not been what the evidence has been. first, nicotine does not permanently change the brain. dr. tucker explained to you yesterday that just like every experience we have in life, everything we ingest, there is some temporary changes but he told you it does not permanently change the brain. he sat right there. they never asked him a question about it. did not even try to cross examine him on that. second, nicotine addiction does not prevent smokers from understanding the risks of smoking. i'm going to show you the evidence as we go, all claims where this is admitted, that nothing about smoking nicotine prevents somebody from understanding the risks. in fact, it enhances the concentration probably. third, nicotine addiction does not prevent smokers from quitting. you have seen a lot of statistics. we are going to run through them today and perhaps in a little bit different way, but this goes straight to the heart that every claim you have heard this morning is that by being addicted to nicotine it prevents somebody from quitting. that is what the whole case was about. and you know that is not the case. finally, just like i promised you in opening statement, i'm going to show you the evidence, all plaintiffs experts admitted that any smoker can quit, including heavily addicted smokers. so that is the first set of type of claims that plaintiffs made. what else did they talk about? the allegation was made that cigarettes are engineered to be more addictive. during the cross-examination y'all learned that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature. in fact, all of this comes straight from the cross-examination of the plaintiffs expert. dr. henningfield admitted to you that roll-your-own cigarettes made with natural tobacco are just as dangerous and addicted - addictive as unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. now, he threw in some explanation about, yes, they are just addictive but you are not more likely --you are not as likely to get addicted because they do not taste as good. i'm not sure what he was trying to explain. but in the end, he admitted that unfiltered pall mall cigarettes are no more addicted than natural tobacco, roll-your-own cigarettes made with natural tobacco. third, dr. henningfield told you that additive free cigarettes are not safer or less addicted. lots of discussion about the use of additives, did it make it more pleasurable, did it make it more addictive. and you hear all that, but then when we confront them squarely, let us cut through all this, are they more addictive? he said, no, that cigarettes are not more addictive. so what are we spending a bunch of time talking about issues that do not make a difference? next, unfiltered pall mall cigarettes are not engineered to be addictive as possibly. i'm going to walk through the cross-examination of dr. henningfield with you. he did not describe a single design feature that made the product more addictive. in fact, whenever i asked him, are you testifying that this design feature makes the product more addictive, he said, no, that is not my testimony. finally, all this discussion about the way that the delivery of nicotine is controlled in cigarettes. it took a while to get there, but what dr. henningfield admitted was that the design features that were used to control nicotine in cigarettes were approaches recommended by the public health community to try to make the cigarettes safer so that people would get nicotine with less tar because tar is the problem. so that is what the evidence actually was. now, you heard a lot this morning about --actually a claim you did not hear much of during the trial, but some type of claim about concealment. here's what i think we were told. i think that the claim was made that the efforts of the tobacco companies to debate whether smoking was dangerous or not created a stumbling block that prevented smokers from understanding that smoking is dangerous and prevented smokers from quitting. easy claim to make, but you have to prove it. and the evidence was exactly the opposite. in fact, the evidence was that the debate about the health effects of smoking did not prevent smokers from quitting. i mean, maybe this was the most revealing part. this was dr. cummings' cross-examination. you remember when we spent saturday in here on generic testimony. dr. cummings admitted that at the height of the debate in the 1960s and early 1970s, when the tobacco companies were debating this issue, that we had the highest rate of quitting that we have ever had in this country. that is because nobody listened to tobacco companies. we are going to show you later, remind you of some of the evidence that dr. michel told you yesterday, which was that the tobacco companies reviewed as the least credible source of information on this issue and that is simply not where smokers and other people look to get their information. finally, today, look at what is going on today. people - the plaintiffs have conceded there is been no debate for over a decade, but people continue to smoke. in fact, the rate of quitting has apparently slowed down some because everybody who wants to quit, who is concerned about the health has already made that decision. so when you -- if the debate was causing people not to quit, and you remove the debate and less people quit, that demonstrates that the plaintiffs claim that the tobacco companies were preventing people from quitting simply does not stand. now, i want to go to the final sort of general issue that was discussed by the plaintiff. and i do not know any other way to do this than just to address this straightforward with you. the first 60 seconds of the plaintiffs opening statement and in the first 60 seconds of today's statement they began talking to you about punitive damages. punitive damages. i mean, the fact is that this whole case has been a quest to try to get you to deliver a huge verdict in the tens of millions of dollars, i suspect is what they have asked for in punitive damages. that is what this whole case has been. they structured their whole case, not about mr. cox, not about unfiltered pall mall cigarettes, but their quest for punitive damages. how they try to do that? well, we have heard a couple of different theories but the one that they seem to always come back to is that if you just award mrs. cox tens of millions of dollars in punitive damages that somehow you will improve public health because you will make cigarettes safer. and it seems like what they tend to focus on is that by doing that, you will force the tobacco companies to take the nicotine level in cigarettes below the addiction threshold. so that is the story plaintiffs have tried to read to you. huge punitive damages award, force the companies to change design, that would improve public health. but let us look at ha the evidence is on that whole issue. all this is undisputed. united states food and drug administration controls cigarette manufacturing, marketing and distribution. in fact, you were told that the united states food and drug administration controls the level of nicotine in cigarettes. it is already being regulated. dr. henningfield admitted that the tobacco companies do not increase nicotine levels in cigarettes. he admitted that r.j. reynolds has already spent billions of dollars trying to make a safe cigarette but nobody knows how to do it. in fact, you heard there is not even any agreement as who how to go about trying to making them safer rather than completely safe. you heard that this whole theory, take the nicotine out, has been tried and failed. smokers do not like it and will not switch to it and that is why the food and drug administration regulates it. this theory of take the nicotine out, it is not based on science, it is not based in public health policy. it is a litigation theory because it has some surface appeal. it has some surface appeal. but it is simply not what the evidence has been. and i'm going to show you as we go through this, i'm going to show you the admissions of dr. burns, dr. cummings, and dr. henningfield who all admit that this claim that the tobacco companies should be forced to take the nicotine out is not based on sound science and is not sound public policy. it is a litigation theory to try to insight you to award punitive damages. just going to be straight up about what this is. like i said, there is no public health consensus about this, and we are going to talk about all that as we look at the evidence. like i said, plaintiff spent almost the whole case trying to reprove the engle findings but they do not have to do that if you find mr. cox to be a class member. the engle findings come in automatically. and you have been instructed as to the rule. they did not have to be proved. think about what their case really was. with all due respect to dr. henningfield, dr. burns and dr. cummings, they are sort of a traveling road show that has been testifying against tobacco companies, all of them admit they have been testifying since the 1980s in lawsuits against tobacco companies. and look at what they did. dr. henningfield came here and testified about generic cigarette design but not unfiltered pall mall cigarette design. and, you know, there was a claim, well, he did not have that information. i'm going to review it for you, but you remember, when i said, dr. henningfield, did you look at the documents that you were putting up in front of jury? it has the exact same type of data you say you need. and i'm going to show you what it was. dr. burns came here and gave generic testimony. and i know he testifies a lot. it is probably hard to keep the facts straight in all the cases that he testifies in. but you saw, he simply did not remember the facts of this case. he is their $2 million witness. the $2 million witness cannot remember the facts of the case. third, dr. cummings admitted that he - he admitted that he was here to give generic testimony that he has given countless times. now, this type of generic testimony might be helpful if you were trying to prove the engle findings. but they do not have to reprove the engle findings. so why do we spend day after day, including saturday, with dr. cummings on generic testimony that is been given countless times? why do we do that? we did that because there is a complete failure of proof with respect to the claim of mr. cox and unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. so all of this generic testimony was designed to take your eye off the ball, to make you angry, to make you emotional, to make you dislike the tobacco companies and to distract you from the actual issues you are here to decide. back to what we are here to decide. i suggested to you in opening that i believe the evidence has been absolutely clear that the plaintiffs case simply does not fit mr. cox and it simply does not fit unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. in other words, they have got the wrong smoker. their case involved people do not know that smoking's dangerous. but mr. cox was warned not to smoke at home and did not become a regular smoker until he was an adult. lots and lots of discussion about marketing to youth. but you heard the admissions. even dr. henningfield said that he had no evidence that he became a regular smoker until 1957. in fact, nobody did. he was seen smoking some -when he came home from the navy he appeared to be smoking. but then he came home, came back to the family farm from '54 to '55, lived with his mom and dad, nobody saw him smoking. so it appears that he became a regular smoker around the age of 27 or so. clearly he smoked some before that, but all the evidence on youth marketing and he became a smoker. lots of discussion about the advertisements, tobacco company's statements, how they influenced people. wrong smoker again. his smoking choices were not influenced by advertising or statements. like i said, lots of evidence about smokers not knowing the risks. wrong smoker. we are going to look at the evidence. he knew the risk and was warned over and over in his family and schools and multiple sources certainly from the 1950s on. all their case about the tobacco companies create a stumbling block, they confuse people, they kept people from quitting. there is no evidence that he ever, ever expressed any confusion about whether cigarettes were dangerous. we are going to look at dr. burn's testimony in this subject, but all the evidence is that mr. cox never expressed any doubts. and finally, evidence of how difficult he can make it to quit, how people try and try, and they go back and they are tormented by their smoking, they want to quit, they cannot get away from it. just the wrong smoker. you know - you know now the evidence well. he did not try to quit smoking for over 30 years, and ultimately he quit smoking cold turkey it appears. wrong cigarette. again, this is a case about pall mall cigarettes. they just got the wrong cigarette in this case. all this discussion about making cigarettes more inhaleable. the evidence was that unfiltered pall mall cigarettes are harsher, harsher and more difficult to inhale than filtered cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes. dr. henningfield told you that unfiltered pall mall cigarettes would have been less inhaleable than well over ninety percent of the cigarettes on the market. it is the wrong cigarette. their design claims do not fit this cigarette. if pall mall was such an addictive product and so appealing to smokers, would it have lost all of its market share? during the time that mr. cox was smoking it went from an approximately 14 percent down to below 1.5 percent. dr. cummings told you that today it is less than one-tenth of one percent. is this a cigarette that smokers just love and cannot do without it? it is the wrong cigarette. you were told that roll-your-own cigarettes at least as addictive as pall mall. then additive-free cigarettes are not safer or less addictive than unfiltered pall mall, and that unfiltered pall mall cigarettes are no more addictive or dangerous than roll-your-own cigarettes. we will look at some of these. they have got the wrong smoker. they have got the wrong cigarette. it is no surprise they brought you these generic witnesses and put on their generic testimony. it simply did not fit the smoker or the product in this case. what is this case really about? what - it actually boils down to a fairly simple case. when you cut through all this, when you sweep all this aside, there are only a few facts that you need to know to decide the issues. one is during the years that mr. cox smoked there was no safer or less addictive cigarette on the market than unfiltered pall mall. second, that mr. cox knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive but choose to smoke anyway. and finally, that mr. cox could have quit smoking earlier and prevented his death. and we are going to look at all the admissions that this statements are based on because the plaintiffs admitted these things and you are going to see those as we go through the evidence. like i said, the evidence matters. facts matter. the testimony matters. the law matters. it is not the rhetoric of the lawyers that matter. you have to cut through all that and look at what the evidence in this case was and what the instructions say with respect to how you are supposed to go about making your decision. okay. let us start down that road. the issues for you to decide are whether mr. cox was a class member. if so, whether the actions of rj. reynolds were a legal cause of mr. cox's death. and finally, just like i told you in opening statement, really ultimately the issue that you are going to be asked to decide is whether mr. cox's estate is entitled to money because he chose to smoke cigarettes for over 30 years without trying to quit, even though he knew that smoking was dangerous. those are the issues you are going to be asked to decide. i want to focus on that emphasis as i talk to you today. let me go first to the -- could he have - no, i'm sorry, let me back up. before i even get to that i think that i need to talk with you a little more about the engle findings because you have heard about the engle findings over and over, but i think it is really important to take a look at the role that the engle findings had in this case. and the instructions tell you what that role is. you are going to have instructions back there. when you want to look to see what the engle findings role is go to instruction number five. it starts on page six. you were instructed, we read you this morning -- you were read so much, i know how this all comes at you so i'm going to try to give you some reference points to help you when you get back there. it says -- you are going to see this instruction number five. it says, these findings are only binding on you and only relevant to this case if you -- if you find that roland cox was a member of the engle class. so they only come into play if you decide whether he was a class member or not. next. the findings i have described to you do not establish that r.j. reynolds tobacco company is liable to mrs. cox. remember we told you that what the plaintiffs have to do is link, they have to make a connection with evidence, with facts under the law between the engle findings and the injury the plaintiff is claiming in this case. third you were told, nor do they establish whether mr. cox was injured by the conduct of r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson tobacco company or american, or the degree, if any, to which any of that conduct was the cause of mr. cox's death. so they do not come into play until you have made a decision about class membership. so when you are back there talking about class membership, you are not supposed to consider it. we talked about it in jury selection the dilemma we put you in. we have talked about the engle findings for weeks, but we say, hey, you need to answer this question but you are not allowed to think about the engle findings. that is just what the law is. second if you find him a class member and you get to these other issues, the findings will not establish the liability. the plaintiffs have to have evidence and facts under the law to make a connection between those findings and mr. cox's death. the finding of legal causation. it is not surprising that the engle findings do not answer the case because remember what we talked about with respect to the engle jury? the engle jury did not hear any evidence about mr. cox. the engle findings do not establish he was a member of the class. i would review all this. the bottom line is, if the engle jury had decided the issues that you are here to decide you would not be here. you are here to pick up on the issues that the engle class jury did not consider. so that is why this instruction is in here, to help you understand when and how those engle findings come into play. okay. let us go to class membership. that is going to be the first issue on your verdict form. and so i want to look at the instruction that will be relative to you to help you decide class membership. that is on page four. it is --1 believe it is instruction number four. it is instruction number four. the instruction say, the first issue for your determination in this case was whether mr. cox was a member of the engle class. to prove that he was, plaintiff must prove that mr. cox was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, and that his addiction was a legal cause of his death. so merely proving - my point is merely proving addiction does not get you there. you have to do more. we looked at this in jury selection. go right back to this. they have to prove that smoking caused his death medically. they have to prove that he was addicted, and the most difficult hurdle for you, as you are going to see from the evidence, is they have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of his death. those are all things that they have the burden of proof on to establish that he was a class member even before those engle findings have any relevance to your decision. so i'm going to skip over the issue of medical causation. you heard the testimony of dr. burns. the plaintiffs have the burden of proof to prove that smoking caused his decision. i'll leave that decision to you, understanding that plaintiffs have to prove that to you. but let us focus on this. the plaintiffs also have to prove that mr. cox was addicted to nicotine. what happened on that issue in this case? basically the plaintiffs gave you a conclusion. they said over and over he was addicted. why was he addicted? because he smoked a lot. that was the sum total of their proof. he must have been addicted because he smoked a lot. basically under their proof, anybody who smokes a pack a day or even less than that on a consistent basis is addicted. does that really help you decide the issue in the case? that is why we brought you dr. tucker. dr. tucker gave you the tools that you need to decide whether he was addicted. dr. tucker was the only witness that came to you that was a professional in treating people with addiction issues. and rather than just ask you to accept his opinion, he provided you his analysis under the dsm and that is, as he told you, that is the gold standard. that is what medical professionals use throughout the world to make decisions about whether people were addicted. so you have two versions of whether mr. cox was addicted in this case. you have the conclusion he must have been because he smoked a lot which is what the plaintiffs evidence was and you have dr. tucker's analysis, and i'm sorry it took so long, those criteria are dense. we had to apply the facts to those criteria. a little bit like what y'all have to do in this case. you have to take the law and the evidence and apply the facts. we wanted to walk you through that so you have a fair opportunity to see what an addictionologist, someone who treats people for addictions for a living, how they would analyze the situation as to whether or not mr. cox was medically addicted. was he a nicotine addict? because that is what you are being asked to find. you are being asked to find that mr. cox was an involuntary smoker, that he smoked because he was compelled to smoke by nicotine. remember what dr. tucker told us? he walked through the facts. he explained to you that under the dsm mr. cox simply did not meet the criteria. you know mr. cox was not a tortured, distressed smoker who hated his smoking and spent his life trying to quit smoke. you know he never complained about and, in fact, i'll show you the evidence, you know he enjoyed his smoking. his daughter laura, his brother kenny, his nephew michael all told you that he enjoyed his smoking, of course. he never expressed any regrets about smoking. he never expressed any desire to quit. he never wanted to quit until finally laura was on him so much that in 1989 he decided to make a quit attempt apparently. and what he did? ultimately he quit cold turkey. the bottom line is that he chose to smoke and then he chose to quit. and interestingly there is no evidence that his doctors who were treating him at the time ever diagnosed him as addicted. that is a label that he never had until this lawsuit. that is just how it is. the question being called an addict, nicotine addict never came up in his life until this lawsuit. so on the one hand you have the conclusory nature of plaintiffs evidence; must have been an addict; must have been an involuntary smoker because he smoked a lot. you have dr. tucker's very principal analysis, the facts of this case, and whether mr. cox met the dsm criteria. and you saw who dr. tucker is. is he some kind of industry hack who does not know what he is doing? he is board certified in addiction psychiatry, addiction medicine, forensic psychiatry. he spent his life - this is what he does for a living. he spends his life helping people with addiction problems. but he came here to explain to you how this will be viewed as a medical addiction. you have to decide which of those versions of whether mr. cox wax addicted do you find to be the most persuasive, and i leave that decision to you, of course. okay. i told you what the evidence would be. you heard laura say that, in fact, she believed that her father enjoyed smoking. you know, if mr. cox was addicted -- they kept saying what does that mean, it keeps you from quitting, it causes you to smoke. remember what mrs. cox told us when he talked to her about those 1989 quit attempts? her bottom line was that when you stitched it altogether, even though he used a weak patch and even though he used the gum, it is such a low level it could not have been helping him much, one piece a day instead of ten or twelve, despite all that it appears he went about 40 days without smoking. had some symptoms, yeah. did not meet withdrawal in the dsm. had some symptoms, quit the gum, went a few more days without smoking and then he got aggravated at somebody and picked a cigarette back up. okay. the next question that you have to decide -- by the way, if you find he is not addicted, if you find he is not addicted, you check no on the first question and that is the end of your analysis. you do not go to any further questions. that is the end of case and the end of your analysis and you return your verdict and you go home. if you find he is addicted though, then that is just the beginning of your analysis. what you have to go to next, you have to go to the second verdict i showed you as to whether addiction was a legal cause of his injury and death. and it is kind of a hard thing to wrap your mind around what that means so we gave you some alternative ways to think about this. was roland cox a tormented smoker who hated smoking and smoked because he was compelled to do so by nicotine addiction? was he an involuntary smoker who had no ability to stop smoking and prevent his own death? i mean, this is really what the plaintiffs trying to prove to you. when they say nicotine caused his death they are saying he was an involuntary addict who had no ability to prevent his own death. was he caught in an addiction cycle with no way out? well, to answer the questions, let us take a step back and ask ourselves, does addiction prevent smokers from quitting. does it? is that really how it works? i'm going to go through this quickly because y'all heard so much of this i bet statistics are coming out of your ears, but nonetheless i'll summarize these for you in a way that i hope is meaningful for your deliberations when you go back there. between 1955 and 1965 17.6 million people quit. before the first warning went on the pack, 17.6 million in ten years, 1.7 million, thousands of people every day quit before there was ever a warning on the pack. why? you know why, because, number one, people were already being warned from other sources and, number two, smoking (sic) does not prevent quitting. second, in the 15 years after the surgeon general's report you heard that 30 million people quit in 15 years. two million a year. 5,000 a day. is nicotine preventing people from quitting? is tobacco companies preventing people from quitting? this was the highest level of quitting in the history of our country. about 5,000 people a day, 365, for 15 straight years, day in, day out for 15 years, about 5,000 people were making a choice that they did not want to smoke anymore and stopping. finally, you have heard today that number is somewhere in the range of 50 million. huge number. what does it mean? well, i cannot resist talking about football at least one time, so i thought, how do i explain what 50 million is? the swamp. 50 million smokers would fill the swamp approximately 540 times. that is what the number 50 million really means. and every one of those smokers quit smoking to fill the swamp. again, every month you would fill it again. does nicotine addiction prevent smokers from quitting? the answer is pretty obvious. but it is not just smokers in general. heavy smokers quit, too. we asked dr. henningfield, would not you agree that of the million of male smokers who quit in the '50s, '60s and '70s that many of them were heavy smokers? answer: yes. mr. bassett asked dr. burns: well, let us just be clear, dr. burns, millions and millions and millions of heavy smokers quit smoking in the '50s, in the '60s, in the '70s and in the '80s? cumulatively that would be correct. in fact, dr. cummings told you that heavy smokers were just as likely to quit as lighter smokers. you might remember what happened. he had a bunch of things to say on direct examination. his litigation testimony came out. i said, dr. cummings, are not heavy smokers as likely to quit as light smokers? he said, no. so what did i do? i got out his publication that he had written about his experience with smoking cessation clinic and this was the testimony. let us look at what i highlighted and focus on the last highlighted sentence. you and your coauthors wrote, heavy smokers are more hesitant to try to quit, but once they make an attempt they are as likely to succeed as lighter smokers when other factors are constant, correct? the answer was, right. dr. tucker explained to you in detail yesterday that, in fact, all the statistics from the surgeon general's report show that heavy smokers, and we will use the two-pack per day number, sort of a marker for heavy smokers, are more likely to quit than lighter smokers. those are just the facts. what about smokers, heavy, light, what about highly addicted people? you know you have heard about this getting caught in the cycle of addiction and spiraling to end stage addiction until you have no hope and you have no choice but to smoke yourself to death. that is what the claim is. look at what dr. henningfield said. you would agree that even highly addicted smokers can successfully quit, right, sir? right. we tried to get to a bottom line on this. we asked dr. cummings, but you believe that any smoker can quit smoking, do not you, sir? answer: absolutely. i work with smokers. i would never tell somebody they cannot quit. that would be foolish. dr. bums, in fact, there were tens of millions of formerly addicted smokers who broke their addiction? absolutely. all addictions can be broken. dr. henningfield, i want to make sure you do not lose my question, sir. you believe that everyone has the ability to quit smoking with proper resources and proper motivation, right? answer: right. how do they quit? how do they quit? this morning during his closing argument mr. mitnik said finding the lucky few get help and are able to quit. that is not the evidence. the evidence is almost everybody that quits, quits cold turkey, because it is a matter of making a choice. deciding that you would rather be - that it is more important for you to be a nonsmoker than continue to be a smoking. dr. henningfield told you that cold turkey is probably the most common way that people are quitting. dr. bums' testimony. let us go further than that. it also means that tens of millions of those addicted smokers had a choice to quit, made the effort to quit, and actually accomplished that quitting, right, sir? well, you cannot stop smoking without stopping smoking so, yes, they decided to quit and they stopped and they were able to stay off. now, over and over and over you have heard ridicule this idea that you are minimizing nicotine addiction by describing it as a choice. that is a litigation theory. that is not the science. all of plaintiffs witness admit you have to make your decision to quit. dr. cummings, in fact, the surgeon general has described smoking -- excuse me, smoking is both an addictive behavior and a personal choice behavior, right? yes. and, in fact, in 2010 in the surgeon general's report that you talked about, is not it true that the surgeon general in 2010 said, now is the time to quit smoking, no one can make you quit, and no one can do it for you? answer: yes. that is what the science is. that is what the science is. that is not a litigation theory. that is what the science shows. no one can decide to quit for the smoker. let us go down and look at what dr. henningfield says. now, if he was going to quit, it was mr. cox who had to make the decision to try to quit; is that right? answer: yes, that is the first step. no one can make that decision for him, could they? answer: no. you know, i could not quite understand what argument was being made this morning. you heard over and over they are going to talk about he did not quit, he did not quit, he did not quit, but look at what their witnesses say. he had to try to make a quit attempt. that is just the way it is. you do not quit smoking unless you try to quit. dr. burns, all smokers, including addicted smokers, have a choice to quit smoking, correct? answer: they have to make the decision to stop. they have to make a choice to stop smoking, that is correct. dr. burns worked on more surgeon general's reports than anybody else. is this choice words something that the tobacco lawyers have made up that come in here and try to pull the wool over your eyes? look at what their two million dollar witness says. they have to make the decision to stop. they have to make a choice to stop smoking? that is correct. so when you get down to this question of whether addiction was a legal cause, which is part of what you have to decide for class membership, like we discussed, it comes down to this question: did roland cox have the ability to quit but choose to continue smoking or, did nicotine addiction control mr. cox and leave him no choice, no matter how hard he tried, but to continue smoking until his death? i submit, respectfully, that that is a question -- those are the questions you have to ask yourself when you are deciding whether addiction was a legal cause of his death. what is the evidence? we already know what the evidence is. the plaintiffs have admitted that he could quit. you heard the request for admissions read to you. roland cox could have quit smoking cigarettes permanently prior to august of 1991. admitted. had roland j. cox quit smoking prior to his lung cancer diagnosis in 1991 his risk of developing lung cancer would have decreased. admitted. on the one hand they are trying to convince you that no matter how hard he tried to quit he had no choice to continue smoking until it caused his disease, thus addiction was a legal cause. but they admitted that is just not the facts; that he could have quit sooner, he could have decreased his risk of developing disease. dr. henningfield talked -- we talked to dr. henningfield a little bit about, okay, what are people who are really addicted who struggle with addiction, what are they like? he told us that they are smokers who complain, who try everything to quit, who they try and fail and try and fail and try and fail. some smokers are like that, right? is that mr. cox? that is not mr. cox. dr. tucker explained to us that there is smokers who hate smoking, who desperately try to quit, who try over and over to quit, who ask for help from their doctors, who throw out their ashtrays and cigarettes, that they are an involuntary smoker. that they were describing the type of person who might be - who might have a disease that could have been caused by addiction smoking. that is the type of person you should compare to mr. cox to evaluate whether or not he was a class member. well, they always say, you have heard this over and over, well, in fact, you heard this big song and dance this morning ridiculing, oh, i smoke because i like to, you know. lots of ridicule about how could that possibly about. how could somebody light a cigarette and intentionally inhale smoke into their lungs. could anybody really want to do that? look at what these experts say. dr. cummings, you know that is kind of interesting because that is a perfect lead to my next question because not all smokers want to quit, do they? answer: no. dr. henningfield, you would agree that there are people who like to smoke, enjoy it, and do not want to quit, would not you? answer: yes. dr. tucker -- we took some time to go through this yesterday. dr. tucker, in your practice, have you encountered smokers who knew that smoking was dangerous but who simply did not want to quit? answer: yes. why? he explained to you what smokers say about why they enjoy smoking. relaxation, enhances the attention and concentration, sensory aspects of smoking, social interactions, weight loss, habit and conditioning. there are reasons that people choose to smoke unrelated to nicotine addiction, and as we know, with respect to mr. cox, he enjoyed smoking. here's what the evidence was. i've put the witnesses beside this as to who gave you this evidence. mr. cox enjoyed smoking. never said he wanted to quit. never said he was unable to quit. never said he did not like smoking or that smoking bothered him. never said he was addicted. and mac no quit attempt prior to 1989. does that sound to you like the type of tortured, involuntary, nicotine addict that is so helplessly trapped in an addiction cycle that they have no choice but to smoke until they develop a smoking-related disease that cause their death? we have got the wrong smoker here. now, what if mr. cox was weak. what if he was somebody who just really could not process information, if he was a weak addiction-prone individual, someone unable to control himself, indecisive, someone who basically, the winds of life blew them in whatever direction it took, unable to control his own destiny? might have a different case. but look at what mrs. cox said about him. he was intelligent. he had a mind of his own. he made his own decisions. he was strong-willed. and he did what he wanted to do. in addition, she told you that he said that smoking was his business. was he a nicotine addict being compelled to smoke? ma'am, if you ask your husband to quit he would say, that is my business, what i do is my business; is that correct? answer: that is the type of person he was, yes. question: ma'am, you do not think there is anything that anyone could have said to mr. cox to get him to quit, do you? answer: no, i do not. with all due respect, i believe that those two admissions alone defeat completely every single one of the claims being made in this case. they have simply got the wrong smoker. the generic case they brought to you, the generic witnesses simply does not fit mr. cox. they have just got the wrong smoker. this is sort of the same comparison we talked about. i'd suggest to you when you go back, one of the things you can do is evaluate whether mr. cox was a class member. consider the testimony of dr. henningfield, and dr. tucker, you know, was he someone who wanted to quit, tried and tried to quit, repeatedly relapses, hates smoking, complains about smoking, tortured by smoking, not in control of smoking, smokes against his will, claims to be addicted, expresses an inability to quit, desperately seeking help to quit. that is the type of person that might be an engle class member. but does that sound anything to you like mr. cox? in the interest of time i'm not going to review everything again, you have seen it in the red what the actual testimony was. mr. cox was the opposite of that type of smoker. he was the opposite. so could i have the elmo, please, jeff. thank you very much. i'm going to suggest to you that when you deliberate after you consider this issue of class membership, which is your first question, was roland cox addicted to nicotine - excuse me, to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, the american tobacco company or brown & williamson tobacco company and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death. the answer to those questions respectfully should be, no. and if you place an answer, if you check that box no, you will see that if you answer no to question one, your verdict is for r.j. reynolds and you should proceed no further except to date and sign the verdict form and return it to the court. that should be the end of the case right there, ladies and gentlemen. of course that is up to you. not up to me. it is not for mr. mitnik. that is why y'all are here, to answer that question. so my obligation, although you know that i believe that is what the answer should be, my obligation is to talk with you about the rest of the case, so to provide you our perspective on how the rest of the case should be decided if you get there. now, as i told you, if you decide that he is a class member, the engle findings come into play and your next task is to deliberate together to decide whether or not the plaintiffs, through facts and evidence, under the law, have linked those findings to mr. cox's injury and death. they have to do that. that is called finding legal causation, and you will see in your instruction that legal causation requires the plaintiffs to prove that the engle findings directly and in a continuous sequence substantially impacted roland cox such that, such that roland cox would not have died from a smoking-related disease but for the negligence, product defect, and concealment. you have the definition of legal causation instruction. these are the key components of it and your task will be to see whether or not the plaintiffs have made this type of link between the engle findings and mr. cox. so what i'm going to do now is i'm going to look at each of the claims and what the evidence is so we can look at whether or not they have made this showing, have they shown you with facts and evidence that the engle findings directly and in continuous sequence substantially impacted him such that but for those findings, but for those findings he would not have developed lung cancer. i want to start with - randy, where am i on time? mr. bassett: just under an hour. mr. furr: understand that it is the judge that is actually going to decide that. mr. bassett: 50 minutes. the court: mr. bassett's close. mr. bassett: you are at 50 minutes, jeff. mr. furr: thank you very much. two claims that i can deal with at the same time are the concealment claim and the conspiracy to conceal. and what i'm going to do, again, is show you the key part of the instructions which, of course, are your instructions as to how to decide this claim so that you can keep those instructions in mind as i show you what the evidence is. so when you get to the concealment claim, if you go to instruction number eight on page ten, when you read the whole thing, the whole instruction number eight, you will see this is the concealment instruction. and the part that i want to highlight for you is that additionally, to be a legal cause of mr. cox's injury, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown to mr. cox. to be a legal cause of his injury the concealment or omitted facts must have been unknown to mr. cox. so one of the analyses you have to undertake is did he know that smoking was dangerous. now, there was a lot of discussion this morning, frankly i did not understand what was being argued to you with respect to, no, it was not enough to know it was dangerous, he had to know what the belief was within the tobacco company about some issue or other. you are going to see that this is what your instruction actually says though. additionally, to be a legal cause of mr. cox's injury, the concealed or omitted fact must have been unknown to mr. cox. that is your concealment instruction. on, i believe, the next page, page 11, instruction number nine you will see that this is the instruction for conspiracy to conceal. and you will see it is the exact same concept. additionally, to be a legal cause of mr. cox's injury, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown to mr. cox. so you see the legal principal, the same operative legal principal controls both of these claims. so i'm going to deal with both of these claims at the same time with respect to reviewing the evidence with you. lots of words in the instruction. what does it mean? submitted actually means this: did mr. cox die because information about the dangers of smoking were unknown to him? when you place the facts of this case into that legal instruction, this is what the question becomes. okay. let us start generally and look at what was known generally and what mr. cox knew. first question is, i guess, were the dangers of smoking a secret? the dangers of smoking a cigarette would have been hard for him to know it, but is that what the evidence is? all the plaintiffs' experts admitted that the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes were common knowledge. dr. bums, it has been known for centuries that smoking can cause disease and be difficult to quit. dr. henningfield, the terms addictive or addiction have been tied to tobacco use going back hundreds of years. dr. cummings, the media has publicized that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive for about 100 years now. was this a secret? did you have to have internal company documents in order to understand these things? dr. burns, mr. cox was raised by his parents not to smoke, correct? my understanding is that his parents had a prohibition against smoking, that is correct. what i'm going to do is go back and forth between what was generally known and between specific evidence, that type of personalized awareness that mr. cox had as we try to assist what the evidence shows with respect to whether the dangers of smoking were unknown to mr. cox. like we looked at under that instruction, if they were known then the plaintiffs proof has failed on both of those claims. let me back up. you know, there is been a lot of discussion about large family, lived, worked in a rural area, close to where i live actually. large family rural area that did not go to school very long. did that make it impossible for people in his family to know that smoking was dangerous? look at what his younger brother told us. was there a reason back at the time before you saw your brothers getting sick from smoking that caused you not to smoke? well, when i grew up i pretty well knew that drinking and smoking was not good for me, so i did not do either one of those. is this a secret? this is his younger brother. school texts. dr. michel walked through these in detail. i'm not going to go back to that whole story. cannot place a particular text in the hands of his teachers. what we know is that virginia required the dangers of smoking be taught over that time. you saw a whole series of school texts that warned about smoking being dangerous, smoking being addictive. those were the types of materials that were being taught in the virginia schools. i know it is kind of hard for us sometimes to think, well, we know today but did people really know. that is why we brought you all that historical information because just like a lot of historical issues, over time, we, as the people, forget what was known before and have to have that lesson brought home to us. readers digest story. not going to go through that whole thing. you have heard about how popular readers digest, one in four households, four-decade long effort to educate the american public. okay. but what were they really saying? what was the readers digest saying? 1924, before mr. cox was born, smoking is injurious to the human body, it is use sometimes induces cancer. did you need an internal tobacco company document to have this information? you heard "smoke smoke smoke that cigarette". i'm going to skip by this, alecia, and not play it again. you heard about the discussion of the health effects, about the addictive nature of cigarettes. yeah, it was satirical, but the thing is, mrs. cox heard it and she told you that mr. cox heard it, too, she believes. no secret. 1954, have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoke may be a cause of cancer? the famous gallup poll we talked about, ninety percent said, yes. now, you all watched sort of an interesting ping-pong match here with the polls. one poll says this, another poll says this. one organization criticizes the use of the poll by one. another organization criticizes the use of the poll by another witness. kind of hard to sort through. kind of hard to reconcile. i think it is interesting information for you to consider but you do not have to rely on the polls to know that people are smoking. let us look at what the experts admitted in this case. because like i said, people say all kinds of things from the witness stand, especially on direct examination. they talk about concealment and being an obstacle, how nobody knew. but then the reason we have cross-examination, the reason cross-examination is so critical to our system of justice is because in the end we believe that the cross-examination of a witness sharpens the issues so the people can really get to a bottom line about what is known and get past all the rhetoric and all the attention and blame and sympathy. look at what dr. cummings told us. you would agree that virtually everybody knew in 1954 that smoking could cause disease? your answer was, yes. heard and knew the same? answer: that is right. now, y'all saw an interesting thing play out here during this trial. dr. cummings came here and when i cross-examined him he would not admit anything. he wanted to argue with me about things. what did i have to do time after time after time? i had to go get his prior sworn testimony given in other cases and say, dr. cummings, is not this what you said under oath before? and he had to admit that that, in fact, was what he said. was the dangers of smoking a secret in 1955 in order for people to be warned? let us lock at what doctor - (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) in 1954 drs. hammond and horn of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking habit of american men. here is dr. hammond reporting on the results of the first two years. it is now present in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people can be warned the dangers and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video stopped.) mr. bassett: jeff, you are at one hour. mr. furr: why did i select this? first of all, very prominent researcher you heard. see what he said? whether they want to smoke or not was their business. what did mrs. cox tell us? that mr. cox told her whether he wanted to smoke or not was his business. because you see that is the thing in america. we get to choose. i'm not being critical of mr. cox in any way or mrs. cox in any way. i hope i've been clear about that throughout the trial. i have total respect for them both. that is not the issue. the issue is in america adults get to make choices; adults get to make choices. you are given information and then you get to choose. here's another way. again, so we do not have to play ping-pong with the polls, so that we do not have to sit here in 2011 and have paid experts tell you whether they think that smoking -- the risk of smoking were known back in 1950s, let us go back and see what public health officials from the 1950s were saying. people were on the ground, warning smokers who had obligations to the public, whose jobs involved alerting people about the dangers of smoking. an early surgeon general, dr. leroy burney, our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv. dr. john heller, newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public. they were in the moment. they knew what was going on. as dr. cummings told you, i think he said he would have been three years old at this time. here he is getting paid to come back and tell you what was going on when he was three years old at the time these gentlemen were making this observation. okay. what are the dangers - let us go back to mr. cox now. were the dangers to him a secret? we talked about after he was discharged he returned home and hid smoking from his parents. he knew that smoking was dangerous. in fact, when he went back to take his new bride home to meet the family as a 28-year old man, he said, do not tell my parents i smoke because they do not know it. that tells us two things. number one, tells us he knew smoking was dangerous and something he should not do. number two, when we go back to this 1955, '56 period when he is living at home and working on the farm, he is around his family all day and they do not know he smoked? he could not have been smoking very much at all especially given this - and do not -you have heard way too many times probably about his mother being able to detect when somebody's smoking. during this time when mr. cox took mrs. cox home to meet his family, his father, mr. cox, was suffering from emphysema. you have heard that. in fact, in 1959 his father died from emphysema; that his brothers told you that other family members believed was smoking related. now, do we have evidence that somebody said to mr. roland cox that his father died from emphysema caused by smoking? we do not have that. well, let us use common sense. he goes back to the funeral, we are told that everybody always went back, the family mince life rules. he is there with his brothers and sisters for his father's funeral. the family believes that the emphysema is caused by smoke. is there really any chance that mr. cox did not hear that? is that the way families work? is that the way things are in families, that nobody tells anybody something like that? 1964, the surgeon general's report. y'all have heard about the process that led to this. you have heard about the report and how much publicity it got nationwide, radio, tv, newspapers, magazines. remember we are looking at whether the dangers of smoking is a secret. did you need internal company documents to know that smoking was dangerous. i'm going to show you just a little part because it is so consistent with what everybody has been saying outside of litigation. i mean, you hear one source from plaintiffs witness, but when you get outside of litigation look what everybody says about smoking. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) harry reasoner: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one's going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video stopped.) mr. furr: you see there is a convergence here. it is his business. it is your business. it is a personal choice. it is your decision. not only a decision of yours but also the responsibility for that decision and the health consequences that come along with it. that is what people say outside of the courtroom. the washington post, i only bring this up because mr. cox was a distributor for the post at the time. you recall that was one of the jobs he held during that time. front page, next day, washington post, cigarette smoking cited as main cause of deadly lung cancer. now, there is been a lot of discussion in this case about circumstantial evidence, about advertising and debate about things the public knew. now, here's something that we can place in his hands. he was a distributor for the washington post so we know this is probably something he handled countless times the next day. he became so well-known that you heard very soon, very soon after the report the public was so saturated with the knowledge about the danger that the media switched the coverage how to quit, how to quit. instead of trying to warn people because everybody heard, the media switched to how to quit. in fact, dr. cummings told us, and, in fact, the level of awareness really had not gone up much since 1964 because the fact of the matter is that by 1964 almost everybody heard it. they had heard it, yeah, about 47 years ago. in 1966 the first warning label went on. there is been a lot of talk in this case sort of about minimizing. there is been a lot of attempt to try to minimize the importance of this warning label. the suggestion that the use of the word "may", somehow resulted in nobody understanding that smoking was dangerous and nobody responded to the message. but look at what - look at what the information was outside of litigation. first you heard this from dr. michel yesterday. in the same year that the label went on, well over ninety percent of both male and female smokers knew that the label was on the side of the packs. new that the label was on the side of the packs. mr. cox is smoking. is there any chance he didnt know? well, what about this claim that the label was too weal, it was too watered down, it did not have any influence. look at what dr. henningfield told us. when the label went on the packs in 1966, millions and millions of people quit smoking, right? answer: yes. that was the effect of the label from their own witness. people who were concerned about the health risks had a personal choice to make as to whether to quit or whether to continue. millions and millions of people quit. you have heard that mr. cox's brother, kenny cox, was one of those people who quit after the warnings went on. you have also heard that kenny cox is alive and well today, approximately at the age of 75 years old because that is the choice that he made. dr. henningfield, between 1966 and 1970 about 13 million people in this country quit smoking, right? heaviest period of quitting smoking in the history of the united states, right? was the label really ineffective? did nobody know that smoking was dangerous? people quit at a higher rate then than they do now. now, let us personalize this now. let us ask ourselves very carefully and respectfully, whether the dangers of smoking were known to the cox family. y'all got to watch mrs. cox's testimony. you recall that this was what she told us. the question was: yes, ma'am, is that a warning you remember? answer: that is a warning, yes. question: that was on there when you began buying the packages? answer: yes. and you saw that warning? answer: yes. did you go home and talk to your husband about that warning? answer: no. is this a secret in the cox family? because remember the question we are trying to get, i showed you the instruction, the question we are trying to get at, were the dangers of smoking unknown to mr. cox. because that is what the plaintiffs have to prove in order for the concealment to be a legal cause. that is why the instructions are so important because it helps focus you on what to look for in the evidence. mr. cox was smoking a lot. i cannot  the evidence is very -- we have not spent a whole lot of time disputing whether it was one pack or two or three and when that transition spent because the bottom line is that regardless of how much he was smoking when, every time he picked up a pack of cigarettes since 1966, he was picking up a pack with a warning on the side of the packages. if he was a pack-a-day smoker, it would be 7,000 times a year; two packs, 14; three packs, 22. did he see it every time? of course not. i'm not suggesting that. but did he see it? is there any chance that this gentleman did not know that the cigarettes he was smoking had a warning on the side of the packages? again, let us go back, rather than battling about the polls and taking things out of context and looking at different competing snippets, let us go back and look what the public health scientists on the ground of the day were saying. dr. daniel horn, united states national clearinghouse on smoking and health: you could stand on the rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. several times its been suggested to you that you would have to live under a rock not to be exposed to cigarette advertising. like i said in opening, you would have to live under a rock at the bottom of a cave not to have heard that smoking was dangerous during these years. do not take my word. take the director of the united states national clearinghouse on smoking and health. but we do not have to. we do not have to rely on generic evidence. we do not have to draw inferences because we have specific personalized evidence from his family. his daughter laura came and talked to y'all. you remember what she said? now, ms. gullett, throughout your life you told your father that smoking was bad for him, did not you? answer: yes, i did. and from the time that you were big enough to know that your father was smoking you would tell him that smoking was bad for him, right? answer: yes. and you thought, he knows that smoking is bad for him, he just does not want to hear it, right? answer: correct. i'm not being critical of mr. cox in his decisions. but the point is that plaintiffs are trying to prove to you that the dangers of smoking were unknown to him. his own daughter's testimony completely refutes that claim. 1970 we had another surgeon general warning label go on and look at what else laura told us. now, one of the warnings that you talked --that we talked, other lawyers from reynolds talked to you before about was the warning when you recall that said, warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. you remember that specific warning, do not you? answer: yes. and, in fact, that is a warning that you remember talking specifically to your father about? answer: yes. and when you did, he gave you the deaf ear? answer: correct. now, she did not say he disputed it. she did not said, oh, i've heard contrary information from tobacco companies. he did not say, i'm not certain that is true. he did not say, there is a different perspective out there. he did not say, i've been hearing the debate about this. he turned a deaf ear because it was nothing he had not been hearing for decades already. dr. burns, again, rather than debate, debate, debate what all those polls and everything mean, let us look at what dr. burns told us. dr. burns, more americans knew that cigarette smoking was a danger to them than knew the name of the president of the united states? that is a statement you made in 1975, correct? answer: it certainly is. that is my version of the statement that dr. horn made. was this a secret? was this - this was decades before the tobacco company documents h been released. did anybody need tobacco company documents to know that smoking was dangerous? there was this whole issue, well, maybe people heard but they did not know. they had not personalized the warning. lots of discussion by the plaintiffs witnesses about it. we cut through all that discussion, through all that cloud that had been placed in this courtroom with this question and answer right here. dr. burns, 95 percent of smokers are thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking and ninety percent of them realize their own health could be affected. that is a statement attributed to you, dr. burns, correct? it is a statement that is contributed to me. i said it and it reflects the survey responses that were available at the time. not only people heard, they personalized it. they knew it. dr. henningfield told you, and what were people doing with the information. there was this claim you have heard over and over again, yeah, they have heard it but the actions of the tobacco company caused people not to quit. it was a stumbling block that prevented people from quitting. dr. henningfield told you that among the men that started smoking around the time that mr. cox began smoking in the --1 should say, who were born in the same timeframe as mr. cox that sixty percent of them had quit before mr. cox ever made the quit attempt. another very personalized warning to mr. cox got, mrs. cox told us that when his brother loren died from lung cancer that she had this discussion with respect to loren's wife and she told you she knew it was cigarettes that caused his lung cancer, did not she? yes, she did. and you went back and told your husband? yes. what loren's wife had told you, right? answer: yes. and your husband, mr. cox, said loren knows it and he is going to continue to smoke. that is because that was mr. cox attitude. no secret to him. these were not facts unknown to him. you have heard, this is sort of a summary to show you that what is going on is when all this information is coming out, when people are learning about the dangers of smoking they quit and they quit by the millions. in the interest of time, i'm not going to walk through all this right now, but basically i've highlighted for you some of these key things we have just learned about when the dangers of smoking were known, and what you see is that the quitting tracks that. people heard. people quit. tobacco companies were no stumbling block to that. the court: jeff, if you are at a breaking point, what i'd like to do is take a short break. mr. furr: sure. the court: ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take a short break a little earlier today for about five minutes. and when you come back we should be able to conclude the arguments this afternoon. again, i remind you, do not form any opinions about the case, do not discuss the case. we will see you back shortly. [#deleted recess#] (the jury resumed its seat in the jury box and the following proceedings were held:) the bailiff: the entire jury is present, your honor. the court: all right. thank you so much. everybody please have a seat. we will complete with mr. furr's closing argument. go ahead, mr. furr. mr. furr: i appreciate it, your honor. the court: yes, sir. mr. furr: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, when we broke - when we broke, we were talking about plaintiffs claims that concealment of information and conspiracy to conceal information had been the legal cause of mr. cox's death. and we looked at the instructions, and what we were focusing on was whether or not information about the dangers of smoking were known to mr. cox. because as you saw under the legal cause instruction, if it was known to mr. cox, it cannot be a legal cause. so i just want to summarize what the evidence is showing. did concealment - did concealment of r.j. reynolds prevent the public health community from warning people about the dangers of smoking? no. you saw the evidence. did concealment of r.j. reynolds prevent the media and public from warning people about the dangers of smoking? no. did concealment of r.j. reynolds prevent roland cox's family from knowing the smoking was dangerous? the answer is no. did concealment of r.j. reynolds prevent roland cox from knowing -- roland cox from knowing that smoking was dangerous? the answer is no. did he quit when he was warned about the risks of smoking? the answer no. were the risks of smoking known or knowable to roland cox? and the answer to that, ladies and gentlemen, is yes. i want to go back. alecia, if i hit this left arrow, can i get it to go backwards? i'll try. i want to go back. i'm taking a big risk here. i want to go back to something because i want to go back to what i think is the most compelling evidence in this case about whether mr. cox knew that smoking was dangerous. because probably the way -- the most compelling influence on what we all know is the people we spend the most time with. so let us look at what the people that mr. cox really spent his time with knew. this is where we talked about his information where these were the people that he lived with, socialized with and talked with. his brother fred, who was never a regular smoker because he knew it was dangerous growing up, and he read in 1954 that smokers were getting lung cancer -- fred told you that in 1954 younger brother fred read that smokers were getting lung cancer. no secret. kenny quit smoking in 1965 following the surgeon general's report. no coincidence. laura cox told us she hated smoking and repeatedly warned her father from the '60s to the '80s and begged him to quit, even talked with him about the warning labels. of course mrs. cox knew about the warnings back in 1960s, as she actually quit in 1977 herself. so we talked about this chart. ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiff has failed to prove the concealment of information about the dangers of smoking was a legal cause of mr. cox's death. so i would respectfully suggest -- and jeff, could i have the elmo? thank you. i would respectfully suggest that when you get to questions 4 and 5 on the verdict form, you will see that question 4 is was the concealment of r.j. reynolds tobacco company, american, brown & williamson or omission of material information about health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes both a legal cause of mr. cox's death? the concealment question, that the evidence indicates that the verdict should be no. the next question is was there a conspiracy to conceal. what the answer should be with respect to conspiracy to conceal, and you saw it is the same legal principle, whether it was known to him. and i respectfully suggest, ladies and gentlemen, that your answer should be no on that question also, because he knew. the dangers of smoking simply were not unknown to mr. cox. thank you, jeff. let me go back to the --1 want to talk about each one of the legal claims. because you are not here to decide generalized issues about what you would like or do not like or what you think happened. there are specific legal claims and specific legal rules that we have to follow. the next claim that i want to talk to you about is the negligence claim. i believe you are going to see that the evidence has demonstrated that the plaintiff failed to prove that the negligence of r.j. reynolds was a legal cause of mr. cox's death. remind us again what the plaintiffs had to do in this case was take the engle findings and through evidence and facts and under the instructions they had to link those findings to mr. cox. so let us look at other evidence with respect to his conduct and whether or not the plaintiffs have linked that to mr. coxs illness and death. first, you heard from the beginning that the plaintiffs case was circumstantial. circumstantial evidence means drawing inferences from other facts. it is a permissible way under the law to prove things. but what you are going to see is the reason the plaintiffs had to rely on circumstantial evidence is because all the direct evidence is inconsistent with their litigation circumstances here. plaintiffs circumstantial case can be summed up like this. r.j. reynolds advertised and made public statements about smoking. mr. cox was in the environment where these advertisements and public statements were, and mr. cox smoked; therefore, he must have been wrongly influenced by those statements and advertisements in a negligent way that caused him to smoke. that is their circumstantial case. but what does the direct evidence show us on all these types of issues? the direct evidence is -- is actually that mr. cox really was not influenced in any way by advertising. mr. cox never so much as tried another brand. they tell you he was bombarded throughout his life with the wallpaper effect of advertising. there is zero evidence he ever tried another brand. when everybody else was switching to filters and to light cigarettes, he never even tried those cigarettes. mr. cox - okay. this is a very, very revealing fact. this is direct evidence of what mr. cox knew. mr. cox himself warned his daughter early on that smoking is addictive and unhealthy, a bad, nasty habit to try to quit. that is what he told his daughter. now, if he had been confused about something the tobacco companies were saying, how could he have told his daughter that? the direct evidence is that mr. cox smoked because he wanted to smoke and he did not want to quit. his family members told us he enjoyed smoking. mrs. cox told you what mr. cox said was smoking was his business. and mr. cox never told anyone -- no evidence that mr. cox ever told anyone that he thought that smoking was safe. this is the direct evidence. it is not circumstantial evidence. you might remember, this was, let us say, an unusual piece of testimony from dr. burns. dr. burns was asked: "what did he tell his wife, doctor?" answer: "he told his wife that he never thought that the cigarettes were going to hurt him. he did not think they were going to hurt him." that is what dr. burns's said. well, in order for mr. cox to have told mrs. cox that, they would have had to discuss whether smoking was dangerous or not. let us look at what the actual factual evidence in this case was. "in fact, you never heard your father say that smoking was not bad for him, did you? the answer to that is: "correct." question: "and you never heard your father say that he did not think smoking would cause him any problems?" answer: 'that is correct." and the most important piece of evidence. mrs. cox was asked first: "you never talked to your husband about whether there could be health hazards related to smoking, did you?" answer: "no, i did not." so where did dr. burns come up with this statement? where did he come up with it from? not intentionally. i'm not suggesting that dr. burns intentionally lied. no way am i suggesting that. maybe -- most likely in his head he just had it confused with another case. maybe he just thought - he was thinking about some other case and they all ran together in his mind when he comes to give generic testimony. because you saw he could not remember any of the facts when mr. bassett was cross-examining him. and then he came up with this. i do not know any other explanation. i think we should give him the benefit of the doubt and say he just got it mixed up with some other case. was advertising  was reynolds advertising a legal cause of from cox's death? well, that is the theory based on the plaintiffs circumstantial case, but here was the direct evidence. no one knows when he actually began smoking. you remember all this discussion about smoking as a teenager when he still lived at home before he went to the navy, but every time we boil it down and got to the bottom of the matter, no one had ever seen him smoke. no one had ever seen him smoke as a teenager. second, no one knows why mr. cox began smoking. plaintiffs circumstantial case is, well, it must have been because of the advertising. really? his dad was a longtime smoker of roll-your-owns. roll-your-owns. in fact, you were told that he was buying tobacco and using a paper bag to rip up to use for paper to roll-your-owns. is advertising the only reason people begin smoking? we are going to look at that more closely, but in his owri family that is not what was going on. second - third, no one knows what type of cigarettes he began smoking. even if he smoked as a teenager, he may. no one knows. none of us can possibly know for sure. we know there is no direct evidence of it, but none of us can know. we were not there and none of the fact witnesses were there. but if he was, no one knows what type of cigarettes he was smoking. there is simply no evidence that his choice to begin or continue smoking was influenced by r.j. reynolds. there is no direct evidence. so, of course, the plaintiffs litigation theory is to come in here and try to convince you with the merits of their case with circumstantial evidence. that is what you try to do when you do not have any direct evidence. is advertising why people begin smoking? is that how it works? let us look at what the plaintiffs experts told you. dr. cummings: "the most important factor in whether a person smokes is whether his friends or family smoke." we went a little bit deeper on this subject with dr. henningfield. we said, "hey, we have heard that friends and family are the key thing. how important are they?" and he said, "they are so important they are in a category by themselves"; not advertising, whether your friends and family smoke. let us look at the poll on this issue. because dr. michel told you yesterday that this very issue as to why people began smoking had been examined i polls. "roper poll, 1970, most important factors why people smoke: friends and family," not advertising. 51 percent of people polled reported they began smoking because of schoolmates and friends. twenty percent because of relatives smoking. 1 percent, 1 percent because of the cigarette advertising. but the plaintiffs generic case, if you accept - if you accepted it, it would result in you concluding that everybody that ever began smoking was starting because of advertising. and yet the direct -- the direct evidence is that it was actually 1 percent. we asked every single fact witness and every single expert witness these questions because we wanted to know, "is there evidence linking the actions of the tobacco companies to mr." - i should say, "is there evidence linking negligent actions of the tobacco companies to mr. cox's injury and death?" every witness was asked, "any evidence he saw the frank statement?" "no." "ctr statements? "no." "tirc?" "no." 'tobacco institute, press releases, industry white papers, industry interviews or statements, tobacco company statements about smoking and health, tobacco company statements about smoking?" and it gives you -- and the answer from every fact witness and expert witness was, no, there is no evidence that any of that happened with respect to mr. cox. they have the wrong plaintiff. they just have the wrong plaintiff. you can imagine a scenario where someone will testify, "you know, i was uncertain about the dangers of smoking. i saw the tobacco company debating it. i thought they must know more about it because they were the manufacturer, so i relied on what they said." that is possible testimony. we would have a different case if we had a smoker like that. that is not what we have. we have mr. cox. he is just the wrong smoker for the case. mr. bassett: ninety minutes, jeff. mr. furr: thank you very much. the 1970 roper poll, let us -- i'm going to take you to circumstantial evidence head on. because it asks you to draw inferences that the tobacco companies were being a stumbling block preventing people from knowing that smoking was dangerous. in 1970 the roper poll asked who makes - asked the public who they find to be the most reliable source of information on smoking and health. 62 percent of the public said organizations like the american cancer society. 47 percent said organizations like the american medical association. percent said organizations like the tobacco companies. but if you except plaintiffs circumstantial case, you would find that everybody was influenced by statements by the tobacco company. that is why direct evidence is so much more powerful when you are trying to decide issues like this. dr. cummings: "sure, i mean, you talked about the actions of the defendants providing a psychological crutch to people, right?" the answer to that is: "right." see, we can hide in the - when they came up with this psychological crutch, we did not run and hide and pretend to stick our head in the sand, pretend like that document did not exist. we tried to find out what it means. what it means not with respect to what somebody wrote in a crummy, stupid, cruddy document, but what it actually meant, for what was happening in society. dr. cummings, question: "but the surgeon general's report, notwithstanding that psychological crutch, 30 million people quit during those 15 years?" answer: "that is right." nobody was listening to the tobacco companies. nobody was making decisions based on the tobacco companies. could i have the elmo, please? ladies and gentlemen, i suggest that, once again, there is simply been a complete and utter failure. the plaintiffs just have not offered you-all the evidence and the facts and the law that they need to establish that r.j. reynolds' negligence was a legal cause of mr. cox's death. and so when you get to question number 2 on your verdict form, if you get there, i suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the right answer for question number 2, based on the facts and the law and the evidence, not speculation, not conjecture, not lawyer rhetoric, the facts and law and evidence, that the right answer is no. could i have the computer again? okay. i want to turn now to discussing claims about cigarette design, claims about cigarette design. dr. henningfield was asked: "back to the unfiltered pall mall cigarettes, sir, during the years that mr. cox smoked unfiltered pall mall cigarettes, there was no safer cigarette product on the market, was there?" answer: "none that i'm aware of." they have got the wrong product. they have got the wrong product. here's what dr. henning- - dr. henningfield admitted in every one of these things that roll-your-own cigarettes with - with natural -with natural tobacco are just as dangerous and addictive as unfiltered pall malls. additive-free cigarettes are not safer or less addictive, arid cigarettes cannot be made safe. but we went further. you know, dr. henningfield came in and testified about the nature of tobacco and about the nature of cigarette smoke and about all the properties of tobacco and about additives and design attributes and everything, and we tried to sort this out. what does it mean for this case? because this is not a case about generic cigarettes. it is a case about unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. he told us that unfiltered pall mall cigarettes were no different than natural tobacco on all these issues. both contain irritants. both contain carcinogens. both contain ammonia. both contain nicotine. both contain thousands of chemicals. both cause cancer. both are addictive. and both are dangerous. they have got the wrong cigarette. and i said, "dr. henningfield, people who smoke roll-your-own tend to be very highly addicted, right?" answer: "yes." "and greater overall cancer rates, right?" answer: "yes." you have heard over and over from the plaintiffs that the way the cigarette manufacturers changed the design of cigarettes made them more addictive and more dangerous. and they hypothesized and speculated about all kinds of different design attributes and how that might have changed the way the product we use to make it more dangerous and more addictive. but look at what dr. henningfield tells us. roll your own, smokers of roll-your-owns can be very highly addicted. and they do not just have the same cancer rates; they have greater overall cancer rates. skip this one. okay. this is something i need to address. you recall when dr. henningfield first took the stand he was asked, "i want you to assume the defense lawyer made a statement in opening statement that the tar and nicotine levels of pall mall cigarettes had been reduced by fifty percent." and dr. henningfield said, "very misleading statement." let us be candid. he was talking about my opening statement. and he labeled it as very misleading. so when i began his cross-examination, here's what i asked him: "now, we are going to talk about whether you think it was misleading or not, but let us talk about whether that is factually accurate. as measured by the ftc machine, the tar and nicotine levels of unfiltered pall mall cigarettes decreased by about fifty percent during the years mr. cox was smoking them, correct, sir?" answer: "that is correct." let us take it a step further. dr. henningfield came in here, talked about all kinds of design attributes, but they were generic. they did not relate to the cigarette at issue in this case. he talked to you about filters, ventilation holes, overwrap, inhalability. he told you that, first, he did not have any evidence on any of these issues with respect to unfiltered pall mall. and, of course, filters, ventilation holes, overwrap, all those deal with cigarettes to which a filter had been put on the brand. so he was talking about design attributes entirely different from brands other than unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. that is why this case took so long. they would throw that kind of stuff out, and we would have to come up there and unravel it and try to get to the bottom of the truth, the truth about these issues, and what they mean for the brand at issue in this case. same type of situation. he came to testify in this case without researching the design of unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. he talked about all these things, smoke particle size, paper porosity, burn accelerants, expanded tobacco, reconstituted tobacco and ph level. and i asked him two types of questions. i said, "sir, do these design attributes make cigarettes more addictive?" the answer was: "no." second, "are you telling the jury what the design of the pall mall unfiltered cigarettes was with respect to these design attributes?" answer: "no." what are we doing spending hours talking about design attributes of other cigarettes that even he cannot - that he cannot even testify make cigarettes more addictive? that is why the case took so long. and then here's the part - very technical, but i want to bring this to your attention, remind you of what happened. i asked dr. henningfield about the free nicotine and ph level in unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. and he came up with some explanation, "no, i do not know any of that -- thing about that because the tobacco companies will not give it to me." and then we got out the very document that he had used on direct examination, and we turned to this graph. he explained to us that the ph of cigarettes, if it is below 6.0, that that puts the ph below the kick line, is what he called it, below the place where you have free nicotine. and we looked back in the graph, back in the document that he used, and the very document showed that unfiltered pall mall cigarettes when being tested always had a ph below 6.0, below the kick line. they have got the wrong brand. they have got the wrong brand. but, moreover, i said, "did you know this data was in that document?" and his answer was: "yes." now, why would they come in here and talk to you about a design attribute that has nothing to do with the brand at issue and use a document to try to prove this up to you when they know, when their witness knew, that if you look back in the document, that it did not apply to mr. cox's brand of cigarette? the reason is because they had the wrong brand. they have got the wrong brand. he was putting on his generic evidence perhaps without even a thought as to what this document actually proved with respect to unfiltered pall mall cigarettes. we talked about additives a lot. the reason we talked about it a lot is we are all very sensitive -in our world today we are very sensitive to the concept of additives. we are all concerned about additives in our food supply, in our water supply, things that we do and, you know, bottles that we use to feed our children with. we are all very sensitive to those issues, so we spend a bunch of time on it. but here's what came out of it. additives do not make cigarettes more dangerous. they do not make them more addictive. they do not cause cancer. the additives in unfiltered pall mall cigarettes did not make them more addictive. that was dr. henningfield's testimony. the public health community had recommended then - and then you might remember i cross-examined him. i said, "hey, the tobacco companies have been required to give a list of additives to the department of health & human services since 1984. dhhs was in turn responsible for looking at that list and telling congress if any of these additives were the problem with cigarettes." and i said, "is not it true, sir, that congress came back and said, 'hey, you are not giving us any information about the additives,' and the director of the department of health and human services said, 'it is not the additives; it is the tobacco that is the problem'?" so why did we spend so much time in this case on that? okay. you have heard - you have heard again this morning --1 did not think we would hear it after the evidence, but you heard it again. not like the way you heard it in opening, but again you heard that the litigation theory of the plaintiff is that you should make - you should award mrs. cox millions of dollars to make the tobacco companies take the levels of nicotine down below the addiction threshold, because that is what makes cigarettes safer. that is their litigation theory. let us look at what the evidence is. dr. henningfield: "and would not you agree that even today there is no consensus as to the best way to make cigarettes safer?" answer: "yes, i would agree with that." he did not support their theory. dr. henningfield: "okay. all options should be considered, correct, sir? that is what you said, all options?" answer: "yeah." "increasing nicotine, decreasing nicotine, all things that should be considered, right?" answer: "yes." look at where we are, ladies and gentlemen. they want you to find that r.j. reynolds should be punished to make them take nicotine levels below the addiction threshold in their cigarettes, and their own paid expert says that one of the options that should be considered is increasing nicotine levels. i asked him: "sir, is not it true today -- here we are in the year 2011  you cannot say that a nicotine reduction approach is the most acceptable way of making cigarettes safer?" answer: "no, its more complicated than that, which is why it is being studied by the national cancer institute and the national institute on drug abuse." "it is being studied today whether or not this is the right way to go, right, sir?" answer: "yes." it is a scientific question, not in the hands of the tobacco companies, in the hands of the fda and public health organizations, trying to find the right way to go. and yet you are being asked in this case to find the tobacco companies should be punished for not doing something that the public health community and the fda is not ready to conclude is the right way to go. dr. cummings came in and said it is the right way to go now. you might recall in a year's time --i'm not going to go through all this --1 got out his old deposition, which was his testimony in another case, in which he said he could not recommend that decrease in nicotine was the way to go, and in fact maybe increasing nicotine was the way to go. testimony changes, depending on what case he is in. dr. bums: "dr. bums, that was a long answer. let me just ask it this way. you would not make a public policy recommendation at this time that cigarettes contain no nicotine?" answer: "i would not make a public policy recommendation for governmental action at this point in time that cigarettes contain no nicotine." their own witness tells you he cannot recommend that from a public health perspective, but they want us punished for failure to warn. can i have the elmo, please? ladies and gentlemen, based on all the evidence you heard and on the admissions that the plaintiffs own experts have made in this case, i'd respectfully suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that when you get to question 3, that question being, "were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by rj. reynolds company, american tobacco company or brown & williamson tobacco company a legal cause of roland cox's death," respectfully, ladies and gentlemen, the answer should be no. they have got the wrong brand. the case they put on to try to convince you that the answer here should be yes does not even match the brand mr. cox smoked. it took us a while. i hope we did not bore you to death with all that cross-examination on cigarette design and those technical issues, but we had to do it to bring the truth to you. because the truth does matter. the evidence matters. the facts matter. the truth matters. and that is the truth about cigarette design. could i go back? thank you. ladies and gentlemen, i recognize, of course, that you may not -- that you may find differently, that you may find that there was some liability in this case. so it is my obligation to address the next couple topics with you. one of those is the allocation of fault for mr. cox's injuries. you i recognized may get to the point where you have to decide how to allocate fault in this case, so i need to talk to you about that concept. again, i want to do it from the perspective of what the plaintiffs own witnesses have told you. but first - i'm not going to walk through the instructions. you will see that. very important legal principle to understand, the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. cox's death. what does that mean? that means, for example, if you would find that concealment was not a legal cause of his death, if you put an x on the "no" box for concealment, then when you get to allocation of fault, you should not allocate any fault for concealment. that is what that means, that the fault has to be related to the theories of liability that you found the company to be responsible on. okay. so what was the evidence on this issue? dr. cummings: "and i asked you is not it true, dr. cummings, that your view is that a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit. and your answer was yes, a person has to make the choice to quit, correct?" his answer was, "correct." this was one of those instances where he did not want to admit this like he had in other cases. we had to impeach him to get him to admit it. dr. cummings told you the choice to quit is one hundred percent in control of the smoker. not a little bit. not a small bit like is being suggested to you by the plaintiffs, that you allocate some small fault. dr. cummings told you it is one hundred percent responsibility of the smoker. here was his testimony: "you were asked if the choice to quit smoking is something that is one hundred percent in the control of the smoker, right, dr. cummings? "answer - your answer was: 'yeah. i mean, you have got to want to quit, right?' "question: 'no one can make that decision for the smoker?' "'that is right.'" "that is the questions you were asked and the answers you gave, right, sir? "yes." i had to drag it out of him with a prior transcript, but ultimately he admitted the choice of whether to try to quit or not is one hundred percent in the control of the smoker. dr. burns: "and you would agree that just because someone is addicted to nicotine does not relieve that person of the responsibility for their own behavior, does it?" answer: "that is correct. they still -- they remain responsible for their own behavior." "and you have testified many times that smokers, including addicted smokers, are responsible for their smoking behavior, right, sir?" answer: 'that is correct." the plaintiffs whole theory in this case has been mr. cox has fault, but because he was addicted he is not completely at fault. look at what their witness says. addiction does not relieve the smoker from responsibility. that is the admission from dr. burns, a witness who is been paid $2 million to testify on behalf of plaintiffs against tobacco companies. you have heard this morning that plaintiff -well, actually youve heard throughout the case, from the beginning of jury selection on. you were told that plaintiffs admit that mr. cox was negligent in his efforts to quit smoking and was a legal cause of his own death. that is what you were told. i now want to talk to you about what does that mean, to admit that mr. cox was a legal cause of his own death? what would be the necessary facts for that to be the case such that plaintiff was forced to admit that? well, first, we looked at these instructions. number 1, he could have quit smoking permanently prior to when he did. admitted. that had he quit smoking prior to his lung cancer diagnosis, the risk of lung cancer would have decreased. let us keep going on. what does it mean? before you would admit that the plaintiff was a legal cause of his own death, you have to admit that he knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke. if he did not know that smoking was dangerous, would you ever admit that he was at fault? how could he be at fault for not trying to quit if he did not know that smoking was dangerous? and although they do not say it this way, that is what that admission has to mean. he had to have known it was dangerous or they would never have admitted he was at fault. second, he had to have the ability to quit smoking earlier. we just saw the admission. of course that is the case. you would never say -- if you were the plaintiff, you would never admit to be at fault for not doing something that was impossible for you to do. so you are necessarily admitting that you could have quit, because how would -- why would you accept fault for something that was impossible for you to do? you had to have known it and you had to have been able to do it and it had to have been able to make a difference. that is the third factor here. he had to have had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death. if he could not quit smoking at a time that would have made a difference, you would not admit fault. it is that simple. those -- when the plaintiffs tell you that they admit some fault, they are telling you he knew, he could have quit, and he could have prevented his own death. those are the necessary parts of that admission. when you sort through it, think about, "what does it mean?" this is what it has to mean. why is it important to quit? dr. burns told you that quitting smoking has major, immediate health benefits for all smokers; that a middle-aged smoker who quits can avoid ninety percent of the risks related to smoking; and that it is never too late to quit smoking. the bottom line is plaintiffs admitted that mr. cox could have quit smoking sooner and could have prevented his own death. in fact - skip over this, alecia. let us look at what dr. - we asked dr. burns these very questions. because it is a hard fact. it is a hard fact. you know that we meant no disrespect to mr. cox in any way for his decision-making. it is a hard fact. but we had to ask his expert these questions. dr. burns: "i want you to assume that roland cox had quit smoking in 1975. if he had quit in 1975, you would say there is a reasonable degree of medical probability that he would not have developed lung cancer when he did in 1991, correct, sir?" answer: "i believe my complete answer is that while it is not possible to know with certainty what would happen for any single individual, if his risks behaved the way the population risks behave, and there is every reason to expect that they would, then to a reasonable degree of medical certainty he would not have developed his lung cancer at the time he did had he quit 20 years earlier." the language is a little dense, but when you unpack it, dr. burns is admitting that had mr. cox quit in 1975, when millions of other smokers were quitting, around the time when his wife was quitting, when his daughter laura was asking him to quit all the time, when his daughter laura was showing him the dangers, when the public was being bombarded with information about the dangers of smoking, he would have prevented his own death. mrs. cox's testimony: "ma'am, if you would ask your husband to quit, he would say, 'that is my business. what i do is my business'; is that correct?" answer: "that is the type of person he was." "ma'am, you do not think there is anything that anyone could have said to mr. cox to get him to quit, do you?" answer: "no, i do not." this is a vital, critical evidence for you to consider if you get to this question of fault allocation, because the evidence is that mr. cox's choices are the only legal cause of his death. when you sort through the evidence, the evidence is very clear that there is nothing rj. reynolds could have done that would have prevented mr. cox's death. you have heard over and over they cannot be made safe, they cannot be made -cigarettes cannot be made noncancerous. and his wife just admitted there is nothing that could have been said to him to cause him to quit. theres nothing rj. reynolds could have done. the witnesses have told you that only mr. cox had the ability to prevent his death, that he had to make the decision about whether to quit or not, one hundred percent in his control whether to try to make a quit attempt, that he is one hundred percent responsible for his choices. and i want to suggest to you that this admission of fault is actually a litigation tactic to try to get you to compromise. the plaintiffs have stated over and over and over, "we accept fault; they will not accept any responsibility. it is a tactic to try to get you to compromise. they are hoping you will find 50/50 or something like that. that is what their hope is. but as a matter of logic, when you take their admission and think about what it means, that he knew, that he could have quit and he could have prevented his death, and there is nothing anybody could have said to prevent him from smoking, and the product cannot be made safe, then the fault is one hundred percent in this case. if he died from a smoking-related disease caused by addiction to nicotine, i respectfully suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the fault was one hundred percent mr. cox's. and so if you get to question 7 and you are asked to allocate fault, i suggest, ladies and gentlemen, although plaintiffs are hoping that you will go 50/50, that is why they made this admission, to try to get you to compromise, i'd suggest that based on the evidence and the facts and the law that the right answer here is 100 and zero. and there is something i need to address with you with respect to this issue. you were asked a lot of questions during jury selection about whether the parties started out equal. but then we all very carefully explained to you that with respect to this comparative fault question, that the parties do not start out equal. i mean, there is a real temptation - because we are all fair-minded people, there is a real temptation to say, "okay, let us start here 50/50 and see whether we need to make any adjustments." but that is not where we are here. because, number one, mr. cox has already admitted fault. that is already out there. second, mr. cox has to prove that the plaintiffs - that the defendants were at fault. there is no assumption the defendants were fifty percent at fault. mr. cox has to prove every single percentage point of fault that should be allocated to the defense. you simply do not start out with 50/50 on this one. you start out with his admission of fault up here, the defendants down here, and the plaintiffs have to, through their proof, prove to you every single percentage point. that is the task you have before you, and that is the plaintiffs burden of proof. well, i want to talk to you about - may i inquire where i am, your honor, as to time? the court: you are - hang on one second. you have almost 30 minutes. mr. furr: thank you, sir. the court: 33 minutes, i believe. mr. furr: okay. another task you have before you is this award of damages. if you get to this question, you have to decide how much - what the appropriate amount of damages under the law should be. so i want to look at the instructions with you a little bit and give you a few things that i suggest you might want to think about if you get to this question of damages. could i have the elmo? the first thing i suggest, your starting point on damages, is to take a look at instruction number 13, which is on page 16 of the verdict form. and there you get some guidance that is very critical for you to have in mind as you address this issue. "any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence." fair and just in light of the evidence. so let us take that and take a look at a couple things. first, i think it is very important - you will see this in your verdict form and instructions -it is very important to understand what is not being requested in this case. first, the plaintiff is not asking for damages related to lost wages. the plaintiff is not asking for damages related to medical bills. the plaintiff is not asking for expenses such as funeral expenses. and it is really important to understand that the plaintiff is not asking for damages related to the pain and suffering for mr. cox - of mr. cox. none of that is a component of the damages in this case. you will see the damages relate to mrs. cox's loss. i'm not belittling her loss in any way, but it is important to understand really what it is you are being asked to evaluate in this case. okay. i do not really know how to say this now, but something odd happened this morning when the plaintiff was talking to you about the amount of damages. first the plaintiff said to you, "you have got to award $10 million." and within the next minute he told you, "oh, but $5 million will be fine." "award $10 million." "oh, five will be fine, too." what is going on with that? it is a litigation tactic. asking for, respectfully, an outrageous sum that has no - no basis in the evidence. appearing to compromise by cutting it in half. mr. mitnik: judge, i hate to interrupt closing argument, but i do think at this point i've had enough. may i approach? the court: okay. you can stand up and stretch your legs. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. furr: may i proceed, your honor? the court: yes, sir. mr. furr: ladies and gentlemen, we were talking about the first request made for 10 million and then for 5 million, both huge sums of money that had no basis in the evidence in an effort to get you thinking in those terms as opposed to looking at what damages would be fair and just in light of the evidence. i'd suggest to you a couple more points on damages. first, this effort to get you thinking in terms of 10 million and 5 million, it is really an effort to inflate their claims by asking you for a huge amount that has no basis in the evidence. second, with all due respect, you are entitled to use your common sense, your reason and common sense. the instructions tell you that you can do that. i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that your common sense tells you that even if you determine to compensate mrs. cox for her loss, that no one should be made a millionaire because their spouse chose to smoke a product they knew was dangerous for over 30 years without ever attempting to quit using the product. i'm not going to suggest a number to you when you get here. use your reason. use your common sense. but i do want you to think for just a moment about how it is we got here when you are faced with the question of the plaintiffs request for 10 million or $5 million. so let us just take a look at how we got here. can everybody see that? because it is not just the damage claim that defies common sense, with all due respect, ladies and gentlemen. let us really look at how we got here. mr. cox was warned from a young age by his family and school that smoking was dangerous and addictive. he chose to start smoking. could have decided to be stop [unintelligible], could have chosen health. he got warnings from his parents - the court reporter: mr. furr, can you repeat that? mr. furr: i'll speak up. the court reporter: i need to see you. mr. furr: is that better? the court reporter: yes. mr. furr: sorry. warnings from his parents. could have chosen to quit. could have chosen health like his brother did, kenny, still with us; fred's still with us. chose to continue smoking. warnings from the media. chose to continue. could have chosen health. stared the consequences of smoking right in the face in what had to be a horribly difficult personal experience as he watched his father die from emphysema. could have chosen health. chose to continue. even told his wife, "you need to help me hide this from my family." surgeon general pack warnings. his brother quitting. distributing that washington post on the day after the surgeon general's report with the warnings about the dangers on the cover. warnings on the packs. warnings from his daughter, over and over and over. his wife quitting. his brother loren, his sister sylvia, watching other family members die. he could have chosen health. at every one of these he had a quitting opportunity. could have chosen health. still he chose to continue smoking, develops lung cancer, and sues rj. reynolds for millions of dollars. you will have to decide whether this is the common-sense way to go about doing things, because i'd suggest that the plaintiffs whole case defies common sense because they have the wrong plaintiff. they just have the wrong plaintiff. last topic, and that is this topic of punitive damages, which i suggest to you is what this whole case has been about from the plaintiffs perspective from the beginning, the opportunity to ask you for tens of million dollars of punitive damages. that is really what this case has been about. the first 60 seconds of the opening statement, that was being discussed. we need to understand things a little bit. first, punitive damages are in addition to compensatory damages. what they are asking you to do is first fully compensate mrs. cox for whatever you think is the fair and just amount, and then they want you to award punitive damages unrelated to her loss on top of that. that is what you are being asked to do. second, you need to understand they can only be awarded to mr. cox's estate. third, that they can only be awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of mr. cox's injury and death. you will see -- mr. mitnik: judge, i hate to interrupt again, but may we approach? [#deleted motion for mistrial#] mr. furr: okay. home stretch. can i have the elmo, please? ladies and gentlemen, we have given you some directions. we talked about this. you will see in instruction 16 that there is an additional claim in this case that you must decide. if you find for the plaintiff against r.j. reynolds tobacco company, you must decide whether, in addition to compensatory damages, punitive damages are warranted as punishment to r.j. reynolds tobacco company and a deterrent to others. so what i want to do is take a broader look at rj. reynolds tobacco company's conduct so that you can decide whether that conduct should be punished and whether punitive damages should be awarded to deter that conduct in the future. now, everything i'm going to talk to you about comes directly from the evidence in this case. first - i'm sorry. i should stay with the elmo. first, you are going to see that you get a special instruction for punitive damages on the burden of proof. it is very important for you to take a look at, respectfully, ladies and gentlemen. and that is instruction number 22 - instruction number 16. if you take a look at page 20, the plaintiffs have a special word of proof when it comes to punitive damages, and that is the following: "in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue." without hesitation. they have to convince you that punitive damages are so warranted you conclude so without any hesitation. let us look at the evidence. they have been talking to you about all the bad things the tobacco companies did. you need to take a look at the good things the tobacco companies did as you decide whether or not they should be punished. they have called ctr a sham and a front and everything else in the world. again, the rhetoric's one thing, but the admissions from plaintiffs witnesses are another thing. plaintiffs witnesses told you that ctr funded $500 million of research, thousands of studies were published. and there was this claim made that, "yeah, they funded stuff that did not have anything to do with smoking and health." i said, "dr. cummings, is not it true that in its reports on smoking and health the surgeon general has cited the ctr-funded research over 600 times?" his answer was yes. they funded nobel prize winners. see, what they do is they go out and fund research - research institutions like university of florida here in gainesville. university of south florida. florida state. miami. these are not tobacco company scientists doing the projects. university research centers make grant applications; the grants get approved and funded. and, remember, all the ctr money, ctr does not have -- it is not a for-profit company. they were being completely funded by the tobacco companies. so when we talk about what ctr was doing, it was r.j. reynolds and brown & williamson and american and the other tobacco companies funding this research through ctr. they kept saying the ctr research was no good, it did not mean anything, it did not show anything, it was part of the concealment. really? look at the research they funded. in 1963, in the american journal of psychiatry, ctr funded a study by nap called "addictive aspects in healthy cigarette smoking." we talked to dr. cummings about this. we did this article, supported in part by a grant by ctr, the authors conclude, "nicotine is an active agent. it appears to have certain addictive qualities. healthy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts. our subjects also showed a compulsion to smoke" - "to continue to smoke in increasing amounts." was this a sham? was it a front? was it being used to hide the dangers of smoking? this came out 25 years before the surgeon general concluded that smoking was an addiction. ctr, with tobacco company money, was funding studies that concluded that heavy cigarette smokers thus appeared to be true addicts. larson, haag and silvette. remember we had some fun with the green monster and the yellow and orange and blue supplements? but it is actually quite a serious business. it is a given, tobacco company money. first american tobacco company, the manufacturer of pall mall cigarettes, then ctr, funded three research scientists, larson, haag and silvette, to pull together in a bibliography all of the research about smoking and health in the published scientific literature. they did such a comprehensive job that when the surgeon general's committee in 1964 began their project, they reached out and got that book and said, "this is so thorough, so comprehensive, we do not even have to look backwards on research. we will just look forward from this to pull together everything." so basically the tobacco companies funded the book that was used to conclude that smoking causes lung cancer by the surgeon general in 1964. so did they take their money and run away and go home when that conclusion was reached? no. you heard tobacco companies continued to fund supplements of '69 and '72 and '75. notwithstanding the way that science was being researched, used, they did not take their money and stop funding it. they kept funding it. they funded it so scientists could put it together and put it out there and let the public decide what they thought. ctr included chapters -- excuse me. larson, haag and silvette had chapters on smoking-related disease and death; cancer, including lung cancer; heart disease; emphysema; carcinogens in smoke; and addiction. larson, haag and silvette was a good thing. the surgeon general, you heard, acknowledged in the 1964 report - in addition to larson, haag and silvette, the surgeon general acknowledged and thanked rj. reynolds, brown & williamson and american tobacco company for making submissions to the surgeon general. you have heard that r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson and american tobacco company tried to make cigarettes safer. they are wanting you to punish them, but you heard they tried to make cigarettes safer. in fact, mr. mitnik told you this morning, "of course they want to take the carcinogens out." he is absolutely right. and his witnesses told you that the companies tried like crazy to decrease the levels of carcinogens in cigarettes. you heard that they implemented design features recommended by the public health community. and you heard that in 1979 and 1981 the surgeon general studied the changes the tobacco companies had made in cigarettes and found that in fact the changes had resulted in cigarettes that produced decreased numbers of cancers and tumors on the backs of mice. and they want us punished for our cigarette design efforts. twg. you have heard this story over and over, but the bottom line is that tobacco companies sent their chief scientists to work with national cancer institute scientists on the twg to try to find a way to make cigarettes safer for ten years. they funded all kinds of research, looking at all kinds of different approaches to make cigarettes safer, but they could not do it. nobody could find a way to make a cigarette safer. but the tobacco companies tried. premier and eclipse. this is a product developed by rj. reynolds. now, they are asking you to punish this company, but r.j.  dr. henningfield admitted that in fact premier and eclipse were safer products, that rjr spent $2 billion trying to develop premier and eclipse, with a new technology, to heat but not burn, with reduced carcinogens. they altered that tar-to-nicotine ratio that you-all have probably heard a little bit too much about during the course of this case. it had decreased biological activity and decreased tumors in skin painting tests. premier failed in the marketplace. did r.j. reynolds quit? no. they brought it back in. they revised it. they developed the eclipse product, which dr. henningfield told you may well be a safer product. they put it back out on the market and it is still out there today. niconovum. dr. henningfield admitted that rj. reynolds' parent purchased a company that manufactures products to help smokers quit. rjr is in the process of introducing these smoking cessation products in the u.s. dr. henningfield admitted that investing in the development of these products was a good thing. so take a step back. they are asking you to punish us and award millions of dollars to mrs. cox, punish us to the jurors, when they are also admitting that we tried to make them safer. and r.j. reynolds in particular now has bought a smoking cessation product company to try to develop products that will help people quit if that is the choice they make and they want to quit. and they want that company punished. finally, this whole issue of deterrence. "you have got to award millions of dollars, and you have got to award punitive damages in this case, because that would deter them. that would cause them to change the way they are designing cigarettes." the fda is responsible for that. you have heard over and over - i'm not going to go through all this again, but you have heard that the fda has authority to regulate the design, manufacture, sale and advertisement of cigarettes, and the fda can regulate the levels of carcinogens, of tar and nicotine in cigarettes, and the fda can regulate what additives are used in cigarettes. the tobacco companies have to go to the fda and ask for permission to make any change to the design of a cigarette that has public health implications or to introduce a new product. what - what does all this mean for the issues in this case? there is nothing left to deter. there is nothing left. this is all under control already. it is all under control. finally, the products have carried warning labels since 1966. reynolds has not disputed the dangers of tobacco for over a decade. and this whole idea of awarding punitive damages has to be tied to the legal theories in this case. is there any chance of concealment? the documents are all public domain. reynolds does not dispute in any way that smoking causes disease. there is no deterrence needed to prevent reynolds from concealing that information. so, ladies and gentlemen, again, i would respectfully submit to you that when you get to this question of whether punitive damages should be awarded, the answer is absolutely dear. under this very high burden the plaintiffs have of clear and convincing evidence, where they have to convince you without hesitation that you should award punitive damages, that the answer is no, and put an end to this case. the instructions tell you if you answer yes, we will come back and have some more evidence and more argument, but the point is the answer here should be no. okay. the court: five minutes. mr. furr: thank you, sir. that is basically it for me. and you probably wish that was it a while ago. i recognize that. but my concern is this: i have to say it all now, because the plaintiff gets to get up here and have rebuttal. and i do not get to respond to that rebuttal. they get the last word. they get the last word. but what i want to do is ask you to watch what happens when they get up here on rebuttal. is it going to be more rhetoric, more insertion of emotion and sympathy into the case, or will the rebuttal talk about the facts and the evidence and the law in this case? and you know how - you are going to hear their rebuttal arguments, and i suspect by now you have been here so long you know how i'll respond to these rebuttal arguments. let me ask you, when they get up here on rebuttal, ask them to prove to you that mr. cox did not know that smoking was dangerous. ask them where the evidence is that mr. cox was unable to quit smoking. ask them where the evidence is that unfiltered pall mall cigarettes were worse than other cigarettes and could have been made safe but the company simply chose not to do so. see whether they try to address those issues or whether they go right back to their generic assault on the tobacco companies, reproving the engle findings. thank you very much for your time.