closing argument mr. mitnik: good morning. before i get started i want to start the way we started the trial out, which is to thank you sincerely on behalf of everybody. really, that is not lip service from any of us. everybody knows how dutiful you have been to this important, responsibility, but everybody knows it comes at a price of each of you. thank you so much. and i think by now it should be clear that while you have given greatly of your time, it is given to a significant case, something that has gravity and importance to it. men like dr. cummings and dr. burns and dr. henningfield that came here to speak to you and share with you information, information that not a lot of folks have seen and heard, information that is important. and this case is important. this case involves roland cox and rose cox. but it also involves, under the law the judge just gave you, the facts and circumstances of this case, an opportunity to do something important, that is, deterrence. to deter not only rj. reynolds, but to also deter others similarly, such as other cigarette companies, to deter them in the form of action here locally by you folks here in gainesville. we have talked a lot in this case about harm to other people, not just to mr. cox. mr. cox is the starting point in the lens as we look at this whole case your eyes through. but we also talk about harm to others and now with the judge's instruction, i can talk about why. because as you heard, on the reprehensibility of their conduct, meaning how bad is what they did. on the -- does it warrant punitive damages through which we then talk about not just punishment but deterrence? does their conduct warrant talking about deterrence and punishment, an opportunity to do the deterrence? does it warrant? in showing that, we look at reprehensibility of the conduct and harm to others similarly situated. so when we talk about 440,000 americans dying a year and 28 million total that have died, when we talk about things like targeting teenagers, when we talk about that it is still going on today, and the epidemic of death and disease, that is, a (unintelligible), when we talk about a billion dollars in the marketing that now today, i think the testimony was 10 million, and how many teenagers today that have been affected by it. we talk about harms to others, too. it all passes through rose cox's husband and her claim, but it leads on the reprehensibility that leads to the deterrence part of this, we talk about harm to others. we talked about the conspiracy. we showed you numerous documents, lots of them that were from r.j. reynolds, or the companies that they took over, american tobacco and brown & williamson, but we showed you other company documents. why are we showing you other company documents? because that is part of the conspiracy, the conspiracy when people get together and agree to do something, and they agreed to conceal things. so others that are within that conspiracy, that got together and made this decision back in 1953 at the plaza hotel in new york city to conceal what they knew to be true, then the other documents of those coconspirators are relevant and important to see in the whole picture. and something i want to make clear upfront before i - i'm going to try to go through in some sequence. but before i do, i want to set something straight. we have got various claims in this case. there is negligence, and that is a standalone claim. they all lead to the same point, but it is a standalone claim. we have a defective product. that is another claim. we have concealment, is another claim, and we have the conspiracy to conceal. on the concealment part, i want to isolate that part just for a moment and clarify something. on the conspiracy claim, we are not here talking about whether or not roland cox heard these things can be bad for you. of course he did. of course he heard they could be bad for you. what was concealed here was not what everybody virtually in america would have heard is these things could be bad for you, they could cause cancer, they could, could, could. what was concealed is not what others heard, it was what they knew to be a cold, hard fact. what they concealed was what they were up to behind closed doors with roland cox and the rest of america. what they were doing behind closed doors, what they were up to. does that matter? because at the end of the day they are going to get up and talk roland cox, roland cox, what is this got to do with roland cox? i want to deal with that right now for a moment, and i'll talk about it some more later in more detail. what difference does it make if just one more person said it was bad for you? a bunch of people are saying that. but that is not a fair perspective on this. because this was framed on purpose, on purpose by r.j. reynolds and its coconspirators, framed this way. over here is someone accusing us about our own product. we know best about our product, and there is an accusation that it really is causing cancer. that is the accusation. it is not a fact as they frame it, a mere accusation. and on this side there is the people that know because they are the ones against whom the accusation is being made, is their product. and unlike the situation where we heard with aspirin causing reye's disease, the response was not, "that accusation is true, america, let us work with health officials and public health people to fix this problem before more harm comes." the response was to keep it an accusation and a denial with a coverup. so to america and particularly as you saw with polls and you have heard from these men with eminent credentials, in somebody who is addicted very, very much, does not want to have to struggle with giving up the drug they are deeply addicted to. it does not take much. and when you tell that person like roland cox: these people over here are making this accusation do not have any proof. well, we take it serious and we are going to high the best and brightest scientists in the world and we are going to get an answer. we do not think there is a thing wrong with our product, we are a responsible company. remember this is at a different point in time. people in america trusted corporations. we take this seriously, and we are taking the bull by the horns and we are hiring -- forming an organization of these doctors, and we are going to get the answers. and if anything is found, which we do not believe it is there, we are going to be the first to find it, we are going to fix it, we will tell you about it, or we will remove it from the shelves. the refusal to admit what they knew to be true changed everything. it was not one more person saying what everybody has heard. it was the person who knew, who knew. what was concealed is not what people have heard, people have heard it. what they needed to hear, you saw the poll, how millions said, "i need to hear it from the manufacturer." what was concealed was the truth of what they knew, the admission, and they confessed what they knew to be true. there would not be polls. there would be nothing to poll. have a frank statement that is really frank, not fraudulent frank, for real frank, that said: we are going to be frank with the american people. it is true our product is causing cancer and it is highly addictive. it really is. it really is. kids, steer clear. be fully warned how addictive this thing is. if you pick it up, you may be hooked for life and struggle and struggle, and the statistics against you are horrible. and, by the way, for those of you that are already addicted, you really are an addict. you really have an addiction to a real drug. this is not some silly thing. this is not coffee. this is big stuff. you are going to probably need help, but i want to maximize your motivation, tell you the truth about our product. it is killing people and we know it. this is not a mere accusation. it is a fact and we are going to truly join the public health to try to deal with this problem before it turns into a bigger epidemic and arm the people with the truth. it was not a controversy and a subject of doubt, it is a fact. when they come forward about their product and say it is true, it is done. it is like the analogy i talked about the aliens. i do not mean to belittle the importance of this, but once someone comes forward against who the accusation's made and say, "it is a fact," there is no room for evidence and debates and can we have an open debate. it is done. so what was concealed here was not had you heard as ninety percent of america had heard these things could cause cancer, lung cancer. of course, they had. but you saw the polls, so many people, so many people did not accept it as fact. why? there is only one reason why, one: r.j. reynolds and the other coconspirators who decided to make it so for one reason so they could keep the sales booming. it is that simple. that is why we are here. this was an opportunity about their product, to protect their customers, americans, and roland cox, an opportunity in '53. and instead of marching up to the plaza hotel with scientists and inviting public health officials and medical people and dealing with this honestly, they got hill & knowlton and spun it and did it for 50 years funding it all together. and the conspiracy was not -- think of this for just a moment. the conspiracy was not about just sharing resources to fund their big pr campaign, to keep it a matter of doubt rather than an admission against the person who is accused, who really knew because it was their product so it would become hard fact. it was not just sharing resources to accomplish that goal. it was that, too, but it was not that only. the conspiracy to agree to all conceal this information and all join into this was the only way they could keep a lid on it. because if one of them said, "i want to go and tell everybody it has not been proven" and another one said, "aha, i'm selling the same product and it does kill and it is highly addictive. it is causing cancer. this is not just mice they have loaded up and you put enough of bad anything on it, it is going to hurt a mouse." it is not been proven. just because there’s a statistical correlation does not mean it. it could be smog. it could be all kinds of other things. if one of them had come clean, one of them, it would have been over. so they had to agree if they were going to pull this thing off for all of them to do it. and they did. and the polls tell this horrible story of consequences, and roland cox and rose cox are classic examples because roland cox was a success story for this conspiracy and this concealment. he followed precisely what they told him because the message was to addicted smokers, who they were targeting with this information, targeting. we hear about his dad died of emphysema. we do not have any evidence one way or the other whether way back then roland made any connection. we just do not know. he might have, he might not have. but it does not matter. and the reason we say it does not matter is that is the microcosm in his family of precisely what they were after. precisely. the concealment to create this open debate: the proofs not in yet. wait and we will see. we are going to get the answer. who is it really targeting? who is it really targeting? we know why. the sales were booming. and then for the first time in - and there was all kind of information from the 1900s out there. all kinds of it, but it was not affecting sales a lick. sales were booming. it is like knowing that - hearing that there could be a boogie man in the closet versus an intruder in the house. you have got concrete (unintelligible) for a little while. until it got up to what they got up to and he made it less concrete. sales dipped. they did what they did and they took off again. who was it that the sales were dipping with? remember, the vast number of people in america smoking. this was just a different time and place. it was not somebody you saw smoking and saying, "i cannot believe you are still smoking out there today, what is wrong with you?" it is not that era. it is the era everybody was out smoking: policemen, the lawyer, the judge, the doctor, the parents, the tv stars, the sports stars. it was everywhere. you sat down, people were smoking; you got on an airplane, people were smoking; you go to a hospital, people were smoking. sales started to come down. with all these people smoking, what was happening? you saw the graph of the lung cancer come along with this product that is killing people en masse. follow it on that curve. the people who were stopping was a combination of information. on the one hand public health has got that mice painting, cancer scare, that is gotten a lot of people's attention. it was an opportunity. in addition, all these customers of theirs had friends and family members who were all smoking. so the people who were dying of lung cancer had a loved one who were dying of lung cancer: mice painting causes lung cancer, dad died, someone's sister died, my best friend died. you know what, maybe there is something to this. then motivation goes up and people start to try to struggle to break free from this horrible addiction, and it is having an impact, an opportunity where those sales could have kept coming down to something where we did not have this epidemic. that is what they targeted. they had to speak to the roland coxes of the world who had a loved that potentially might have died from smoking. that is who they were after. and look how it worked. sales took off. in 1966 after the warning, that first warning, after the surgeon general, after the mice painting, was the biggest years in the sales in america ever, ever. they pulled it off. they bragged about pulling it off, how brilliantly conceived it was. and they say it was never going to be a victory totally. it was a holding strategy. make as much money as they could, and they would get another plan. and roland cox grew up in that era, in the heart of it. in the heart of it. what a lost opportunity and a lost life. and they said, what did we have to do with any of this, we were just a bystander? what are we doing here in this courtroom? it just does not work on these facts and this evidence. it just does not work. i want to just start with this to bring it back. these were the people that were in the conspiracy that we were talking, that dr. cummings told you about. philip morris, rj. reynolds, lorillard, brown & williamson, these companies, and american tobacco, were all part of the conspiracy. there was a trial that lasted a year, the engle trial. you heard dr. cummings talk about the vast number of documents that filled this room when the government gave them a grant looking into it. in this trial here with you folks, taking your valuable precious time, we have had, including saturday, we have worked five days and five days here on a saturday, a lot of your time, but when we were done with the very important process of picking the right people to decide this case in jury selection, we had six days to put evidence on, and we were allowed to split the time evenly. so if i was up talking, our time would be running, and if they were up cross-examining, their time, and vice versa. so we had to divide up the six days of evidence between us, so we had a total of three days, including breaks and lunch, and all the other things to put on whatever evidence we can squeeze in that time period. these jurors heard evidence for a full year, for a full year. the findings --and i'm going to get to the findings. these findings then came down from that jury, then land here after passing through the supreme court to here as binding, once we have proven class membership, which we have done. and i'm going to talk about that in a minute. but let me talk to you now about the findings. well, let me talk you, first -- because it’s next on the slide, but we will get to the finding about class membership. we have to show that the plaintiff - we have got to prove by the greater weight of evidence. remember, on everything but whether punitive damages are warranted, it is greater weight of evidence. not beyond a reasonable doubt. is it more persuasive, more convincing, is it more likely, practically speaking. the wording is more persuasive, that roland cox was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that this addiction was a, a legal cause of his lung cancer? let us pause a moment and talk about that. was he addicted? what does addiction do other than cause people to use it a lot? what does addiction do other than cause the frequency of use of the addictive drug to spiral out of control? roland cox is smoking two to four packs a day. if you do the math on that, he is smoking anywhere -depending on which point in time, as this progressed, anywhere from two-and-a-half cigarettes in an hour, taking approximately ten minutes each to smoke, to five cigarettes in an hour, taking ten minutes, he is -- and the evidence supported it. he had a cigarette all the time. whenever circumstances allowed, he had a cigarette. he woke up first thing in the morning. now, let us keep in mind we hear about this product is just something so much fun everybody cannot get enough of. it is just wonderful fun. we love it. we have got to pause and see what it is that is so much fun. it looks - the image looks like something you would want to do, why? because of all the marketing. all the marketing. every star, every sports figure, every doctor, it is what the in-crowd did. james bond. james bond, he makes you want to go and do a shake and not stir, just to kind of be like him. how many times is he pulling out that cool little case and lighting up? sean connery, i could go on and on. nobody took a lit stick and said, "you know what, i tell you the most exciting, attractive thing i can imagine, i cannot help myself, is to light the end of that thing, get it really hot, and start sucking and smoking on it and blow it out. that is so attractive, i could not keep myself from it." and then everybody said, "i want to suck in smoke and blow it out, too. now i want to do it more and more and more so i do it all day." and years later, i just never got over the thrill of sucking it in and blowing it out. why did people pick it up? you look at a poll, nobody says, "i saw an ad and i picked up it." why did they pick it up? their peers and their parents. why did their peers and their parents pick it up? because of all the advertisement that had all of america doing it. and they ingrain that into the fabric of society as a right of passage to adulthood. and it has passed from generation to generation to today because they keep fanning the flame they lit. it was not a hula hoop that was a passing fad. they got the brass ring. they ingrained into the fabric of society as a right of passage to adulthood for the youth of america. and their parents were up there smoking. so i see my parent, and i do the same thing because my grownup parent did. my friend's doing it and he is cool. well, i want to be part of that crowd. and they said, "what do we have to do?" we will show you a poll that says most people say it was not because of the - because of any act. oh, come on. that person did not see that ad or pick up that cigarette. but that person did not pick up that cigarette but for what those ads have done to america. so roland cox picked up that cigarette as a teenager and started experimenting, hiding around and got caught, and he did what the rest of american boys at that time did, and the women started doing it, too, and follow precisely what they were targeting, what they wanted to happen for money. (unintelligible) just a bystander in all this. then it goes to the point of frequency, to where the first thing in the morning, before your feet hit the floor and you are heading to the bathroom and you have got them right by the bedside table so i can light up and start sucking that smoke in my lungs before i even make it all the way to the bathroom every morning. it is that just as - boy, this is just one of the things like the cappuccino delights. but it did not stop then. you might could sell that. if he had that one and said, "all right, i'm going to go to work." now i'll have one, maybe two in the evening, i like to relax, like the feel of a cigar. that is not what happens. before he leaves the house and is having his breakfast, he is on number two, and he is in his car on number three and all day long. and he comes home, all evening long. he wakes up in the middle of the night and has another one. that is not natural. that is addiction driven, and they cannot bring themselves to say the obvious. of course he was addicted. bring some guy from california who has nothing really of any substance to do with nicotine addiction to come and work some little book, have unreasonable conclusions like, "oh, he was not spending a lot of his smoking. he was not having a problem with his family talking about (unintelligible). to come in and say, "no, he was not addicted," and then belittle addiction. trivialize it down to nothing. and they said this is just roland cox we are talking about. really? what he said that it is just a rare case where it did not have anything to do with contributing to why someone smokes enough to get sick. that is really rare. that is a tortured smoker. that is not just roland cox. that is the story that escapes accountability right here. of course he was addicted. dr. burns, dr. henningfield, they did not say he might be. he certainly was addicted. and you know what, i have to believe with the hard work we did in picking the right people for this job, you folks. that is just obviously common sense. but they are going to get up here and tell you he was not. was it a legal cause? well, one thing we know because there was not a shred of evidence to the contrary, not a shred, was that he got lung cancer and then he died from his lung cancer from smoking. dr. burns told you that - he did not say, "reasonable medical probability." he said, "it is certain, absolutely." it is the kind of lung cancer 91 percent of people get from smoking. and this guy smoked just tons of cigarettes, dose after dose after does, bathing his lungs. of course that was the cause of his lung cancer. they did not bring one single shred of evidence to you to contradict that. nothing. so we know it caused his lung cancer, and we know that addiction is a reason someone smokes a lot. and you do not get lung cancer from smoking a little, that is the horror of this addiction that they are using to build an empire on, is because they have a product that if it is used with frequency kills. and there is a drug in it that they can take out, they can grow it without it, that drives the frequency to the level that kills. you can sell, without the addiction that drives that kind of frequency, that kills at a high alarming rate. the problem is the frequency does not just drive death, it drives sales through the roof. if you take the addiction out, the addictive drug out, and people truly use it as someone would use with choice, i'll have one here on weekends when i go out with some of my friends, go to a bar in the evening, i'm going to sit on the porch, would not have this epidemic. they would not have the riches. remember the document about a large bag of money. addiction is a frequency of use, smoking so much it makes you get lung cancer, go hand in hand that is an abnormal, extraordinary usage you would not see but for the addiction. so this is pretty clear-cut. so, now, once we have proven that to you, we now talk about the engle findings in a whole different light. we no longer talk about: well, they only come into play if we prove. i'm going to assume that we have done so on the evidence and common sense and the law. and i'm going to move, then, to these findings coming into this courtroom as a determination that is controlling on the rest of the case, that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer and that nicotine is an addictive drug; that rj. reynolds, american tobacco company, and brown & williamson placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. defective and unreasonably dangerous. i want to talk to you just a moment about this product. we have a product that has nicotine that is a highly addictive drug that drives the frequency of sales through the ceiling that causes people to die in droves. and it does not have to be there. they cannot get the cancer-causing stuff out of the smoke. they tried. they cannot get it out. they would love to get it out, because you saw that hill & knowlton document from the pr group from the plaza hotel, they were thinking: gosh, what if we were the first one that could get the cancer, that they know is in there, out. it would be great for sales. all the people dying are not good for sales. so they are happy to spend whatever it takes to try to get that out. but what we know is they can take the nicotine down to levels where it is not addictive or they can grow the plants. they will not do that because that is the one that drives sales. they say, "we cannot do it because nobody will buy it." well, you heard dr. cummings tell you that test market that they did was - it was very limited, but when you look at the limited, it was really people had an interest in it and they shut it down. do they really want - do they really want a product without nicotine in it, will people use it in moderation and the sales (unintelligible). brown & williamson concealed and omitted material facts and information otherwise not known or available knowing that the material was false, misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and addictive na- -or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. that is a finding that came out of the engle trial, that they concealed material information about the dangers and the addictiveness. now, remember, here in this courtroom, and you saw a historian walk you all the way through the history of how many people knew about all this. those polls have been around for years. they did not just note this guy that came here for them that they paid 100 grand did not run the polls himself. he went back and got historical polls that were done in the '50s, '60s, '70s. and if you accept their argument, well, that means there cannot be any concealment, because there were polls that showed a bunch of people had heard. but that does not hold water. what was concealed was not did people hear. it was what hear it might be. it was what they knew and refused to tell about their own product. they talk about the warning label. well, the first one was a victory for them. the first one said, "may cause." well, they did not set this up as the surgeon general and public health people are the accuser, and they are really fanatics. they do not want us all have any fun versus us who know because it is our product. and that is the way this thing was couched in the terms that it was put in. and the warning label - so - and their message to the country was: we just do not know, we need to have - it started with it is not but we will get to the bottom of it. and as the more information came they even switched it a bit. you saw the evidence, can we have an open debate? can we have an open debate? we are looking into it. it started with: no, but we are going to look into it. then it was: it had not been proven. can we have an open debate? that is how they stand 50 years with more and more information coming out from the public health officials. can we have an open debate? what was concealed was there was nothing to debate, and there was only one -- one corporation or group of corporations that could end that horrible, false controversy and tell america the truth. end all the polls, end all the dispute, end all the "do i believe" or "do i hear" and all this stuff. one group. the problem is they conspired to conceal the truth of what they knew about their own product. it is true, the accusation is true. r.j. reynolds, that is the concealer, or other cigarette companies agree to conceal or omit information regarding health effects or their addictive nature with the intention -- this is not a jury question. i want to be clear, there are jury questions we are going to talk about. this is not the court's reading you a question. this is a statement of fact once we are a member of the class that came from the hard work of a year from that other jury that has passed down and landed in this courtroom as an absolute fact once we are a class member. if we are not a class member the case is over so there is no reason to be talking about it. so this is a fact: rj. reynolds, they concealed it and omitted information regarding the health effects of cancer and the addictive nature, with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. that is exactly what they did, and you have seen proof of it here, and you need no more proof to see how well it worked. we do not need a poll. we have got rose cox here as living proof from her deceased husband about how well it worked and the fallout from it. okay. this case has everything to do with roland cox. he started as a young teenager in 1904, the age they were targeting. the age they were targeting specifically. he got hooked while in the navy in the 1950s. we had this about sea rations. i do not think - here's the point, here's the point: sea rations were going to the troops. the troops were smoking like fiends. you joined the military, you get on that boat, and all your peers are smoking, what happens to the vast majority? you go be a part of the troop, the squad. the general is smoking, commander's smoking, my bunkmate's smoking. and what happens when this product's given freely and it becomes an environment of heavy smoking to all the soldiers when they come home? they are the heroes, and they walk the streets of america in their small towns. and what are they doing? and who is following that example of heroes? the teenagers. smoked pall mall, one of the most popular and heavily advertised brands at the time. is it just a coincidence? this one was booming, you saw the ads and you saw - i'm sorry, you saw the tip of the iceberg. he happens to pick the one everybody else was picking that they are advertising so heavily, they grabbed a huge share of the market. mild and smooth natural filters. natural filters. we have information in the general environment out there about health risks. so what do you do? i'm going to smoke one that filters. what is a filter do? it takes the bad stuff out. and this could not be any better. this is not some unnatural attached filter. this is natural filtration. gosh, that sounds safer, and they are telling me there is nothing to this and we are looking into it. and everybody's doing it. if it was really killing people, would everybody be allowed to do it? so settle down. and then you are addicted. and the addiction comes into play, that says, boy, i'm glad to hear that message. you have to face it square on when they had told the truth. had they told the truth in 1953, roland cox would have been early, early in his smoking career, not the heavy-duty smoker that comes from decades of smoking. what an opportunity to just decide: we are not going to lock arms and go to the plaza hotel and conspire and conceal what we know to be true about our product and claim it is a mere accusation without proof. we are going to admit what we know about our own product and concede the truth about it. way back when roland was a very young smoker, can we say for certain that roland would have changed that? no, of course not. no crystal ball. that is why we have a burden of proof here. is it more probable, is it more likely, or is it more convincing, is it more persuasive, that that had had a significant fact? not the sole fact that it would have had likely an impact. no throat scratch with pall malls, another safety message. two to four a day, heavily addicted to their defective product. bought into their message completely, no real reason to try to stop. they come in here and say, "gosh, he did not even try to stop so it is all his fault." and that is got some curbside appeal when you do not stop and tunnel down and look at how fair it is for them to be saying that. for them to be saying that, "he did not even try to quit. what the heck are you talking about addiction and all this stuff? you did not even try." the conspiracy was intended and the acts of rj. reynolds were intended to send that message. it cannot be disputed. it is not disputed. there is no real reason to try to stop. addicted sounds like a really rough thing. every time i put the cigarette down, i know what that feels like and i do not feel like myself. i feel out of sorts, i feel lousy, i feel horrible. i cannot concentrate, i'm anxious, and when i do this i feel like my highest and best self. and that person is getting this drumbeat of this message from them that there is no real reason to try to stop. and he does exactly what they intended, like millions of others that got caught up in this conspiracy in this era, that he passed through, unfortunately. and he did precisely what they wanted him to, he was a success story, and then they come in and say, "well, it worked on him so what is this got to do with us?" had they told him the truth rather than conceal what they knew about it, imagine if roland cox had seen what they were writing in private, the documents you have seen; imagine if the things they would do and tell them: we have got to get them a psychological crutch to keep smoking. we got to tell them: go on and enjoy riding in the car; where they are talking about, yes, it kills and, yes, it is highly addictive. but here are the things we are going do to manipulate our customers. imagine if he would seen those concealed documents, because remember this, in that jury instruction, one that the judge talked to you about that deals with the conspiracy -- concealment, i'm sorry, he could not possibly have seen these secret documents. he could not possibly have seen them. they were top secret, confidential. nobody saw them. so, of course, he could not have seen them. they had more access to them. had he heard and seen what they were writing and saying about him and everybody else, that would not be -- go all the years, buying the message, there is no real reason to stop if he heard what they were saying about you, we are making a (unintelligible). they are addicted and they are buying it. it would not have mattered to roland cox to know what they were up to. brand loyal for decades. cigarette industry success story, unfortunately, died from the disease cigarette companies knew their product was causing and was telling everybody, "we think there is no link, there is no proof." class membership. we have already talked about that. and it basically distills down to was nicotine one of the reasons he smoked so much? was nicotine one of the reasons for all this frequency that he smoked so much? because you do not get lung cancer if you do not smoke a lot. was it the sole reason? no. was it a reason? of course. what it is not is: could he quit? everybody can quit. he, ultimately, after the diagnosis, which sadly is rock bottom for many, many millions of people who are addicted to this horrible addiction, because it does not come crashing down on you like heroin. it does not intoxicate. it does not impair. somebody can only shoot up so long before something bad happens and they hit, quote, rock bottom, and their intervention is coming to help. same with cocaine. even with alcohol. people get duis, bosses smell it on their breath. things get brought to a head because of the havoc that gets reeked by the intoxication side. this was the perfect drug for somebody in the business of selling an addictive drug. it was unique. it brought about pleasure. it brought focus. it made you feel the best you could feel. but when you quit you had a rapid-fire withdrawal symptom that made you feel out of synch, out of sorts, and miserable. not dts. well, let us be fair, dts with alcohol is an extreme case. most alcoholics are not having dts when they go to work or when they drink too much the next evening. and it did not look - it did not look like one of these hard drugs. everybody's doing it, the police are walking around doing it. and you can do it forever. you could go work and actually perform better on it. so it does not have the natural braking system other drugs have. and it was real easy to trivialize addiction and mock it, because it did not look like the other drugs. so you could mask and hide the hook. what perfect bait. you hide the hook. this one was a great hiding place. it is just coffee. those were their talking points. their talking points to diffuse the risks and dangers of what this horrible product were and are. 50 million people have quit. how hard can it really be? it is like coffee. the ones that did not quit, they just did it because they were weak or they did not really want to, they just enjoyed it too much. it is all just a matter of choice. what a great place to hide in america. what a great place to hide in america. if you are in the business of selling an addictive drug and you are making a fortune off of it, what a great - and the addiction is driving the sales that create all the profits, what a great place to hide addiction. choice. choice is an american ideal. you say choice in america and we stand up. who is going to argue with choice? listen, look how insidious choice is in this situation, because choice is a wonderful thing in america. it is a horrible thing to exploit, to hook people to an addictive drug that are youth of america, and put everybody else that is addicted's mind that, i do not have an addiction, nobody wants that stigma. it is a horrible thing to hide. unless to use choice, this admirable thing to hide addiction, how does it work? let us look at it. the teenager who is thinking about picking up this product. let us take today. because, remember, we are talking about harm to others, too, on reprehensibility. so let us talk about today, not orienting back at a different time and place where everybody was smoking, let us take today. all those teenagers you saw on the statistics picking them up today. and you kind of scratch your heads, we do not need polls now. we are now at the point it should have been back in 1953 where everybody really does know. you do not see any polls now about does it kill. you know why, because in 19- - i'm sorry, in 2000 cigarettes companies finally admitted it really was causing - it really was causing lung cancer. so there is no more polls. because the person against who the accusation was made has admitted it. so let us take today. when there is no question, why does that kid pick up a cigarette knowing it could kill? i know there is this image of all the fun and all this stuff, rebel, whatever it is. but, come one, there is other ways to express yourself, why pick that cigarette up? why are they doing this? is all our youth just gone mad? they may not be mature and sometimes we say the kids are crazy, but, come on, they are not all bad. lots of those kids are intelligent kids, they are decent kids, they are good kids who make good decisions, but they are doing this, why, why? because in an american ideal called choice. they say to that kid, "it is all just a matter of choice." but it has two impacts. over here it says, "yeah, this is your choice. this is your choice, not your parents' choice. and, by the way, we are going to diffuse the dangers because everybody knows you are not going to get cancer tomorrow from smoking." and you heard the evidence. these kids think they are going to be quit in a few years. none of them think, i'm going to be 80 years old dragging an oxygen tank like i see on the ads in tv and stuff. i'm going to put them down. why? because they have been told, hammered by the talking point that diffuses the danger: you are not going to get hurt until you do it a long time, and you are not going to do it long enough because it is all just a matter of choice. it is a dangerous message. and it is still one. so can you quit? yes, the standard is was the addiction a reason, a cause. did it contribute substantially? meaning not insubstantially, not insignificant or trivially, but did it contribute in a meaningful way to why he smoked so much and get sick? not: could he quit? it is just not the question on class membership. when we get in the comparative fault phase, you can talk about, well, he could have quit so we weighed somewhat on his side for his fault. but, remember, he is taken fault from the beginning. we are here talking about the significant share of fault they have that they will take no responsibility for. was addiction the only cause of his smoking? it does not have to be the only cause. there are other things, like: do you have some choice? were you a zombie? was there some choice left? was it constrained but you still could? yes. that’s why was the addiction one of the causes, not the only. that is why i keep highlighting a legal cause. did he have any choice in the matter? that is not the question, not for class membership. but it is fair game to talk about when we get to the next phase, when those engle findings are in and we talk about those four counts we talked about in comparative fault. was he sufficiently motivated to quit? that is an ironic one for them to talk about because everything they did was done intentionally to undermine motivation for profit. and when it worked, they say, "well, you were not sufficiently motivated." think about that. so why are we here? what is this got to do with this us? wrong smoker, really. but it is not a question for class membership. it is a simple question, was he addicted, was addiction the reason he smoked so much? because we know that smoking causes lung cancer. what do people know today? that is certainly not the question. because we have to remember, i ask you please keep orienting about the time and the place. please keeping remembering how these people in all these settings were smoking. when approximately sixty percent of all men were smoking, almost half of the adult population were smoking, and two-thirds of the physicians were smoking. at a time roland cox was in this little town with funny-looking cars and a funny-looking hat, although, i guess that is not necessarily for the times. at a time when he was a sailor back at the time of the korean war. they will not admit cigarettes are addictive back in 1954. where are we at today? they will not admit cigarettes are addictive to roland cox, and they will not admit that they have any -- that it was a legal cause of anybody except in the rarest of situations for why they smoked. it would not even be a contributing reason, according to the person they brought here, except in the rarest situations with the tortured smoker. think about that. they will not admit in '54 that smoking and addiction caused lung cancer. they will not admit smoking and addiction caused roland cox's lung cancer. had nothing to do with it, what is addiction got to do with it? like the tina turner song. it is got everything to do with it. they will not admit it that is why we need you. oh, you want to - this is a good time. the court: yeah, that would be great. ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take a short midmorning break, i think we may have adjust your lunch order, i'm not sure. i have to talk to the bailiff about that. we will be back in five minutes. please do not discuss the case, do not start your deliberations, do not form any opinions, and do not do any research. we will be back in five. (the jury withdrew from the courtroom and the following further proceedings were held:) the court: let the record reflect the jury is out of the courtroom. we will be in recess for five minutes. (recess.) (the jury resumed its seat in the jury box and the following further proceedings were held:) the bailiff: court is back to order. the court: all right. thank you very much. everybody please have a seat. let the record reflect the jury has returned it to the courtroom. thank you for your attention. mr. mitnik. mr. mitnik: thank you, judge. okay. i'm going to run to through this brief. i know you were all here, but bear with me. i'd like to say, gosh, i think everybody made the mind and seen the justice that as i seen and sit down. i do not know what you folks are thinking, and it is very important that i discuss some of these. if i running into some of the thing i'm repeating it, bear with me it is so important. okay. briefly. you remember dr. henningfield. nida, national institution on drug addiction; nci, who, the world health organization, the department of defense, all the people that turn to him for information, hire him to when they need to know thing because of his experience with, what? schizophrenics? no, nicotine addiction. editor of the surgeon general report that dealt specifically with nicotine addiction, not just guy the contributing. i should not say that. someone is invited to contributed to a surgeon general of the united states of america report on nicotine addiction is a big honor, and it says much about their understanding, knowledge, and experience, and ability to render opinions knowingly and informed to a jury. but he was not someone who contributed, even though could be very impressive. he was the editor on the very suggest we are here on, and he is the one that talked to about it. in weighing the credibility as a witness and knowledge and training and experience, him versus somebody that came in and was paid $100,000. i'm not saying there is anything wrong with being paid. our experts were paid, too. but someone who is brought in and paid that much money who really does not have much to do with anything and says things that do not pass the common-sense test. he says that just to finish: served on the fda tobacco product scientific advisory committee last year. addiction rates of other drugs. and, remember, he is a specialist who spent a year doing research on addiction rates, on all these drugs. nicotine addiction is one of his specialities. but he also studied, worked in labs, done the actual hands-on investigation as to these to drugs too for the national institute for drug abuse, including heroin and cocaine and other drugs. this guy has got as much knowledge as anybody in america has about it and he shared with you. try to make this sound like the feather versus the hammer, although they never quite say feather. can everybody hear me? i'm told to speak up a little bit, and i feel like i'm bellowing at you. i'll raise my voice a little. i intentionally brought it down so i do not want to be offensive. here are the cold heart facts that he brought. to 15 percent of those who use alcohol become addicted, 10 to 15 percent alcohol. 15 for those who use marijuana become addicted. a little higher, 10 to 15, now 15. cocaine, 15 to twenty percent of cocaine users become addicted. that is powder cocaine. so now we are raising up. 25 percent of crack cocaine users become addicted. because, why? it is getting inhaled into the lungs and it gets quicker to the brain. quicker than going into the nostril and having to go through membranes, it goes through the lungs, which is the fastest way to get to the lungs, which makes -increases the risk of addictability a lot. so now you have got 25 percent versus 15 to 20 switching to crack cocaine. heroin users become addicted thirty percent, thirty percent. cigarette smokers become addicted at, what? ten percent like alcohol, 15 like marijuana, 15 to 20 like powder cocaine or 25 percent like crack. how about thirty percent like heroin, is it 40? maybe a little more, 50, 60? 70 to ninety percent of cigarette smokers become addicted according to dr. henningfield, who is in the midst of studying these exact things for governmental agencies. it just does not intoxicate so there is no braking system to get in the way of it running amok and having to kill and making lots of money. we have roland cox precisely in the midst of that kind of use and died. but, gosh, what is that got to do with him? wrong smoker. really? he showed you -- dr. henningfield showed you how it worked in the brain. did not just come in spouting things, brought you something to show how to really worked, to kind of educate some of the information that he has. 70 known carcinogens in cigarette smoke. changes are not -- this is dr. henningfield. "changes are not going to happen from government alone." changes are not going to happen from government alone. we saw the asam from dr. tucker's organization. what we do here is important in this case. what we do here is important because the truth matters. dr. cummings, director of roswell park cancer institute for 30 years, surgeon - i'm not going to - we talked about it at length. let me just pause here one minute, talking about the bad engineering versus good engineering that dr. henningfield shared, and then dr. burns came in and shared some more about it. i'm not going to go back through each of these. you-all heard extensive testimony. but i do want to make one point. they cross-examined dr. henningfield. and at the end kind of gave -at the end of the first pass, gave the expression, what is this got to do with pall malls? and then we, unfortunately, had to leave before redirect, but dr. cummings came along and explained it and then dr. henningfield confirmed it. it is got everything to do with pall mall. he does not know precisely what they - some of them, in fairness, i do not remember exactly, which i think may be the ventilation holes or porosity, would not have been in the pall mall. but what he said is: these things were made to be more - to cause more frequency, more likely to have been addictable because they made them more inhalable in whatever combination, i cannot tell you exactly what they are doing, because they would not share that information. but it does not mean that they were not engineering this to make it more inhalable and more likely to be addictable and that certainly this product was one of them that had those - some combination of intentional engineering to increase the likelihood of it becoming addictive. not that the other -- without their engineering they were not addictive or did not kill. they were. it started as a bad thing, it was made a lot worse. and as you increase the likelihood of addiction, here come all of the sales, here comes all the lung cancer. and the filters, they flue-cured it to make it gentler to get in the lungs. the deeper in the lungs, quicker to the brain. more we have a problem with likelihood of addiction. they also use the filter. they did not put the external filter, they just told them, "hey, this is long and it is naturally filterable," which really made it more dangerous. but it sounded to the roland coxes of the world that were using that heavily marketed product is, hey, if i've got a lot bit of concern here, they have told me there is no real reason to stop, but let me smoke this one because it has natural filtration and that sure sounds safer. but what do they have to do with anything? roland cox is the wrong smoker. really? i'm not going to dwell on this. i just bring it up to remind you the demonstrative aid to help explain how increasing addictive inhalability increased the likelihood of causing addiction, because it gets quicker to the brain in how much energy they put into it, how they monitor nicotine levels. you will recall they got up and made a big point with - geez, i cannot even remember who it was, it may have been dr. cummings, it may have been dr. henningfield, one of them, about: well, look here, one of the documents you showed with pall mall, it is not up at this level of ph for the free-nicotine something, i do not remember the details of it. but the point was that we had to then bring out on redirect was: look how they are manipulating precisely and monitoring and following precisely the nicotine levels as was explained because they are looking for that sweet spot, that sweet spot, to get people where this is gentle and unoffensive, but is maintaining the addictability that drives the frequency through the ceiling and it is safe. dr. cummings. dr. cummings says he is the director of roswell park cancer institute for 30 years, surgeon general reports, monographs, federal grants to study cigarette companies' marketing practices and internal documents. we are going to talk about some of the slides and things in a minute, and i'm not going to dwell. we tried to do them in a builet-point fashion rather than keep pulling the documents out that we keep showing you to move this along, but i want to highlight a few of them in a builet-point fashion, if i may. he talked about the wallpapering effect of all the information from the advertising. and the advertising was part and parcel of the concealment and the coverup things that they were doing because it dovetailed in it. it had - when people talk about a synergistic effect. two things together had more power than separate. they were sending this message out: there is no real reason to try and stop. we are going to get to the bottom of it, the best and the brightest. if we find it, we will take it out. and then they kind of shift to, well, can we have an open debate? it really has not been connected. it has not been proven. we are still researching. while that is all going on en masse, banks of microphones to people talking to addicted smokers giving them the message they desperately want to hear, they also have all the ads that make it sound safe and good and wonderful and a good thing. and all these people are still smoking, and the combination of all of that was very, very effective on millions of americans, including roland cox. dr. burns also shared with you some bottom-line numbers: 28 million have died from smoking cigarettes diseases, 48 million smokers --48 million smokers today. what if that message, the truth, what was in these secret documents had actually been revealed to roland cox and america way back then, way back in 1953? way back in 1953. is there any question using more likely right than wrong, more persuasive or not, that a unified message just like with the problem with aspirin for the kids, a unified message: we admit this about our product. we are not going to generate a fabricated controversy, which we are the only one on the other side, it sounds like a controversy, we are the ones that know best about our product. they cannot prove it. let us go on and have fun. more likely than not would it have made a difference if way back then to these 48 million smokers to roland cox? can we show you absolutely? no. the burden of proof in this courtroom is by the greater weight of the evidence. and there, in using your common sense, is it more likely right than wrong it had made a difference? it is, it is common sense. it sure made a difference with aspirin. 85 percent of smokers wish they would never started. 85 percent. and they want to say everybody just likes sucking smoking so much. then how do you explain 85 percent of them started wish they had not, but are still doing it? i'm not saying nobody's quit they are going to put up the numbers of everybody who is quit. that is one of the talking points. you have heard from the men from public health where spent their lives, that we brought here, telling you, they bragging on the 50 million that did quit. it is a big success story. it is a huge number, and that is 50 million over 50 years losing about, you know, 1 or 2 or 3 percent, whatever it was a year. the massive numbers are so much it adds up to 50 million, and they are pleased to have gotten that many off of it because they understand the power of this addiction, and the horrible odds of getting off it. they are proud of it, but it is a drop in the bucket. it is hard to say 50 million is a drop in a bucket. it is a lot of people, but that is over 50 years, accumulated in small percentages over years and adding them, 45 million people are smoking right now. right now. and while they are proud of the 50 million as a success story, for public health it is. i do not mean to belittle it. they turn around and use it as a talking point to diffuse the dangers to the next generation of teenagers. and they were doing it - the number was smaller, they were doing it back then because you remember when the surgeon general came out and said, "this is as addictive as heroin." addictive as heroin, not it causes you to lose your mind like heroin, but it is as addictive, and trying to get the message out. how do they counter? remember the scare tactic? they came in and said at the time the number was less, 40 million, 40 million quit. how hard could it be? no need to steer clear. the truth cannot --the statistics do not lie how hard it can be. 85 percent wish they would never started of 48 million smokers. i cannot do the math but that is a lot of millions smokers wish they would quit. about 5 to 10 percent actually do in a given year. 17 million try to stop every year and about 5 to 10 actually do. it is a powerful addiction. and we are not here saying --1 cannot say this enough. we are here saying because roland cox was addicted that he lost all his responsibility, that he bears no responsibility. i was addicted, everybody else's fault. that is not what we have done from the beginning. he is taken responsibility. there is no way we can come in here and act righteous about the pursuit of justice and not look you in the eye and say, "he takes some responsibility for this." of course he does. you do not just pass it all off because you were addicted. but the person, the side that intentionally addicted him and took advantage of him and made all these profits from him and engineered for it, knowing the results likely are going to be death, when that person dies, they have got a significant share. we need you to bring that to bear. because they just will not. okay. before i move on, the bottom-line numbers, 440,000 americans die a year. fifty percent of the smokers will die prematurely. almost four times the entire population of gainesville die every year and replenish and start over. those are staggering numbers. this is an important case. as opposed to that, we have got dr. tucker. i'm not going to go back through what his lack of credentials, anywhere near the experts that we brought to you, but i do want to point out that he admits or - "admits" is not the right word. i got him to admit that the number out of the dsm-iv that he brought you their number, was 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers. certainly mr. cox was a regular smoker, 80 to 90 of them are addicted under that book. but, remember, he thinks it is (unintelligible). his own book is 80 to ninety percent. the asam, the organization that he lectures about other drugs says that - i do not remember the word, "most" or, you know, indicated the same type of language as the 80 to ninety percent. but roland cox, eh, he is one of the rare ones that are not smoking that much. that would be what he would ask you to believe. i ask you to use your common sense. and then, lastly, before i leave it, dr. michel, i'm not going to go back through all his stuff other than i do want to point out a couple things. he ignores the internal documents. he is hired, he is paid a lot of money, and he comes in and says one side of the story. and they started the case out talking about "paul harvey, i'm going to tell you the rest of the story." well, how can you be a historian and tell half a story? how can he talk about writing a book and landing on the moon - i do not want to be too cute, but it is like leaving nasa out. it is. and then he mocks -- they prep him, they groom him to be a witness for people like you, and go over it with lawyers, not just from rj. reynolds but other cigarette companies, and they hand him an internal document and practice it. now, if he looked at the documents, we could have stood here and talked about what they - how they said it, because i pointed a few of them out, how their own internal documents said, people did not realize how -- that this product was addictive, after being showing all the real cute things (unintelligible) and how bad he was addictive. they are only internal so they do not get it. he says everybody got it and knew it. their own internal documents are bragging about how effective they are being in keeping people from knowing, and the polls that back it up and prove it. keep away from that because i cannot cross-examine him about those documents. and this is the pursuit of the truth and the truth matters. this is a courtroom in america. the truth matters. one thing dr. michel admitted that i thought was significant, and i do want to tell you, because if he would admit anything that would help our side of the case, i think that is pretty - kind of accept that. you can kind of accept that. he was one of those guys that when he had an opening, he wanted to argue for their side of the case. just like, by the way, dr. tucker for their side. but the frank statement. i said it is fair for the - i think i was standing right here, would you agree if it is fair for the goose, it is fair for the gander? the frank statement is one of those that would have gotten into the information - he did not say how, i forgot his word, but the information base out there. it was so prevalent that you did not have to see it to have been influenced by the message. you would have gotten the gist from talk in the street and from others because it created such a buzz you could not miss it if you lived in a cave. like he was saying would have been the case that there was an allegation that this stuff was causing lung cancer, and i said, "you can apply that same standard to the frank statement." and he said, "yes." yes. and that is important. because we -- they may say it again, i ask you to remember if they do. there is no evidence the frank statement was read by mr. cox. and they may not admit it was a question, and it is a fair question about did they get - what information were they getting on the ship? and then he said, you know, i think they did get the frank statement. well, he is paid a lot of money and he did not know the answer. and that was the favorable side. so we -- and in fairness, we did not present any counter evidence at the end of the case, so we are left with "he thinks" and no clear answer. a reasonable question. i simply ask that we look at the next step of it now that we are at kind of the end here and able to bring it all together, he is admitted he would have been exposed to what everybody in america was. not that he comes home on furlough. i mean, he is not like he is on a ship, so he is not part of the information of america, they are communicating with loved ones, people on the boat are communicating with loved ones, they are coming home on furlough. so he was living and returning back to our shores into an environment that had been influenced by that statement where they went through: we take this serious, nothing has been shown, we do not believe it, we hired scientists, we are going to get answers, we take our product seriously. what did they know? i'm not going to go through these because we went over this documents. what did they know about their product causing lung cancer? and these are documents that are in evidence that you can look at yourself. and we got numbers at the bottom and we have shown you many of these in the courtroom so we now distill them down to just bullet points so i can move this more quickly. what did they know about lung cancer risk? well, there is what they know. that is 1953, secret internal document, rjr. another internal secret document 1956, that convoluted carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons simply means the cancer-causing stuff. 1958, that is a fact document in which they were talking to all these -- all of the people in the conspiracy, scientists. with one exception, the individuals who we met believed smoking caused lung cancer. and then, again, look at the frank statement. and what a difference admitting those secret documents that roland cox could not possibly have seen. he would have to have been a burglar, broke in to see them. would that have mattered to pass this truth out rather than conceal it and create a false controversy? l&m, this is '61. this is early in the game. materials present that are cancer causing. it does not say "might, could, there is a debate." there is no scientific proof. we need to research more. cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, and then they add in the part they love most, they just cannot stay away from it, "stimulating, pleasurable, and flavorful." code, addictive. what did they agree to do? we talked about the plaza hotel in '53. this is from that forwarding memorandum that the hill & knowlton people got together in preparation for that meeting. i want to show you a few things, take those highlights. some of these you have not seen as why i'm doing them. i know you have seen them, and i'm trying not to go back over the ones you have seen. to reassure the public and still put to rest, still instinctive fears in this interim when definitive facts were giving -- complete assurances are still lacking, when scientific doubt must remain. roland cox did not get to see that document. the fact is, of course, that no one that has been a heavy smoker is going to benefit himself from now falling into a panic and eliminating the pleasure and comfort of cigarettes. he might just as well go on enjoying his smoke in this interim while research pursues the facts, with full assurance that if any cancer-causing agent is ever really found in tobacco, the manufacturers will quickly find a way out, find a way to eliminate it. this is them plotting what they did with the frank statement and then continued to do for 50 years in every form that they could do it. you can count on the cigarette companies who have obliged themselves to pour millions of dollars into cancer research, to take anything out of their cigarette that is health hazardous. if our science ever really finds out any such hazards in the wonderful tobacco leaf. meanwhile know this, despite the most elaborate attempts, no efforts to give mice a lung illness by making them live days on end in tobacco smoke have ever produced a case of such illness through that kind of exposure. this is then hatching the conspiracy of what they were going to tell americans. and you have heard the bottom-line numbers that fell out from it and roland cox is one of those casualties. what they agreed to do: we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. one of the members of the conspiracy, philip morris, 1964, did not say: let me tell you the truth about the accusations that are real. please be aware. they say, let’s create a psychological crutch to the addicted customer of those who knowing it will mean more money, it is going to be more deaths for people like roland cox. i put this up briefly just to show, these are the - the cigarettes sold. i was talking about sales. that dot - that dot is when all the mice painting happened. here come the sales coming down. that is what caused panic from the cigarette company executives to meet at the plaza hotel. the frank statement comes out, they meet, they plot, they execute the plot. and then we get out here in 1964, surgeon general report comes out. there is a dip. they get in full swing, you saw that - i'm not going to show it you -- the guy with the bank of -remember, why would there be a bank of microphones there for the guy who was talking about califano and, oh, heaven forbid if he ever decides to give up things of the most intimate nature, that guy, mocking the surgeon general. remember, the frank statement said, "we are going to work with the surgeon general." they are mocking the surgeon general. they did not do it right away. this is out in 1964. the frank statement's '53. they were mocking them. if it was not working and america knew all they needed to know, what is everybody so interested in all these microphones there? remember, they jumped in front of the surgeon general and bragged in the internal documents that we showed you about: hey, we actually beat them in prime time and got all of the attention. what is that sound like to america? so it becomes part of the society in which roland cox is operating, a society that cigarette smoking and risks are controversial, controversial. the last thing somebody addicted needs to hear is controversial. look, i do not have a problem with this. put all that stuff on no one's decided. these people said this they find, they will do it. these public health officials really are over the top. i'm okay. and if they find it unsafe, they are going to tell us. they are not going to keep selling it to us if it is causing cancer. you are addicted and you know every time i leave that cigarette down, i come back, i'm getting that horrible feeling and i know all i've got to do is reach over and light it and i'm right back to feeling like my high-performing, focusing self. it works on that person, and nobody knew better because they studied it. they were the world experts on it. so what happens? sales come back. what else comes about? we have - now remember, the warning label comes out. the first one that says, "may," which was a victory to them because "may" was (unintelligible), but no one's proven it. now the government's saying it is "may," we do not know. by then roland cox is an addicted smoker. he started long before that. those ads that made it seem so attractive that sucked him in, way before. not did he say, "i saw an ad?" no. no, hardly. but it worked on him. they did not spend all of that money on advertising, 10 billion - they do not spend that kind of money on advertising if it ain't doing something for them. the biggest sales in their history after the surgeon general report and the "may" warning labels went on. was it working? and they said, "well, roland just kept smoking, he did not try. he did not even try. why are we here in the courtroom? it is all his fault." some, yeah; all, not fair. now i want to pause for one moment just before i leave this, the warning label, warning labels. then they came out later - when was the warning label that actually said? 1970. they went from "may" to "actually cause." it is very interesting what it said. because, remember, they framed this whole thing brilliantly but it is horrible to call it brilliant but it was. to be on this side the accuser, the surgeon general, on this side, the people who knew better the product and it is a false accusation or - accusation that cannot be proven. what does the warning label say? it says, "the surgeon general has concluded." that was the person they were saying, do not listen to. it is their product package. it did not say, "we admit it." it did not say, "the manufacturer has concluded it causes lung cancer." it said that other guy. all right. what did they tell the american people? we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility. this is their message out. i just want to hit on some of these. this is from the tirc, that is the organization they were all funding to carry this conspiracy to the american people: we believe our products are not injurious to health. that is out of the frank statement. here's 1969, we believe the -- they call it a bum rap. bum rap. we are not going to knuckle under to the times, that is the one we showed you from the new york times. 1988, tirc again, well-funded research. we have been doing it for years. it had not been established smoking products produces a physical dependence to nicotine. really? have you seen the documents internally where they are referring to thank goodness ifs a product our client -- our customers cannot quit. they call it addictive. 1997. this is philip morris, one of the coconspirators: they are behaviorally addictive or habit forming. they are much more like caffeine, in my case, gummy bears, this is what - this is what they were telling the american people. gummy bears, i want my gummy bears and my coffee, belittling the addiction to diminish the deterrent effect and to not motivate those that are already addicted to go get help because there is nothing really wrong with them. what did they know behind the scenes? it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. not only the habit, but the characterization is cannot break. that is hill & knowlton in 1953, one of the head scientists from a cigarette company. '63, brown & williamson: "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanisms." did not tell roland cox that. talked about what was concealed, what did they know more about? what did they have advantage to? and what would it matter to know to him and others? how about the truth? "very few customers [sic] are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison." 1978, brown & williamson who rj. reynolds is responsible for. the name's actually on the -- on the jury instructions. young adult smokers lifestyles and attitudes. i want to briefly talk you about this. 1974, brown & williamson, again that was absorbed by rj. reynolds. young adult smokers and lifestyles, they are studying it. they are studying it. smoking at any age. apparently forbidden by parents or other adults was a sign of courage. remember what i said? it is all just a matter of choice. you make this choice, it is time. you make your own choice, not your parents. us against them. next. attitudes towards the effects of smoking and health. now, again, this is a secret internal document, not something that is going out to roland cox or the public. a third type is quite certain that he could stop someday when he is old enough, really to have to worry about it. ironically, one of the respondents who fell into this category had spoken of a parent who is dying of emphysema and cannot stop smoking. remember, i said they were targeting people who had family members that had died? put their mind at ease so they would not try to stop, not even try because there is no real reason to? it is not me just talking, this is them talking. with adults, a different situation exists. only an exceptional 2 percent smoke occasionally and intermittently. nearly all regular smokers are nicotine dependent, but we hear from dr. tucker, a whole different story. this is what they wrote. think they do not know about their own product? it is been said if - i asked dr. tucker about this, i just wanted to show you. this is them writing in their own internal secret documents, quoting, if it were not nicotine in tobacco smoke people would be a little more inclined to smoke cigarettes than they are to blow bubbles or light sparklers. next. physical dependence involves changes which are psychological, first shown by the smoker's tolerance to the effects of nicotine and due to the changes in the synapses. remember the changes in the brain that dr. henningfield told you lasted forever and dr. cummings -- i'm sorry, dr. burns explained will last forever. okay. i'm going to just kind of skip through. much of these -- can you take me out of that. i need to save some time for rebuttal. so i - we are going to have lots of these documents in. choice. i just want to remember these about the choice. you need to go back. you remember about - i'm not going to replay it. you have seen that how much they knew about addiction. and they stood up in front of american congress, the truth matters here. and this got high publicity, "no, it is not." every head of the tobacco company testified it was not to the roland coxes of the world and to all of the startup smokers they were using to replace the ones that were dying prematurely to addict the next generation. why are they playing on the choice? free choice. they cannot - one of them is, it is a talking point to diffuse dangers. another is: look, we are selling this product that is killing lots of people and if anyone finds out it really is addictive, we cannot say free choice. then we are talking constrained choice. well, did not quite sound like they got that message with dr. tucker. but this is what they say behind the scenes. a cigarette is the perfect type of perfect pleasure. they are quoting oscar wilde. it is exquisite and it leaves one unsatisfied. what more can one want? end quote. let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our customers, continue to remain unsatisfied. addiction, you need more and more. all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. this is important. by the way, just to point out, dr. tucker showed some earlier surgeon general reports before they caught up with the industry on addiction, and then they studied and found out how addictive it really was. and then they are telling, yeah, he would showed you the ones about it is all just choice and skip the one that is current information when the surgeon general caught up with what the cigarette industry knew. you heard this, how they said they were going to cooperate, and they really refer to it as number one public health problem or the public health officials and all these attacks on them. nearly 20 years here they are celebrating. this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and opinion. it is brilliantly conceived and executed. now, what have we got -- it was a holding strategy. what have we got to do? create doubt about health risks without actually denying it. here they are bragging, the restraint and the unity of the industry has been very effective in this period. yeah. 1972,1964. yeah. this letter is to paul hahn, the president of american tobacco. "bold and courageous action in december of ’53," that is the plaza hotel, "when you called for a meeting of manufacturers." just read this. please, i do not mean to be bossy, please read it. there is absolutely no question in my mind that if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in deplorable position. did the concealment have a significant impact? did roland cox fit precisely into that impact that they were targeting and act exactly the way the reaction they were targeting and wanted? yes. we have proven what we have to prove here to do justice. you have heard about the cigarette advertising and the replacement smokers. they call them replacement smokers and they are going after the youth. secret documents. been a critical factor for the last 50 years. the youth of america. we have been through these. i'm going through them quick. 14 to 24 age group. r.j. reynolds, 1974, what -- would an admission have mattered? there'd be no room left for controversy or debate, doubt, denial. it would have been clear and present danger, the highest threat level, maximum deterrence, maximum motivation, more likely than not would have changed the course with roland cox, millions of other americans that have died like he has, from their addictive product that kills when used with such runaway frequency that addiction drives. dr. burns, you heard from him. i'm going to skip over his. this is the exposure, you have seen this. you take the addiction out and someone uses it as a social smoker, look at the difference than the wall of cigarettes that people are exposed to, and that is merely two packs per day, drive it up to three or four. that is what kills, that is what addiction does. that is just those cancer rates catching up. he was powerfully addicted. you heard the evidence: powerfully addicted, chain smoked, smoked all day, smoked as soon as he woke up in the morning, two to four packs, told his daughter never to pick up a bad, nasty habit. does that sound like something he just did because he liked it? tried to stop, using patches and gum and could not. not that he literally could not but seemed as if he could not and did not reach the top of the mountain. he stopped only when he was so sick that he is coughing up blood and had a lung removed and it would have been very hard physically to smoke. we know about -- you have seen this about all of the change -- this dramatic change in this nice man's personality. the power of nicotine addiction. it is the center of their universe. they engineered for it, to maximize inhalability and addictability, to override moderation and induce excess, to disrupt and corrupt the natural choice, which is, i hear something bad, i just stop it. something causes lung cancer from sucking smoke in my lungs which ain't that good in the first place. take addiction out and you make different choices. they built an empire on it. they built an empire on compulsive use that comes with addiction, that is where all the money came from. they doubled down on it. when the health scare hit, they banked on it to survive and thrive. addiction and a message will carry us through. you take the addiction out, the message would not work. not as effectively. they took advantage of addiction, they told the addicted customers there was no real reason to try to stop knowing how well denial worked. they trivialized it. they trivialized addiction to distinguish away the dangers for those replacement smokers. they are still downplaying it today. startup smokers, do not shy away. it is all just a matter of choice. 50 million quit, how hard can it be? roland cox takes responsibility for his part. they take none. i want to talk to you about the damages briefly in this case. i'm running out of time so i say briefly, i'm sorry, but it is so important. let me talk to you for just a moment about that. we have two parts of this case, punitive of which we have to show we are warranted, but i want save a moment to talk about that, and then the compensatory damages for her loss. the idea of compensatory damages is you take the harms and losses on one side and the amount of money on the other side and bring them into balance. it is not how much money you can get. it is about trying to value what was taken, what the loss was. to have them make up for that loss as best we can. there is no way to bring her husband back but in a just -- in the pursuit of justice, to try to have them reasonably and fairly make up for those losses or for the share they caused. i want to add one big (unintelligible), there is a comparative fault part of this. we believe they have a big share of the fault but, certainly, he has some. the judge gave you instruction that you do not reduce the amount of the damages by the percentage of fault on roland cox. the judge does that afterwards. so whatever percentage you were to put on that, we will reduce by the same percentage the total amount that you determine what the loss is. so free yourself, please, it is kind of a hard concept but free yourself in this process from what fault he had in determining the totality and the magnitude of the loss, because then the judge will take that mathematically out afterwards by the same percentage. and in doing so, and in looking at this loss, the story - the story is almost 20 years, 18 years, nearly 20 years ago, since roland cox died but the story started back 60 years ago. they got this young boy lured in early and addicted and sent all these mixed messaging, would not admit. but some light came into that story that we have been telling you that is a very dark story, and that light was rose cox. she came to roland's life and it was a light. regretfully not all marriages are wonderful, but when one is, it is truly precious. the day that rose walked in that bowling alley and met roland was the best day of her life. she found her soulmate, who does that? some, some of us are lucky, many are not. very quickly, they were -- eight months they were married. i'm done, this is it for both of us. they were very close knit and they relied upon one another. some people are very socially lead their own lives. they people were a team, they clung to one another. they were truly, when we talk about a marriage, a union. this is what the word "union" and "ceremony" means. the blending as one. they had a daughter that came into this relationship and then there were three. and then, of course, she is got her own life. she is a loving daughter but she moves out of this in the natural course of life and has her life. and what is left is these two wonderful people who face adversity or whatever happens to be in good times and rough together as one. they were each other's lives. that is the circumstance that we have to measure this. that is the circumstance here. it is a wonderful circumstance, but it makes for a horrendous loss to her. rose cox, when her husband died -- we have to stop for a moment and think. we see her now -- and i mean no disrespect -- is an elderly woman. but when her husband died, she was like 62. i remember when 62 sounded old. it does not sound old anymore. i think about my parents who made it about her age together. and i think back, if i were (unintelligible), all the things in their lives together, those 20 years, all those things, what value that had. my mother did not lose my father back then. i cannot regretfully say that for rose cox. i cannot say that. she sits here today (unintelligible) because of the nature of the relationship and how they really were one and they relied on each other so heavily, they were not out. they worked as a team. when he was alive and rearing their daughter, she would work one shift and he would work the other. never learned to do the diapers but they worked hand in hand. he is the guy that takes the daughter shopping when he did not shop for anything else, a wonderful husband, wonderful father, wonderful disposition, caring, loving guy. perfect, not for everybody, but for her. irreplaceable because when he died at such a relatively young age for her, she had plenty of time to try to, quote, move on and find someone else, but it would have been according to her — and someone asked you the question and it did come out sounding a bit odd about dishonesty. i was glad someone asked the question, because she explained exactly what she meant. she felt that if she would go to date with another man, go to dinner, sit down with another man, it would be dishonest to the nature of their relationship. she could not move on. he was too much a part of her life. 18 years in virtual isolation. she is got a wonderful daughter. her daughter is still alive. that life, but for this horrible cancer, more like -- no one knows for sure, more likely than not, would have been shared nearly 20 years with the love of her life. she cannot let it go. she will not move to another man because in her mind the man is still there. she is talks to him. she goes by the chair. she feels his presence. he is much in her soul. when she goes to bed at night she pats the pillows every night. i would suggest that under the circumstances and facts of this case, $10 million is not unreasonable. but i would, likewise, suggest to you, that at the end of the day it is your duty and responsibility to weigh this and present it to the evidence and facts and circumstances of this case and do what is fair and just. 5 million would not be unreasonable. it is your job to piece this together and try to do what is right, what is just. how you best use the measuring stick of justice in this case is truly up to you. rose is here and been carrying the torch for her husband, and she is looking for justice, and she appreciates your willingness to try to do it. the last thing, before i sit down, i want to talk to you about is the punitive damages part of this case, because that part is very significant where we show, yes, it is a higher burden by the more clear and convincing, but it is not beyond a reasonable doubt: clear and convincing. we have got to show that they used reckless disregard for human life, conscious indifference, reckless disregard for safety and welfare, reckless indifference to the rights of others. for goodness sake, did we show by clear and convincing evidence that that is what they were up to? there has not been any evidence to dispute it. so we have met our burden for punitive damages. once you get into the punitive damages we are then down in to reprehensibility of conduct, and we are then down in to talking about some of the important aspects that go beyond roland cox. reprehensible, harm to others, and an opportunity under the law here to deter and punish and try to do something important here. try to deter, punish, and do something important here. yes, on this verdict form. yes, on this verdict form. yes, roland cox was -- was roland cox addicted? i suggest the evidence is certainly greater weight of the evidence. was the negligence of american tobacco - i'm sorry, was it a legal cause of his death that he smoked so much that it caused his lung cancer? that clearly was from the smoking. i would suggest the answer is clearly yes, that ends class membership. we then are talking about negligence. was it a legal cause? and you have got the instructions and saw and you can take them back, it does not say the sole cause. need not be the sole cause, so long as it substantially - contributed substantially. in other words, it was not some unsubstantial thing. were the defective -- was -- were the defective and unreasonable dangerous cigarettes? remember, that part, it is not were they defective? they are. was it one of the causes for the outcome here? the defective product. was one of the causes here addiction in a product that kills? the combination. was the concealment a cause? not the sole cause. the concealment, again, the -- what they knew and would not admit was true about their own product, thereby creating a controversial error rather than a solid fact there should have been. same for the conspiracy. and this is the last part that i want to talk to you about. "under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against rj. reynolds tobacco company." i would ask you -- i'm in a hurry, i want to slow down, but i've got to sit down. this is so important. the answer to that means a bit more hardship, one more day. we will be done tomorrow. we have come a long ways. you have come along ways in your work and it is very appreciated. answer yes to this question and the case law, the law the judge gave you, and facts and evidence, it is appropriate to say yes. and yes says we finish this hard work that we started two weeks ago and really do something important here. thank you. mr. mitnik: i have tried very hard to be above board, to try -- even though i have a responsibility to this lady over here and i certainly am an advocate for her, i have tried very hard to stay above board and be a guide to the truth and approach this with integrity and honor and honesty with you. not play games with the truth, not give half-truths and talk out of both sides of my mouth and be straight. i've tried really hard. you folks can be the judge of that. i sat here and listened to a personal attack like i've never heard in a courtroom. and now i'm going to address some of these accusations made, and we are going to get down to the truth of the matter here. first of all, they make a product on purpose as addictive as possible through bad engineering. because of its high level of addictiveness, people use it with extreme frequency, outrageous frequency, all day long, like nothing else out there. and they know by doing that they make money and it kills in droves. and they are targeting teenagers to do it again in the next generation. that product, because of the nature of it, this defective product, because of the very nature of it, when used as intended, kills. when used the way you are supposed to use it, the way they designed it, engineered it and marketed it to be used, kills their customers. and they come in this courtroom and tell you and get on a high horse and act like there is some injustice that they would be here. you talk about litigation strategies. let us talk about them for just a moment. the measuring stick and the only one that has been their guide to every corporate decision that they have made, every corporate decision that is a part of this case, their measuring stick has been greed and money. yet when they are close to some accountability for what they have done, some reckoning, suddenly they want to turn their measuring stick -- in a court of law where it is appropriate, not out there where greed is killing their customers, but in here where we have the embracement of our justice system to talk about compensation and to talk about accountability, suddenly they want to break the measuring stick that they lived by into little pieces and belittle it. think about why. bigger bags, larger bags of money. and now they might have to part with some. that could be a deterrent to business as usual, and they get really testy. what is this got to do with roland cox? there were three questions. i'm going to get to those three questions in a moment, and we are going to talk about the law that has been distorted here. but i want to start with something. what is this got to do with roland? look, this started out - rj. reynolds' lawyer started out in opening statement, put the engle findings and said, "we are not going to contest these engle findings. there were some bad things that were said, and they are going to be offensive, and i'm not going to make excuses. it is a big company. a few people might have said something over the years." a few people might have said something over the years? a few bad apples said some offensive things? really. really. that’s the best they can do to shoot straight with you? and then they say, "we are not going to contest engle." and then they say i've spent the whole trial presenting you evidence about the conspiracy and the fraud and the defective product and the negligence when there was no cause for it, no cause other than just stirring you up. why would i ever bring you that evidence? we have the engle findings. well, okay. i will take that invitation. because, as counsel told you, one of the big questions that they are so sensitive about is the entitlement - where is the - is the entitlement -here - is the entitlement for punitive damages. now, he has told you everything that you needed to know about their conduct was already in the engle findings. now, i thought i was presenting the evidence to you about what they did because i thought they were fighting that their conduct was bad enough, egregious enough, to warrant punitive damages. and i thought they were going to hold our feet to the fire to prove more than just engle findings but show you more. i did not know he thought that everything we needed to prove was in the engle findings about their behavior. consequently, i want to take them up on that. since they believe everything you needed to hear about their conduct was contained in the engle findings themselves and i did not have to bring any evidence and show just how bad they were, then it is easy. they just told you to answer yes to the last question. they said, "look, you did not have to bring any evidence." is not that the end? now, of course that is not what they mean, and i do not want to be cute with you. i'm pointing out a litigation tactic, to claim that i'm just presenting all this evidence for no reason other than to try to stir emotion, when in fact we had an obligation under the law to bring you evidence as to this question. and we cannot just put the engle findings up and do that. we also have an obligation under the law -and, in fairness, an obligation to you folks who came here and have given of your time -- to bring you evidence. out of one side of their mouth they tell you, "where is the evidence?" out of the other side they say, "why did they present you evidence?" there is a comparative fault issue. here's a curious question. how were you supposed to decide between -- compare and contrast roland cox's fault and rj. reynolds' fault if we did not show you in some detail what they did? how were you going to do that? perhaps i had an obligation to you and under the law and to my client to present my case so you could do your jobs. you think they do not know that? think they do not know that? think they would have just said at the end of the case, "sure, answer this one. you did not need that, any of it"? litigation strategies that i'm being accused of. let us talk a little more about it. here's - and there were a lot of trick questions. let me give you a trick question. we just talked all this time about engle findings just to stir you up. why would we do that? on the other hand, they spent the whole -- because engle findings are already admitted and there is nothing to contest, so why would we present proof? that is what they said. everyone heard it. well, let me take the flip side. we admitted from the admissions you saw in the beginning of the case that he could not quit, possibly quit. we have said that from day one. but what have they told you almost the entire case? what have they talked about through all their witnesses, through their opening statement, and probably fifty percent of their closing argument? he could quit. they said it and packaged it like 50 different ways. we admitted he could quit before we ever got here and asked you to give up your time. so why would we keep reproving, "you can quit," "you can quit," "you can quit," "you can quit," "you can quit," when i told you in opening statement of course people can quit? it is possible. how could i tell you he could not quit? after he got his disease, he quit. so why would they keep saying that? there is something called a straw man argument. you prop up an argument that you know you can win, you could not not win, and make it sound like, "if i can prove that, i win the case." you know what it is? it is the same old talking points that this company has been perpetrating for years, and they are repeating it to you here in the courtroom. "choice, choice, choice, choice. how hard could it be to put them down? it is all just a matter of choice." this is a repackaging of choice. think through it. he could quit. what is the next piece to, "you could quit"? "therefore, it is all just a matter of choice." let us not talk about addiction. let us bring the guy in here who you say -- who comes in here and says things opposite -- now, think of this one for just a moment on litigation strategies. two experts. two experts. that is all they brought as witnesses, two experts. one of them was an addiction specialist who came in here to say addiction is like a feather. it is nothing. it does not cause -- it is not a substantially contributing cause to why people smoke enough to get sick. that is a free pass on every case. but what did not they show him? the internal documents from the very company that has hired and paid him all this money that say the dead opposite. "it is a product that, thank goodness, our customers cannot quit." it is addictive. it is a highly addictive, powerful addiction they talk and brag and celebrate and made an empire off of. their own internal documents prove it. but they hire a guy and pay him money to talk to you like you are not going to notice over here are all these documents out of their own -- nobody knows their product better than them. they talk in private behind closed doors about this powerful addiction. they bring someone all the way from california, pay them a hundred grand for this case alone, to tell you folks, "addiction's nothing. unless you have got a mental illness, it is nothing." it is a [unintelligible]. it is nothing like what they talked about in private. it is precisely what they really do in public to the kids, and they have got this guy doing it to you. litigation strategies. did not stop there. there was another expert. they bring this historian in, not a guy that was a specialist out there, knew all about the history of nicotine and all. they made him -- they took the guy that was a historian and made him a courtroom expert. they just created him. they practiced him up. they did a mock cross-examination. not just one; the industry did. and they bring him in to tell you everything you all needed to know. and guess what they do not do with him? all those internal documents -- and i should not say "all," because we just hit the tip of the iceberg, but those internal documents that you have seen. they were bragging on, "we would be in shambles but for our conspiracy," patting themselves on the back. "we were so successful, but we need to - we need to regenerate it for the next generation so we can make some more money even though they are going to die, and we are going to start with replacement kids." that historian could not stand in here and have that conversation if he ever dared look at what they wrote themselves. so what did they do? hide the ball. do not let him look. prepare him how to deal with cross about it, so he cannot even talk about it in front of you, so he can give half a story that is misleading. is it any surprise that is the litigation tactic from r.j. reynolds, part of this conspiracy? let me give you another one. ct- -- the ctr. they just stood up and told you, "we are such good people. look how wonderful we are. we did all these great things." ctr, what a good organization. these are the engle findings. council for tobacco research. they were one of the coconspirators, found to be conspirators in this. and they have got the gall to stand up and put them on the board and say, "we are good citizens. look at ctr." you saw the documents about how these things were a sham. they changed the name. it started out as tobacco institute for research or something, tirc, and then they changed the name to something else because it sounded less like it was them and more removed. and they called it an industry shield to propagate the conspiracy. that is what they were up to. but they are good citizens. and what -- what did they know? and when they put up all the -- do you know what was not up there? $10 million. still marketing. and all -- and asam, the psychological group their witness was from, talking about, "we have got to do something. what they are doing with these kids, they are sucking them in today." you heard it from dr. cummings. they did not talk about what they are doing today to this product that kills when used as intended and highly addictive. let us talk about, "listen, we are fine, upstanding, taking all this business seriously. it is just the wrong case and the wrong product. it is just the wrong smoker. we are responsible, but we are defending here for one reason, because it is the wrong smoker." okay? talk about a litigation strategy? let us peel that one back just a little bit. because you know the truth really matters in here, and i'm going to continue to try to [unintelligible]. let us peel that one back. it is just roland cox is the wrong smoker. really? okay. the historian said everybody - i did not hear him say roland cox knew everything -- everybody in america knew everything they needed to know. everybody. who is the right smoker? who is the right smoker? if everybody in america knew all they needed to know and that is the way they escape accountability, is not everybody everybody? who is the right smoker? the court reporter: sorry? mr. mitnik: who is the right smoker? let us talk about their addiction guy that they brought from san francisco that hardly ever works with nicotine. he says, "for everybody except the rarest of rare, this does not cause you to be a substantial contributing cause." and remember, you have now got the instructions and he knows full well what that means. if it is not a substantial contributing cause, you are not a class member. case over. total victory for rjr. he did not say just for roland cox. he said even if you are addicted, except in rare, extreme cases, with a tortured smoker - he rarely sees that person -- it would not be a substantial contributing cause. really? it is just because it is roland cox they are not taking that road. virtually no one would meet that standard. the court reporter: i'm having trouble hearing you. mr. mitnik: virtually no one would meet that standard. so really is it just roland cox that is the problem to justice and the obstacle to justice for these people? they asked me - oh. let me just get this out of the way, because i'm afraid i'm going to run out of time and it is important. i've got to straighten up some law here. "ask mr. mitnik to talk about was he unable to quit." i'm going to talk about it. it will not take long. yes, he was able to quit. he is taken responsibility for being able to quit. he is taken responsibility -- not for that big, long list of things. not for that big, long list of things. it was specific what they were taking responsibility, and it is the things that make sense, for not trying harder to break free from this horrible addiction, not to use the addiction as a complete excuse but to say he takes some responsibility. it is not a litigation strategy to make you compromise. it is trying to be reasonable and level-headed and fair. and if you are asking someone to do justice, then you would better walk the walk and talk the talk. remember we talked way back about the three rules of responsibility, corporate responsibility or personal. before you point the finger of blame, hold the mirror up. they have talked about responsibility in this whole case. roland cox and his wife took the responsibility. both held the mirror up from day one. have they once done anything but straighten their finger at you? secondly, if you are going to talk the talk, walk the walk. these people made corporate decisions by highly intelligent businessmen behind closed doors on purpose for money, knowing the consequences, versus roland cox, who was badly addicted and did not try hard enough. we are not shirking that responsibility. we are taking it. for goodness sakes, who has the lion's share in that comparison? they were making a profit on that addiction, knowing it would kill the man, and misleading him as best they could. he should have tried harder. under those circumstances, he could have come in and said, "i was just too addicted." he could not. he is not alive. but through his wife. we are not. how in the world could they not say they do not have a lion's share of the responsibility here? let me finish this question. so was he able to quit? the answer is yes. does that exonerate them from responsibility here? absolutely not. next question. pall mall. i need to talk to you about pall mall. well, i do, because they did a cut-and-paste job on what the experts clearly said, as if you did not hear it. yes, dr. henningfield said the plain tobacco kills. it is addictive. it can be more deadly and more addictive in its pure form. nicotine is a poison. but we did not have an epidemic then. we never - no one ever even hardly heard of dying of lung cancer. those monstrous epidemic lung cancer rates came as a direct result of all the manufacturing, the flue curing to soften it, all the additives to make it go deep and smooth and not burn your lungs until you are hacking and coughing. somebody who could choke down raw tobacco and get it in, it would be very addictive and very dangerous. but very few people can do it, and they certainly could not do it with frequency. it was too toxic. they took the toxicity down to make it easy to go down and get deep in the lungs and fast to the brain, and the likelihood of addiction went through the ceiling, and here came all of the death. and that was made perfectly clear by dr. henningfield. dr. cummings could not have made it more clear that pall mall was much more addictive and consequently causing vast more death and danger and high likelihood of addiction than any of the hand-rolled. they take a snippet of a perfectly crafted question and put that up and leave all the rest out. and they are talking about my litigation strategy. we have now talked to two of the questions they said - let me talk about -- because i've got a lot else i want to talk to you - i want to get out of the way to challenge; that he did not know about the dangers. well, that is an interesting trick question, too. that is another one of these straw questions, because it is not the question. remember we said ninety percent of the people had heard about it? once again, just -- they want to set it up, a question they know they can win, because when we get to the real questions they cannot, not with fair-minded jurors. they cannot. so they recraft the question into something they could win, they could not lose. that is the way r.j. reynolds does business. the question is ninety percent of everybody heard, and i told you in opening statement of course you would have heard. i told you, because it is true. let us try and be a guide to the truth and not shave the truth. so they set that up to be the question. if that was the question, we would not be here. the question is -- and this is -- by the way, this is on one -- one of the causes of action. this is not the defective product. this is not the negligence cause. this is on this concealment. and let us look at it. "concealed or omitted material information about the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, or both." let us break that down for just a moment. concealed material information. that does not say, "have you heard it could be dangerous to you?" it does not say anything remotely like that. did they conceal material information, really? how much more material could it be that the manufacturer of this product knows for a fact the allegations being made against their product that this thing's causing lung cancer were absolutely true and their product was highly addictive? what could be more material information for a consumer to know, a consumer who, and to make matters worse, most of them are addicted and looking for a way out? and instead of admitting it, you go on the attack and say that people making the accusation over at public health officials are all a bunch of fuddy-duddies who are uninformed. "but we are going to hire the best scientists to get you an answer." that is not material information being concealed? that does not make a difference in the smoker, if they knew what they were up to, chuckling and laughing at them all the way to the bank? psychological crutch. if they would have heard and seen the way the talk about the customers and the way they manipulate the customers and what they knew about the deaths of their customers and the addictiveness of their product, that would not be material information to roland cox or anyone else with half a brain that would have been in that setting? it is not that easy, because you have still got to struggle with addiction, but for goodness sakes, you get motivated and you start the long effort to try to stop. and let me add something else there. they talk about rose cox ends everything, rose cox ends it all, because she said, "i do not think anyone could say whether [unintelligible]". she is talking at the end of his life, when he tried to stop and - and could not pull it off. we are talking about back in 1953 when he was a young man and early in the addictive cycle, not at the deep end stages of it. she is not answering for what would have happened back before when it should have happened, this golden opportunity for them to come clean and tell the truth, if they had owned up rather than cover up or at least hush up. and this is very important. bring me back up -- let me just get this, because it is - "very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine and its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison." 1978. people did not know how addictive it was. that is another out of the both sides of their mouth. they put all these cartoons, nicotine slaves, songs about nicotine, nicotine fiend, saying this is a bad addiction and everybody knew it. then they bring an addiction expert in 2011 in gainesville, florida, for you who says, "oh, it is nothing like that." both sides of their mouth. this is important. "concealed or omitted material information about the health effects" -and this is a very important word; i circled it for a reason - "or" - "or the addictive nature of their cigarettes." if they concealed information about just -which it was not. it was not. they were concealing both. but let us just pretend for a minute all they concealed was about how powerfully addictive this was. so roland cox would have known what he was getting into, like heroin, and said, "you know what? i think i'll have a beer instead of heroin, because i do not want to end up struggling with an addiction for the rest of my life. well, maybe i'll go another route because i've just heard this is a real deal, addiction. not little cartoons about it. the maker of the product has told me the truth about it." would that have been a material decision-making in his life early on with this stuff? of course it would have. did they know more about the addictive nature than him? well, of course they did. did they know the truth about whether this was just a controversy and maybe it might be bad or not? of course not [sic]. later in life do you reach a point where -where roland would have figured out, "this stuffs probably bad for me, no matter what these people say"? do you reach a point of, "okay, my daughter's saying it to me. i'm way the heck out in 1990"? of course. we are talking about what they did to him in the early years that got him deep in the addictive cycle when there was an opportunity to save his life, not late in life. that is what -- again, you have got to keep your eye on the ball. not later in life. back then when -- and here's one of the things that is really, really one of the worst things about it. they were talking to you about risk reduction. who knows more about the risk reduction, stopping their product, than they do, way back when? they knew all along about it, that it caused cancer. and they knew all along that if you quit, you had a real chance for recovery. it was not over just because you would been smoking for a while. risk reduction. they knew all about it. they are masters of it. they did not tell the public that. instead they had a holding strategy, knowing holding meant you are missing the opportunity to get away without cancer. mr. prysock: you have got 11 minutes. mr. mitnik: they said, "boy, this is horrible." and i want --1 do not even think this is necessary, but i feel i need to just comment briefly. the underlying suggestion, "gosh, you have to come back tomorrow," i know you folks have put in a lot of time, but this is important work. it is so important work. you have seen why. you have seen why in this courtroom. i promise you it is only one day. just one more day and we can do something that makes a difference. let me set it straight so we can do what we can do to make a difference, okay? and we will deal tomorrow with the details. i'm not even going to bore you with the details today. and i hope, for the sake of justice, we will be talking tomorrow about the details. but let me just set something straight. some things are great for the government to do, and some things just do not really work there. they work better at the community level, like right here. right here. what was the proof in this case? dr. henningfield said -- remember they played the game where you could just see - and he is a nice man. it is hard to get around. he did not bark, but you could see the aggravation and anger when he was being cross-examined unfairly to make a point by cutting and pasting, where they were saying, "well, did not you say one of the things you could consider is increasing nicotine and one of the things you could consider is lowering nicotine?" and he finally said, "you know full well" -because, remember, he was cross-examining him - you know full well that my opinion was, my main opinion was - we were considering everything because we were learning about what they know about it is addictive. we were catching up. we were studying, considering everything. it was an attempt to save lives. but my main opinion was to take addiction out of it. and you know well my opinion. remember that? but you know what else he said? the fd- - and remember, they talked about the fda. you also heard the testimony that they sued to keep the fda from regulating them. you heard the testimony. this is the good citizens today. they have left this one off there, that when they have been trying to - the fda has tried to have stronger warning labels. these kids are still picking it up. they sued to block it. dr. henningfield told you the fda provides a level playing field where - if just one of them were to -- one of them were to be encouraged to bring these nicotine levels out of the addictive stage or start using the non-addictive tobacco, the ones without nicotine in it, if just one did it, it does not do much. but the fda is out there. it is a framework that that could be accomplished because of the level playing field and they could actually do something. but he further said - and this is why we are here with you. this is not something just about money. he said it would -- you could not do it through the fda alone; it would take the cooperation of the industry to bring that to a reality, to force them to do things like taking the addictiveness out of the product. it would take their cooperation. and they need to be encouraged by the only measuring stick they know and understand. and this is an important step in that process. and this is the forum. the asam, the american psychiatric something something, from their own expert, said, encouraged, "this is the forum. some things are better done at the community level." i've got so dang much. i'm just out of time, and i know you-all are worn out. let me just make a couple points. just to show you the games they are playing, when we are talking about strategies and supposed to fight for your side but trying to be a guide of the truth, this is one of the documents they just put up for you. i'm not talking about their historian. they put it up just a few minutes for you. and they put up the headline that says, "cigarette smoking cited as main cause of cancer," to give this impression, "whew, this is all everywhere." we did not do it. what have we got to do with it? this is the same article. look how this has been cut and pasted. let me show you how it really looks. this is the problem with the historian, and this is the problem with rj. reynolds here. we are trying to get to the truth, and it is really slippery. that is the same article. there is the headline they showed you, and cut this out. "more research still needed, says the industry." and that entire column is them going through, "this stuff, there is no link. we do not know. we have got to find" — why would you put that headline up and leave that out? the truth matters, folks. it really matters. it just makes it so hard to get to the bottom of justice on something this important, but i've got to bring it out. okay. give me one moment. i've got five minutes. let me just quickly... one thing i've got to show you. i'm not going to pull it up because i do not have time. i do not know where i left it. the jury instructions on class membership, and they put up all those questions for class membership, could you quit, could you this, was he a tortured smoker, was he -i do not remember all the phrases. if you look at the instruction, those words are not found there anywhere. it is another straw man question. the question is, was he addicted and was the addiction a legal cause? and a legal cause is was it a contributing cause, and it cannot be insignificant. it has to be substantial, not insubstantial. was it a, one of the causes, that a smoker got sick? it does not say anything about this extreme put the bar here. because you know what it is again? all they talk about is, "the problem here is roland cox, not us refusing to take any responsibility at all." well, if you put the bar to question number 1 so far that nobody can meet it and bring in an expert and back you up, there is no accountability for anybody. it is not just roland cox. so look at it and see what the real instruction is, because that one's so clearcut. the last thing that i want to talk to you about is - it breaks my heart i've got all these things i want to talk to you about. i really want -- i'm burning in court for me to tell you the truth, but i just cannot. and i'm going to sit down over there and go, man, i forgot" - because i feel such a responsibility to this lady and to the importance of what we are here about. i started earlier talking to you about the concept of having a spotlight on one person on a stage; everything else is black. the entire litigation strategy for r.j. reynolds has been here - it is the same one they have - you have seen in the records, you have seen in the records - to make it a little tight spotlight on that one person, our smoker, that one person, our smoker, that died. "and if there is some accountability, put a laser spotlight on him, and keep all of our actions out of the light. do not shed any light on them." and how do they do it? you saw the documents. "if the word gets out that these things really are addictive -- thank god there is all this talk but nobody really gets it." that is how they talked in private. "if it gets out that these things are really addictive, we cannot defend ourselves with free choice, because addiction robs you of not all choice, but free choice." that is how they talk, not in one document but two. but they come right back here on that same message. have not moved a bit. they shifted it just a little. now they say, "oh, it can be addictive, but just not to anybody," in a way that would [unintelligible] and trivialize it down to nothing, which happens to match what they are telling the kids so they are not deterred. i simply ask you to see through this strategy that they are so good at that is so easy to miss. i'm trying to put the spotlight here and allow us, as we have tried to do here for your benefit, to turn the floodlight on to show who else was on that stage, these coconspirators. and this particular product he smoked his whole life was theirs, so they are here to answer for this. and let us please do justice and see through the tactics and let the truth matter. and let us please have one more day of your time and answer these questions in a way that takes us there, say "yes" so we can get to there, so we can get to tomorrow and talk in detail about how to make a difference. mr. prysock: two minutes. mr. mitnik: i'm going to sit down two minutes early.