closing argument by the defendant mr. belasic: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. thanks for being here so long. as mr. rosenblum said, i know two weeks -- it was not exactly volunteer when you came in. you were drafted. thanks for performing your civic duty; not just to the system in general, but to mr. crawford and r.j. reynolds tobacco company. you know, mr. alvarez just told you just like he told you in opening statement, he said that his client, mr. crawford, believed the tobacco companies and did not think that smoking was dangerous until 1989. so let us make no mistake about it. what he is telling you is this man, until he was 54, did not think smoking was dangerous. you remember you heard that there are two sides, sometimes more, to every story. there is two sides to every testimony. there is the time when the lawyer asks you questions. mr. crawford gets up there. mr. alvarez asks him, "were you deceived? were you defrauded?" he showed you what he said. but then there is cross-examination, the great 2029 engine of truth in our system. everyone is allowed and required to be subjected to cross-examination. i think you remember, and i'm going to show you, mr. crawford said flat out that decades, years before he got cancer, years before he quit, that he knew and he personally believed that smoking was dangerous and that it could cause cancer in him. let us look at what he said. that is his testimony when i asked him: "you saw the surgeon general's 1970 warning, 'smoking is dangerous.' so you knew was dangerous to your health? and he answered "yes." i saw a lot of you write that down when he made that admission in the trial. that is not what mr. alvarez said this case was going to be about in opening, and that is not what mr. crawford testified when he answered questions. in 1970, he knew. he was not believing some statement that we know he never heard. he was not believing something that dr. proctor came in and showed you that mr. crawford never heard. he believed and a he knew it was dangerous to his health 22 years before he ever got cancer, and he chose to smoke after that, just like he chose to quit. 2030 but it was a lot more significant. he said he personally, personally believed -- again, we are talking two decades before he got his cancer -- he personally thought he could get cancer from smoking. and remember what he did? he bought cancer insurance. twenty years. they are claiming he is defrauded. how could you be defrauded about something you said under oath you believed? how could you be defrauded about something that you went out and bought insurance for? i know his explanation. he says, "well, my wife had cancer in her family, so i bought that policy." you know what? he did not buy that policy just for her. he said he bought that policy for himself as well. he did not have cancer in his family. that was heart disease was in his family. he bought it because he knew, he believed that smoking caused cancer 20 years before he got sick. he believed it. he went out and bought insurance for it. now, any statement from now on that suggests that this man was defrauded, that he was defrauded in the '70s, that he was defrauded after 1982, that 2031 was his sworn testimony, ladies and gentlemen. there is no dispute about that because that is what mr. crawford said. mr. rosenblum got up and said, "you know, the defendant never brought a doctor to say for sure that smoking did not cause his larynx cancer." that is true. they brought in someone who had never treated him and had never met mr. crawford and, we are going to show, did not even look at his medical records, ladies and gentlemen. but let us turn the tables because what mr. rosenblum says is a fair point. let us turn the tables on them. where are mr. crawford's doctors? he is 78 years old. he was diagnosed 20 years ago. everyone agrees there is a box full of medical records that are hundreds or perhaps over a thousand pages long. you can look at every one of them, and you will see dozens and dozens of doctors. not one of his doctors ever diagnosed him as addicted. i asked mr. crawford that. he said no, none of his doctors ever told him he was addicted. but yet, i asked him, every time you see a doctor, they ask you about smoking, and they ask you about 2032 drinking, and they ask you about diet. now, who knows him best? a doctor from baltimore that read the deposition, who never even met him and did not even look at the medical records, or his own doctors, dozens of them? where is that doctor? do not you think that if there was a doctor who had found him addicted, it would be in the medical records? we just pull out a piece of paper. there it is. dr. smith says he is addicted. it is not there, and they do not call any of them. same thing about the causes of his cancer. think of all of the doctors he is had from the time he was diagnosed to the time he was treated to the time he had his surgery. we know the doctors did pathology testing. did they take a biopsy? not one of those doctors ever concluded that smoking caused his cancer. and in all of those medical records, there is not a sheet of paper that says smoking caused his cancer. and i'm going submit to you -- you will decide for yourself -- that is why they had to go to baltimore and find a man that had never met him because none of his doctors support that. and you heard that from mr. crawford. not one of his 2033 doctors think he is addicted. there is no evidence that any of his doctors found that his smoking was caused by cancer [sic]. now, the evidence in this case is that mr. crawford was a willing smoker. and by "willing," i mean there is no dispute that he enjoyed smoking, and he told you that. you saw all of the reasons that are in the medical records, there are all of the reasons that are in the depositions that he enjoyed smoking. but he was not just a willing smoker because he liked it. he was a willing smoker because no one, and certainly not r.j. reynolds, forced him to smoke. what do we know about his starting? the first thing he told me is that he did not start because of advertising. all those old ads that they showed to get you mad, mr. crawford said those did not cause him to start smoking. he said it was his brother. he said the only person who was responsible for him starting was his brother. so he does not sue his brother, but he is going to sue a company with money. but he admits that none of those advertisements caused him to start. well, now think about the next step. when he 2034 was 16, he said he started -- he became a regular smoker. and he does not even claim that r.j. reynolds caused him to become a regular smoker. he does not even claim it was advertising. he says the only reason is that his mother began buying him cigarettes. and if you will think back, i asked him straight out: "is not it true that the simple reason you became a regular smoker is that your mother started buying you cigarettes?" and he said that is not true. and that was the first of many, many times, you will remember, ladies and gentlemen, i had to pull out his sworn testimony from last year because he is testified before trial under oath like all of the other witnesses. and i had to put that up on the screen, and you saw what he said last year before trial. and he said "yes, he started becoming a regular smoker for the simple reason that his mother bought cigarettes." now, they want to talk about lies. they want to use smear words, et cetera. they want to attack. they want to say every disagreement of opinion between a tobacco company and the surgeon general is a blatant lie. 2035 you are going to decide the credibility of every witness, including mr. crawford. and you saw example after example. i only asked him questions, i think, for about an hour and 20 minutes, yet how many times did i have to put up his testimony that he had given a year ago to show that he had said something that was the exact opposite of what he was saying today? like when he said, "oh, i believed the companies. i did not think it was dangerous," and then he admits now for 20 years, he believed it could cause cancer; when he says, "no, it was not my mom," and it was his mom. that is his testimony. no one is tricking him. all we are doing is showing the man his sworn testimony. now, plaintiffs say he smoked because he was deceived or we concealed something. you saw that for 20 years, he continued to smoke even though he believed he could get cancer to the point he was going out and buying a cancer insurance policy. but consider this: the most important evidence that would tell you whether a person has been defrauded, when he quit, when he changed his mind and decided he would quit, you heard 2036 dr. samuel say that he told him that he had decided about a year out that on december 31, '89, he would smoke his last cigarette and that he planned to spend the year tapering down. and he did exactly that; that he made a plan. december 31, '89, was the target date, and he met it. now, did he suddenly start smoking because he learned what mr. alvarez says is the truth? or that he found out some new information and he said, "oh, no, i did not know?" no. he admits, there was no new information that caused him to smoke. it was not a change in cigarettes. it was not a change in information. what he changed was his mind. now, think of a normal case of fraud. what happens is, you find out the truth, and you say, "wait second. now that i know, i'm going to change my behavior" or "now that i know, i'm going to try to give that car back to the dealer. it is a lemon, they did not tell me." that is not what happened to him. he said it was not any new information, and of course it was not because for 20 years he thought he could get lung cancer. and for at least 20 years, he said under oath he knew it could be dangerous. so this idea that he heard something that was never identified, 2037 it is not right. it is not correct. and it is not true because mr. crawford said it was not true when i asked him. you have seen this many times, and we all know that these are mr. crawford's own words. he quit because he just decided that it was time to quit. as mr. alvarez said, he was getting older, and he decided it was time to quit. not that he suddenly learned the truth. he had known for decades, believed for decades that it was dangerous and could cause cancer in him. he said he really, really wanted to quit. why is that important? because he said that is when he finally made up his mind. look at the word "finally." this is his words, not ours. he finally made up his mind, meaning before then, as we heard, he was not motivated. he did not want to quit. he saw the surgeon general's warning and believed it, and he chose not to stop. he was warned by his family. he knew and believed he could get cancer, but he did not make up his mind to quit until 1989. and nothing that r.j. reynolds did prevented him from making up his mind before because he knew and believed it could cause cancer. now, they talked about family. okay? he has 2038 a wife and two children. now, of his family, the only family member that they called was his daughter. did his daughter corroborate or back up his story? look what she says. she is not aware that he ever tried to quit before january 1990. you judge her testimony. there is no reason for her to try to hurt her father's case. she is telling the truth there. he did not try to stop before january 1990. we heard he made a plan, he would spend a year tapering down and quit on december 31, 1989. that is what he did. i'm going to talk to you about the evidence and the warnings, but i've already shown you in his own words what he knew and believed for decades before he developed cancer, before he quit. there were warnings all around him, on the packs, in the tv, in the magazines. he was warned but a coworker. we know what he believed. he told me way back in the day, he had heard "coffin nail." he had heard "cancer stick." he had heard "nicotine fix." that was before all of the technical publications were coming out, and he thought "cancer stick" -- he knew it meant that that cigarette, that "cancer stick" he was buying could cause cancer. 2039 he told us in the '50s, he knew there was bad stuff in cigarette smoke. now, i heard what he said about filters. we are going to look at exactly the evidence on filters and exactly what he said about filters. he knew the surgeon general thought that smoking was unsafe. he never told you that he did not believe the surgeon general. he knew. and get this: his daughter said that in '65 or '66, he smoked around her so much she was getting bronchitis, and there was a family discussion that cigarette smoke from his cigarette was causing lung injuries or lung problems in his daughter. now, ladies and gentlemen, that is 26 years before he developed cancer. he knew. he knew then it could hurt the lungs. it was hurting his daughter's lungs, and he chose not to make even an effort to quit. we know he read the 1966 warnings, and we know millions of people quit after those warnings. he chose not to. look what his own daughter said. again, do not believe me. look at what he said and what the evidence is. his own daughter says that the 1966 warning on every pack he bought did not tell her father 2040 anything he did not already know. that is his daughter. i mean, what possible reason is there to not believe that? so the only family member they called does not back up his story. and his wife, who lived with him from the age of 17, who is still living with him and would have had firsthand knowledge, she did not testify. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. they have the same ability to call the witness. i withdraw that. go ahead. mr. belasic: they talk about family. all they call is his daughter. now, you saw the list of depositions of all of the people who testified. none of them were called. it is just the daughter, and she does not back up her father. he knew in '66 these things. that is 26 years before he got cancer. we know he said he was sure he saw the '70s warning. and that is when i asked him: "you saw it, you knew it was dangerous to your health in 1970?" he said simply, "yes." we know that it was not just generic. oh, it could be dangerous. i do not know what that means. no, he was already thinking, 20 years before, that 2041 he could get cancer. and that is why we know he made that dramatic decision. he bought cancer insurance, not just for his wife, but he bought cancer insurance 20 years before he got it. he knew. you did not hear this: he was personally warned from the plaintiff, he was personally warned by his coworker -- and dr. samuel told you about that -- he was personally warned, and he did not change his mind. we know he bought that cancer insurance. and years later, he saw this warning that could not have been more specific. and did he tell you, well, in 1985 he had known about cancer for many years; that he changed his smoking behavior? no. he did not. and when you talk about concealment, you cannot conceal something that somebody already knows. you cannot hide something that somebody already knows. he knew and believed that smoking could be dangerous, and it could cause cancer. that was not hidden from him. we will see later it was not hidden from the public. but it was not hidden from him. and his own daughter says that when that warning came on the pack, 25 years before he got 2042 cancer, he already knew. that is his daughter. i talked to you about why this case is about choice, control, and responsibility. and we are going to look at his choice. but when it comes to control, there is not any evidence in this case that r.j. reynolds forced him to smoke or that r.j. reynolds could have made him quit because in the end, the only time he ever stopped, nothing changed at r.j. reynolds. no new information. one hundred percent of the reason that he stopped smoking was his decision, and he agreed with me: reynolds' information did not change. the cigarettes did not change. the only thing that changed was his mind. he had that control. and there is not a dispute that he could have quit because you saw that they admit and judge dresnick has instructed you that they admit that because he did not quit earlier, it was a partial cause of his injury. you will see in the instructions that the judge granted summary judgment in favor of r.j. reynolds on that issue. you heard a lot about the engle findings. and what mr. alvarez does is say that they are the law of the case. well, you heard that there was a 2043 class action trial and another jury made findings. here is the judge's instructions. but remember, you are the jury in this case, and all of the questions on the verdict form in this case are about mr. crawford. mr. crawford has never had his trial. this is it. you are the ones who decide. look what the judge tells you: the findings, these findings that mr. alvarez plays up, they do not establish that reynolds is liable in this case -- that is judge dresnick -- nor do they establish that mr. crawford was injured. and they do not establish the degree of which reynolds' conduct was a legal cause. all of those things are for you to decide. and those findings from the other jury, they do not make mr. crawford the winner in this case. they do not hold r.j. reynolds liable. he has the burden of proof. i talked about that burden of proof, and you are going to see on the verdict form a series of questions. i'm going to go through each of those questions with you. but in general, the first three questions that you are going to see is whether or not they proved that smoking was the cause of his laryngeal cancer, and the second one is whether 2044 he was addicted, and the third one is whether addiction was a legal cause. i want to concentrate on the third one for now. now, it is not enough for them to say smoking is the reason he got cancer, and it is not enough for them to throw out that little checklist for you on addiction and say if you add up the points, they claim that means addiction. this is what they have to prove: whatever addiction is -- and we are going to show the evidence proves he was not -- that he did not meet the real definition of addiction -- but addiction had to have been a legal cause, not just smoking. even if they are right, that smoking was the cause, the judge is instructing you and the verdict form tells you that addiction has to be a legal cause and not his choice to continue. do you remember when i showed this chart to mr. crawford and i wrote down these things? he quit the first time he wanted -- he really wanted to, decided it was time to quit. he finally made up his mind to quit. and he did not change his brands. he did not change anything in terms of his information and nothing that reynolds said changed. and suddenly, on december 31, '89 to 2045 january 1, 1990, he is no longer smoking. well, ladies and gentlemen, how is addiction causing his disease, then? how is addiction even causing him to smoke? because suddenly, he does not smoke. and he admits, well, on that day, addiction did not cause me to smoke because he did not smoke. and then the next day, addiction did not cause him to smoke and the next day. and for the next 23 years, the next 8,000 days, addiction did not cause him to smoke. now, let us say for a second that you accept this checklist that they give you where you do a point score, and you find that he is addicted. does that mean that that caused his disease; that that caused him to smoke? because he agreed that once he changed his mind, which is the only thing that mattered, addiction suddenly no longer caused him to smoke. that is the strongest possible evidence from the plaintiff's own mouth that addiction is not the cause of his smoking, even if his cigarettes was. and it is judge dresnick and the verdict form that tells you they have to prove that. addiction was not the cause of his disease because as soon as he changed his mind, whatever they say the effect of addiction was, it vanished. 2046 and let me give you an analogy, something that we all do, and that is drive. i'm driving in a car, and somebody smashes into me. i do not see them. that guy and that car are the direct cause of my injury. there is no way as i'm driving along i can change my mind and say "i do not want to get in an accident today. no. i do not have any power over whether this guy smashes into me." or someone is walking on the street, and three stories up, they are putting in an old-fashioned window air-conditioning unit. the workers are negligent, and it falls out the window, and it smashes that person on the head. that is the direct cause of their injury, ladies and gentlemen. that person walking down the street cannot just say, "i'll change my mind. i will not get injured today. i will just prevent the injury." no, of course not. the direct cause in those cases is the person who injured them. but here, according to mr. crawford, once he changed his mind -- or once he finally made up his mind is what he said -- suddenly, addiction had no power, and suddenly addiction did not cause him to smoke. it is a very strange argument that they are 2047 saying addiction is some force that caused him to get a disease when he could just change his mind and stop smoking. they say, "well, it was not easy," or "it was hard." but we are not talking about that now. was it the cause? the only thing that changed was his mind. if he was addicted, the addiction did not change. so what ended up causing his disease, if they are right, was his smoking. but addiction was not the legal cause because he stopped when he wanted to. you are going to see the judge's instruction, and it is going to talk about three factors. what is legal cause: a direct cause, a continuous cause, and a substantial cause? you have seen, as mr. crawford admitted, once he chose to quit, he never relapsed, and addiction was not a direct cause of his smoking. there is no dispute in this case, and they admit he could have quit earlier. could have quit earlier. they can talk about he meets some definition or checklist of addiction all they want, but this does not change the evidence and the undisputed fact that he could have quit earlier. and even if he quit in '89, he could have quit 2048 in '79, or he could have quit '70 when he believed the warning, and '74 when he bought cancer insurance, and '66 when he saw the warning, and '65 when he knew it could cause bronchitis, and in the '50s when he read about it. they do not dispute he could have done that. addiction is not a direct cause. it is not like someone smashing into your car or dropping something on your head. his choice, his mind is what prevented what he claims addiction from having any effect on him. for the same reason, there is no way it could be a continuous or substantial cause. in the end, there was a one hundred percent change in his smoking from a pack a day to zero, and it was one hundred percent because he made up his mind, and he took his own actions. there was no change in anything else. that was one hundred percent of the reason he quit. now, i've talked about this before, and mr. rosenblum raised it. and they had this slide where they said, you know, none of -- reynolds will not be calling anyone who says laryngeal cancer was not caused by smoking. i already told you turnabout is fair play. 2049 look at this. none of their experts testified that mr. crawford was addicted. and think who they called. dr. proctor is not a medical doctor. he is a professor of history; did not know much, if anything, about mr. crawford, and told you flat out that after a day of showing all of these ads, that he had no opinion, no opinion, whether mr. crawford ever relied on any of it. so the first day or actually about two days of testimony in this case was from a man that does not have an opinion on mr. crawford. he is a history professor. he did not testify on anything about addiction. then they called jack henningfield, and there is a "doctor" in front of his name because he has a ph.d. but he is not a medical doctor. so another guy who is not a medical doctor. and he has never heard of mr. crawford. his testimony on videotape was four and a half years old. january 2009, mr. alvarez introduced it. he never heard of mr. crawford. he never saw mr. crawford. he does not know anything about mr. crawford. he did not read the testimony, and he sure as heck did not examine him. he is not a medical doctor. he does not diagnose people for a living. 2050 and then you have got dr. califano, who is a medical doctor, but he is testifying only about whether smoking was the cause. dr. califano did not say anything about whether addiction was the cause. and in fact -- and you saw this when they just put up their slide, mr. alvarez did -- mr. alvarez had to tell him, "dr. califano, i'm going ask you to assume that mr. crawford was addicted. i'm going to ask you to assume that that addiction caused him to smoke." and then he said, "well, based on that," ladies and gentlemen, plaintiffs have the burden of proof. they do not get to assume their way to a checklist on a form that is entirely about mr. crawford and not about r.j. reynolds. they did not bring one single expert to say that he is way addicted, and this is an addiction case. now, i've talked about his doctors, but this is what mr. crawford admitted: none of his doctors told him he was addicted. and we can go through every single piece of paper in that box, and none of his doctors ever did. and not one of his doctors, not one of his doctors was called. so when plaintiffs set a standard, frankly, 2051 mr. rosenblum got up on the high horse and he said, "look, reynolds did not bring a doctor on laryngeal cancer." turnabout is fair play. they did not prove addiction in an addiction case. they have an old videotape of a man who is not a medical doctor, who says he is not using the official definition, and then they want you to play doctor and do this checklist when none of his own doctors ever found that he was addicted. mr. crawford had the opportunity to show you the whole instruction. and i saw it from a distance, and you saw it up close, and i saw your expressions. and your expressions were exactly like any human being would react to that type of injury. but you promised and agreed that you would put aside your sympathy in this case and that you would follow the court's instructions, which include the fact that mr. crawford has the burden of proof. he does not get to assume, and they do not get to say that he was sick or injured and that that is the substitute for proof. no one came in here and said he was addicted. none of his own doctors ever said he was ever addicted. 2052 now, mr. crawford has not disputed this. and we saw some of his own testimony, and then dr. samuel, who actually examined him and knew all of the information about him. he smoked for a whole bunch of reasons that had nothing to do with nicotine. it helped him relax and made him less nervous. dr. samuel said it could help him concentrate. he liked to smoke after meals with coffee, when he was having a drink. it even helped his stomachaches that he had had for the last 50 years. so there is a whole bunch of reasons, and there is no dispute on the plaintiff's side that these are true; that he smoked for a whole bunch of reasons that have nothing to do with nicotine. now, they mentioned that he smoked in bed, but there is an even longer list of times where he is not allowed to smoke, and he exhibits that control. he does not smoke in the areas of the hotel that he managed. he would not smoke around the hotel guests. he himself said he is not a chain smoker. he would not smoke in church, when he went to other people's houses where it was not allowed, restaurants, movies. he complied with smoking restrictions. this is before he chose to quit. 2053 but if you told him he could not smoke, whether it was from basic training to the last job he held, he would not smoke. he could control it. when it came time to quit, we know that he quit for good the first time he was motivated, not as mr. alvarez says, the first time he knew because we know that he knew back in the '60s, and we saw him say flat out that at least in 1970, he believed the surgeon general. and he thought that it could cause cancer and went out and bought insurance. now, dr. samuel is the only doctor that actually examined him. it is not in dispute. they are playing an old videotape of a doctor who is not a doctor, who never met mr. crawford. he never heard of the man. that is what they played. that was their proof of evidence. now they want you to be a doctor and do a checklist. dr. samuel applied the official criteria. even jack henningfield, the guy who is not a doctor, even he said dsm-iv and now dsm-v were the official criteria of the american psychiatric association for doctors who deal with substance dependence and addiction. and he went through those criteria. he examined him. 2054 they say, "well, he is a biased man. he is got a conflict of interest." and dr. samuel said he did not think he could testify on both sides in the same type of litigation. but let us put him to the test. do you think he is biased? do you believe, are they trying to say he is a liar? i asked him, remember, he looked at 20 cases or something, and i asked him: "do you find in every single one of those cases that r.j. reynolds or a tobacco company gives you the smoker is not addicted?" he said, "no, i found smokers that are addicted." so what does he do? does he bury it? he said, "no, i tell the tobacco companies they are addicted." that is a man who said in his own words he goes where the facts lead him. now you are going to decide whether this well qualified psychiatrist from boca raton who has seen hundreds and even more than a thousand smokers and has been treating substance dependency for 30 years, you are going to decide whether he is a liar. make no bones about it. that is what they are implying: do you think dr. samuel is a liar? then you will make your decision accordingly. 2055 but this man who is well trained and has 30 years of experience is the only man that actually saw dr. -- saw mr. crawford and the only man that did an examination. dr. samuel found that mr. crawford at all times had the ability to control and quit his smoking. and even the plaintiffs never presented any evidence that he could not have decided, the first time he saw a warning, that he could quit. they do not even dispute that. we know he quit the first time he made a serious effort to do so, and he explained it for the reasons i said. and even mr. crawford agreeing that addiction did not cause his injuries because once he made up his mind, suddenly, addiction was like it did not exist because once he made up his mind to quit, he was not smoking. they said something about, well, only one person came to dr. samuel and said, "hey, dr. samuel, i want you to treat me for one and only -- one and only one thing, nicotine dependency." i do not know if you found that surprising, but dr. samuel explained. he is a psychiatrist. he treats substance dependency and mental disorders. 2056 he said he did not just have one patient who smokes who he treated; that he is had hundreds or perhaps thousands of smokers. he is been doing this for 30 years. he got his training at bellevue psychiatric with adolescent addiction, one of the most prominent psychiatric hospitals in the country. he has not seen just one smoker; he is seen over a thousand smokers. and he is diagnosed and treated their addiction. and again, you talk about conflict of interest? he said flat out, he is diagnosed a lot of smokers as addicted. he is become -- he is determined that a lot of his patients are addicted. just like when he looks at some of these tobacco cases, he finds that smoker is addicted. he found mr. crawford was not. mr. crawford is one of the fifty percent of smokers, and you saw that only fifty percent of smokers meet the definition for addiction. mr. crawford is not one of them. now, again, let us talk about jack henningfield. he is a doctor because he is a professor, but he is not a medical doctor. what jack henningfield said is relapse is the hallmark of addiction. and "relapse" meaning that when you quit, you go back to it because that is what 2057 addictive drugs are like; that people have a compulsive behavior, and they go back to it. and he said that the relapse that an addicted smoker has, it is not just after a day or two because he said after a day or two when a smoker quits, he might go back for any number of reasons. but their expert said that the key definition for addiction -- that addicted smokers relapse after a week of cessation. he said if you can see a person who can quit smoking for a week and then they go back, that is addictive behavior. and, of course, mr. crawford does not fit this description of an addicted smoker. he never relapsed. now, we have got a real conflict here because you just heard mr. alvarez said did relapse, and now i'm saying the opposite. who to believe? well, ladies and gentlemen, believe the evidence. do not -- what the lawyers say is not evidence. here's the evidence. i asked mr. crawford: "you heard the testimony about addicted smokers who lapse and started smoking again. but that was not you. you never relapsed and started smoking." and mr. crawford said, "i did not." 2058 so i do not -- what was mr. alvarez talking about? you saw him on the stand. i asked that question. he said he never relapsed. and janet cooke, did she support their argument on addiction or that addiction was causing him to develop a disease? again, this is the only member of the family that they brought in to corroborate his story. look what she said. "did you think it was his choice, and it was not your business? "answer: it was his choice. i did not tell my dad what to do, ever." even janet cooke -- no doubt she loves him and wants to help him -- even she has to admit it was his choice, just like she said he already knew in 1966. mr. crawford own's words, the information did not change. and remember, that is how you can determine if there is a fraud. if somebody has been fooled or tricked because information was concealed, then when they learn new information, they are going to change their mind. no. he said the information did not change. he changed his mind because, he said, "i was getting older. i was 54." and then he wanted to 2059 quit. but 20 years earlier, he believed that he was going to get cancer when he is 34. now, you are going to be asked -- your honor, may we take a break? is pizza here? the court: it is not here. mr. belasic: i think this is a good stopping point for the pizza. the court: i'd like it -- but it is not here. it is close. if you want to take a break and -- let us take ten minutes. if it does not show, start again. and if it does, we will eat the pizza. mr. belasic: thank you, your honor. the court: so we will take ten minutes at a minimum, or longer if the pizza arrives. (jury exits at 12:06 p.m.) the court: note the presence of the jury and the parties. mr. belasic: welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. i hope everyone enjoyed the pizza. this board has the verdict form. and as i told you, i'm talking about the addiction questions first. what you will be answering, as i showed you, the second question: was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" 2060 and you should check "no" there because none of his own doctors, all of the doctors that treated him for 40 years, seen him smoke, they asked him about smoking all the time, not one of them has ever found that he was addicted. there is not one medical record. they brought in some videotape of someone who is not a doctor and who uses, he says, this fagerstrom test. he admitted that fagerstrom, which is the checklist they want you to fill out like you were doctors, is not used to diagnose nicotine dependency; but instead, it is used to diagnose -- or measure how severely a person is dependent after they have already been found, and that is one of the things that dr. samuel explained to you. what dr. henningfield, their doctor, says: this fagerstrom test, remember how he uses it? he uses in his studies where people come in to go to a smoking cessation, a stop-smoking study. and as he described it, by definition, all of the people that come into his research are people who could not quit smoking; people who need to go to a university and be examined to see if they can quit. that is not mr. crawford. he did not go to a 2061 university. we know he never asked a doctor for help. he never asked anyone for help. that is not mr. crawford. just like dr. henningfield said, well, the hallmark of addiction is relapse. and mr. crawford [sic] said he does not fit that, mr. crawford does not even fit jack henningfield's definition, a definition that he admits is not used by doctors to diagnose nicotine dependency. so the third question is the question i told you about addiction: was addiction the legal cause; not actually smoking, but was addiction? for all the reasons i discussed, you should find no. but the most important one is that we know that once he changed his mind, addiction did not cause him to smoke at all, let alone causing his cancer. and again, as the judge explained to you in his instructions, this is not about whether smoking causes a tumor in his larynx. that is question one. it is a completely separate question. this is about whether addiction is the actual legal cause of his injury. and he himself has admitted that once he changes his mind, addiction does not have any effect on him. whether he was addicted or not, the only difference is smoking; and ultimately his cancer, 2062 if it was related to smoking, it was his decision. so you should vote no. what i'm going to talk about now are, there are -- mr. alvarez, i think covered -- there are four questions -- there are four questions that talk about whether or not mr. crawford relied on something that tobacco companies said. and so number 5, number 6, number 7, and number 8. the first thing you will notice is all of these questions are about mr. crawford. they are not about something the tobacco companies said. they are not about whether the tobacco company was good and bad, or, as mr. alvarez says, liars. they are about mr. crawford. the judge is going to instruct you as to what "reliance" means. you will have a chance to read all of these and look at it, but here's his definition. when you determine whether mr. crawford reasonably relied on a statement, you have to determine not just whether he relied. it is not good enough for him to just come in and say, "oh, i believed what they said" when mr. alvarez asks him and "oh, no, i knew you could get 20 years" before i did when i asked him. that is not enough. 2063 look at what the judge instructs you. you have to determine once again: was the reliance a legal cause of his cancer? well, how can reliance on something a company said be a cause of cancer when you, yourself, have already said 20 years ago that you believed the surgeon general? i'm going to show you some of the evidence for you to consider on this. but here's the definition of reliance: in order to be reasonably reliant on a statement that omits a fact, it has to directly and in a natural continuous sequence produce or contribute to such loss -- in this case, it is laryngeal cancer -- so that it be said that but for, but for the reasonable reliance, the injury would not have occurred. in other words, if there had not been some statement, then he would not have gotten cancer. and ladies and gentlemen, the evidence in this case from mr. crawford himself is, as mr. alvarez would say, "not close." and here's why: because when we asked the plaintiff, mr. crawford, whether or not he actually changed his behavior, whether or not he would have quit smoking if there had not been some statement that he cannot identify, the answers 2064 were pretty clear. so let us look at did mr. crawford rely on a statement from a tobacco company? i put it up on a blackboard because, remember, when their historian was there, i said: "if i asked you, dr. proctor, did mr. crawford rely on a statement," you know what he said? "i do not have any opinion." the guy is here for two days. he shows you nothing but advertisements that he cannot tie to mr. crawford and then admits, "i cannot say that he relied on it." so let us look at what mr. crawford told us. and we asked him question after question about whether he chose these brands. and he said, his first three brands, camels, lucky strike, and raleighs. he did not start smoking because of advertisements, and he did not smoke those brands because of ads. and he told me those were the -- those were the brands that the other kids got from their parents; that they would take from their purses, et cetera. he was not being tricked. he never identified any advertisement for these that he thought was false. he said it was because of the other kids. 2065 and he did not smoke kools because of ads, and we will show you that. we actually showed the statement where he said he had no idea why he smoked kools. his mom picked kools out. there is been no evidence. she is not the plaintiff here. there has been no evidence about anything that affected his mother. and he did not smoke winstons because of ads. now, mr. alvarez did ask him, and he said something about ads. mr. alvarez is a good lawyer. he showed you that statement. but when we asked him, we said, "look, winstons came out with filters in 1954, and mr. crawford would have been 19 years old." i said, "well, you thought filters were safer. you must have jumped on it." no, he did not. he did not go to winston filters. it was years later. and even when he then tried winstons, there was evidence that he smoked other brands that were unfiltered and went back and forth. here's what we flat out asked mr. crawford. this was his chance. if he really, actually relied on a statement that was false on cross-examination, this is what he says: "you do not remember ever 2066 seeing an ad that had some statement that you think is false; is that right?" "no, i do not." he does not recall. he is not claiming a false advertisement. we asked him: "is there any advertisement that actually said smoking was okay or that smoking was safe?" he says, "not that i can recall." and he is going to talk about filters. but when we asked him -- this is his opportunity, just like it is my right and every person's right to cross-examine their accuser -- he says no, he cannot recall anything that told him -- now, he clearly told you -- we asked him: did you ever look to the tobacco institute as your source on smoking and health information? and he said no, he never looked to the council for tobacco research; he never looked to the tobacco industry research committee; he never saw the frank statement. you think about how many hours this historian from california came on to show statement after statement, pictures of old men meeting in those rooms, pictures of old hotels, blurry tv shows 2067 where old men sit in front of labs. none of it has anything to do with the smoker in this case. this is not the class action anymore. it is mr. crawford's lawsuit, and it is his duty to tie these statements that they show you to him. he has not met his burden of proof. he admits he never looked to these tobacco organizations as a source of information or help. and remember what i also asked him, i said: had you even heard of these things before you and the lawyers filed this lawsuit? he had not even heard of these groups. how can you be defrauded by groups you never heard of? and the frank statement, we know what that is. they say it is the start of the conspiracy. "did you see the frank statement?" no, he never saw it. how can he be tricked by something he never saw? how can you conceal something that somebody already knew when he says he smoked for decades after he believed that smoking was dangerous? we ran down the whole list. he does not recall hearing any statements from these people. that is the whole list. i asked him every one of those. now, they talk about a conspiracy, and they 2068 say it started at that meeting in the hotel in 1954, and dr. proctor was the person that spent an enormous amount of time. so if they have a conspiracy claim, simple question, "dr. proctor: did the conspiracy start mr. crawford smoking?" and look what dr. proctor said. as the historian in this conspiracy, he agrees the conspiracy could not have caused mr. crawford to start smoking. of course not. he had already started smoking before that. i saw some of you write that down. the reasons that is important is you are going to be asked: did he rely on some statement pursuant to this agreement? it is right here on the verdict form. their historian, their expert on this conspiracy says no, it did not cause him to start smoking. and so again, how can -- how can a statement by a company cause you to develop a disease when you were smoking already? and he says, not for ads, not for statements, but because of his brother and because of his mother. 2069 that is their historian. the conspiracy did not cause him to smoke. i asked dr. proctor the blackboard question. i wrote it on the board: did he rely? he says he does not have an opinion. that is their expert. their expert cannot even connect all of these statements. and mr. alvarez went through all of them. and you heard some pretty emotional statements from mr. alvarez. and obviously, he wants to make you mad, and you may be mad. but all of you agree that you would decide solely on the evidence. there is no doubt, as judge dresnick instructed you, that you have to find that mr. crawford proved that something that a tobacco company said that was false ended up causing him to get larynx cancer. their own expert could not even claim that. what did mr. crawford tell us about who he would trust? he said that in his entire life, he is never trusted a manufacturer more than his own doctors. he is been going to doctors for more than, well, at least the earliest records that you saw were from 1954, 60 years ago, in the military. he is been going to doctors for 60 years. 2070 they said they always talked to him about smoking, about diet, about drinking. he never trusted the tobacco companies over his own doctors. and no one disputes that he knew that doctors believed that smoking was dangerous. and no one is going to dispute, now that you have seen his testimony, that he believed it was dangerous. at least from 1970, he said it was dangerous, he knew it could cause cancer, he was so worried about it that he went out and bought a life -- not a life insurance, but a cancer insurance policy. and again, mr. alvarez talked about family. well, they only brought one family member. the only person in the family that came in, we asked her about advertising, janet. did your father ever tell you that he was smoking because of these ads? she said no, she never heard that. we asked janet cooke: "did your father ever mention any of these tobacco groups; if they were the ones who were making him think it was safe?" do you think his story is true? do you think that in 40 years, he would have mentioned it to the people who loved him who were against him smoking? no. she cannot corroborate. "dad never 2071 mentioned any of these things." same thing. janet cannot say that he ever mentioned any of these things. now, when you look at the reliance questions, it is going to say: was the reliance -- and so he had to see a statement, he did not believe in it, and then he had to change his behavior. the instruction from the judge is that if he had not relied, he would not have gotten the cancer. can they prove that? can they prove that reliance on a statement was a cause of his cancer? we have just seen the evidence. there is not any. there is not any. you know what? in the '60s or '70s when he personally believed that smoking was dangerous on those warnings when he thought he could get cancer, if he had quit smoking, that statistical risk that their doctor from johns hopkins, dr. califano, talked about, it would have gone away. here's what the surgeon general says: if you smoke over a pack a day, after ten years of cessation -- that means ten years of quitting -- the risk begins to approach that of one who has never smoked. so any smoker, if you could quit for about ten 2072 years, your risk of getting cancer from smoking goes back to almost that of someone who has never smoked. and no one disputes in this case, including them; that he could have quit earlier. they admitted to it. that is why the judge granted a partial summary judgment in reynolds' favor on the comparative fault issue. it is right in the instructions. you should vote no on number 4. you should vote no on number 5 on reliance. on number 6, did he rely after 1982? of course not. he told you in 1970, he personally believed that the surgeon general -- that the surgeon general statement was dangerous, and you know he personally believed he could get cancer from smoking by the early '70s. so on 5 and 6, you should vote no. seven and 8 are just the same questions, but they are questions about did he rely on a statement that was made in agreement? and he did not rely. and certainly his reliance did not cause his cancer because he knew it was dangerous, and he continued to smoke anyway. the same question for 1982. no, he is already 2073 admitted that 12 years before this, he believed he could get cancer. he believed the surgeon general's warnings. now, what they have to decide and what mr. alvarez has to decide is filters. he said, "i thought filters were safer." here's the evidence. the evidence shows this whole filter is a side issue, a distraction. first of all, their doctor, their doctor is going to say smoking caused larynx cancer. he said it did not matter if mr. crawford smoked filtered or unfiltered. it would not change his opinion. so you have to find that reliance on a statement caused his cancer? well, no reliance on any statement about filters could have had any effect on his cancer. his own doctor says it would have made no difference whether he smoked filtered or unfiltered. their expert would have had the same opinion. this is the testimony i was talking about where mr. crawford says he still smoked unfiltered cigarettes, even after they were introduced and even after all of those ads came out. so he was not jumping on filters and saying they are safe. they were around for years, and he 2074 was still deciding to smoke unfiltered brands. the first modern filter came out in '54. we were not smoking filters. those ads did not cause you to go out and smoke that brand? he was still smoking unfiltered. now, in rebuttal, mr. alvarez or mr. rosenblum, they have the right and maybe they will show you some of testimony that they gave. as i reminded you, remember, there is a difference between being asked questions from your own lawyer, who is trying to win the lawsuit, on direct, and there is a difference then between being confronted with cross-examination. and i mentioned there is a reason they call cross-examination "the great engine of truth" because you are confronted with the real facts, and that is what he said the real facts were about whether he smoked filters. so he knew smoking was dangerous. what was he smoking when he saw that 1970 warning and he told us he believed it? he was smoking filters. what kind of cigarettes had the warning on the pack? it was the filters. so you have to ask yourself: is it reasonable? could you really believe filtered cigarettes were safe when the surgeon general's warning is on it and he said 2075 he believed that warning and he believed that his smoking could cause cancer? well, he was smoking filters, so he believed smoking filters could cause him to get cancer, and he still smoked them. now, mr. alvarez mentioned family. well, does his family corroborate it? well, does his wife, friends, son? they did not testify, but they brought in his daughter. and what did his daughter janet say? "did your father ever tell you he thought filtered cigarettes were less risky or safer than unfiltered cigarettes?" he never mentioned it. so once again, the family members cannot corroborate it. and i'd ask you to remember if he thought filters were safer, why did his daughter janet say that when the very first warning came out in 1966, that it did not tell her father anything that he did not already know? why did she say that? she thinks that he knew by the time the very first warning; that he knew before that and it did not tell him anything new. she does not support his story. 2076 now, if mr. crawford thought filters were safer because they were going to take out tar and nicotine, well, naturally, you would think he would be looking for some low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes. and i asked him. he knows there is "light" cigarettes. there is a brand called winston lights. there is camel lights. there is winston ultra lights. there is camel ultra lights. and he said no. he saw those ads, he knew the brands were available. he never went out, he did not choose his brands. he did not choose his brands based on what he thought had been done to a cigarette to reduce tar or nicotine. and so the idea that if he was really smoking filters because he thought they were safer, why was not he buying the lowest low-tar brands that were available? they were in the same brand of cigarettes he was smoking. he did not do that. i'll submit it is because, as you saw in his testimony, he was not jumping on filters because he thought they were safer. i asked dr. proctor -- we saw the ads that dr. proctor put up, and they talk about the filter, there is no doubt. obviously, they are trying to 2077 sell cigarettes. but not one of those ads say smoking a filter is safe. and mr. crawford already, as we showed you, did not ever see an advertisement. he said he did not ever see an advertisement that said smoking was safe or that it was good or that it was okay. he has not met his burden of proof. but let us say you believe all of his testimony. he thought filters were safer. would his belief in that statement, is that what caused his larynx cancer? and remember, the instruction is if he did not rely, that but for that, he would not have gotten an injury. so is there any proof that if there had not been some ad about filters that he would have not had cancer? would he have magically quit smoking? i put that question to him. i said: if filters did not exist, are you saying you were going to quit? and here's what he said: even if filters were not around, he would have continued smoking the unfiltered brands he liked. and he admitted it. he admitted it: "i probably would, yes." he is not claiming in 1960, when he might have seen a filter ad, that he would have stopped 2078 smoking and avoided it. he is not claiming that. he is telling us today that we would have a man who had smoked unfiltered camels and unfiltered kools. even he does not claim that he was going to avoid his risk or he was going to quit smoking. now there may be smokers who could do that. maybe there are people in this class who could bring their claims, but those people are not here today, and those people are not named william crawford. because william crawford says that what they said about filters would not have changed his smoking. he would have continued to smoke. so those are the two questions on reliance. and then there are four questions on -- there are two questions on addiction, and there are four questions on reliance. and let us talk a little about the first question. tammy, i dropped the remote. the first question you are going to be asked is: was cigarette smoking a legal cause of mr. crawford's laryngeal cancer, his larynx cancer? they brought an expert, and nobody disputes he is an expert. the question is what he testified. dr. califano comes from johns hopkins in baltimore. 2079 everybody agrees that is a really good medical school. look what his own medical school says about the causes of larynx cancer. this is in evidence. this is the johns hopkins medical school website. what causes laryngeal cancer? you can see it says the exact cause of laryngeal cancer is not known. however, there are certain risk factors. let me ask you to consider this first: this is 2013. and the plaintiff says that this top medical center in the united states still says that the exact cause of this type of cancer is not known. now think back to all of the things that they tell you the tobacco companies said that were lies when people said we do not know the exact cause of cancer. well, this is their expert. their expert's medical center says the exact cause of the type of cancer that is in this lawsuit is still not known. now, how can it be okay -- how can it be okay for dr. califano and the johns hopkins medical center to say the exact cause is not known today in 2013, but they want you to pay this man $15 million because a tobacco company had the nerve to say the same thing 60 years ago? these people are not 2080 tobacco companies. this is johns hopkins medical center, and they are still saying that the exact cause is unknown. look at the american cancer society. obviously, they are no friend of the tobacco companies. no friend. look what the american cancer society says about the cause. do we know what causes laryngeal cancer? we do not know what causes each case of laryngeal cancer. we do know many of the risk factors. mr. alvarez: excuse me. objection, judge. he is disputing the engle findings that laryngeal cancer is caused by smoking. mr. belasic: i'm not disputing. (sidebar conference.) mr. alvarez: this is my objection. the court: i got your objection. mr. belasic: the first thing is none of the findings apply in this case until they establish class action membership. the court: it is been established. it is res judicata. mr. belasic: well, first of all, let me put on the record the findings do not lie unless he is a class member and they have to prove his case of 2081 laryngeal cancer is caused -- the court: is your -- mr. belasic: i'm marking it specifically where it says we do not know exactly what causes each -- the court: i'll sustain the objection. (sidebar conference concluded.) mr. belasic: so these are the two pieces of documentation you saw from the american cancer society and johns hopkins. now, dr. califano, their expert, himself admitted that there were several causes of larynx cancer. some he agreed on, and some he did not. you can see here that both johns hopkins and the american cancer society, they list as risk factors tobacco use, obviously, alcohol abuse, and then something called "gerd." that is gastroesophageal reflux disease, and that is when the stomach acids back up and form heartburn and go into your throat and start burning the lining of both your esophagus an your larynx. those were the disputes. it was their expert who said that there are other causes of cancer in individuals. it is not something some tobacco company made up. it was their expert and the johns hopkins medical center 2082 and the american cancer society say that it includes alcohol and gerd, this reflux disease. well, so that is the evidence from those public health communities about what different causes of cancer are and you have to determine in this case. so look who they bring. there were two joseph califanos you heard about. one was an attorney in the 1970s, and he was the man who made the decision to shut down the less hazardous cigarette group, the national cancer institute group where the tobacco companies were working with the government to make a safer cigarette. just coincidentally, the joseph califano in this case is his son, who is the plaintiff's medical expert. so let me remind you: none of his doctors, the dozens of doctors you can find in that box of records, none of his doctors are here telling you that smoking causes cancer. and you can look in those records, and you will not find any, and you can be sure that if there was even one shred of paper in his medical records that said larynx cancer is caused by smoking, of course that would be center stage in their case. there is not any. so they had to go elsewhere, and they chose joseph califano's 2083 son. and look what he told you. he said that he charged $600 an hour, and he said he requires a retainer, which is an up-front fee of $1,200. i do not care about the money. what i care about is the next question mr. murphy asked him. he said that $1,200 is for the first two hours of your work? and dennis asked him: "up until now, have you spent the two hours?" and he said, "no, i have not even spent two hours working on this case." ladies and gentlemen, there is a thousand pages or hundreds of pages of medical records. you saw stacks of the depositions in this case. how in the world -- how in the world could dr. califano review the medical records and not even work two hours? of course, he does not know mr. crawford. he is not one of his doctors. he is is an outside hired expert who barely even read the medical records, and i'll prove it. he did not know what was in mr. crawford's medical records. and, by the way, when we asked him about alcohol and we asked him about 2084 gastroesophageal reflux disease, he did not agree with the american cancer society. he did not agree with the website of his own hospital. and so their own expert does not agree with the public health community position here, the american cancer society. and yet mr. alvarez says that you should give his client $15 million because the tobacco companies disagree at times with the public health community. the american cancer society says one drink a day or more than one drink a day increases the risk of laryngeal cancer. that is the american cancer society's position, and dr. califano just says, "no. trust me. it is wrong." here's what dr. califano said: he admitted that alcohol could cause laryngeal cancer. and as mr. alvarez says, he said it was rare, but he admitted alcohol was a cause. and then he told us that the first information he got about alcohol was from one of the plaintiff's lawyers. and he said it was mr. shack. that is not one the lawyers in this room, but it was another lawyer for mr. crawford who told him, quote, mr. crawford drank barely, if any. well, i'm going to show you. he did not have 2085 all of the alcohol records or he did not look at them. but he admitted that if there was more drinking, more drinking than he had assumed and more drinking than he saw in the records, then alcohol could have played a role. well, we know there are records that showed that mr. crawford excessively drank alcohol. let me talk about this. i mean, ladies and gentlemen, no one -- this is not a case about whether he is an alcoholic. it has nothing to do with drinking -- it has nothing to do with him being a good man. their expert came in and said alcohol is one of the other causes of laryngeal cancer. we have a right to see if there is evidence. this is the evidence on alcohol use: he excessively drinks alcohol. well, that is contrary to mr. crawford's own testimony. and here's another doctor. "his alcohol use persists on a daily basis, but has improved. he used to drink excessively." that is contrary to his testimony. and you have to decide if he is excessively drinking alcohol now, even after he got laryngeal cancer -- we are going to talk about that you should not be drinking 2086 at all if you have got laryngeal cancer -- you have to decide is he credible when he says he did not drink more than one or two drinks a week in the '50s and in the '60s and in the '70s? well, we are just looking for the evidence on alcohol use, and this is what his doctors reported. we can see here that he was advised to cut down on alcohol. that is what "etoh" is. you can see he was drinking up to three -- either wine or beers -- a day. you know the american cancer society says more than one drink a day increases your risk. but at times, we see that he definitely is telling his doctors different things. his records prove it. in april, the patient does not drink. in may, he is drinking two to three times a week. even more contradictions. he is saying he is drinking one to three beers a day; but the same month, he tells the doctor he never drinks. and a few months later, he says he never had a drink in the past year. again, all we care about is whether there is sufficient evidence to rule out alcohol. now, there is no way there is. dr. califano, their expert, he did not even look at these records. or if he did, he forgot 2087 about them. and when a man like dr. califano says he spent only two hours, we know it is impossible for him to get the information. he was relying on something that attorney from mr. crawford, someone named mr. shack, had told him. he had not gone through these records. i asked mr. crawford this just flat out: is not it true that since you have had laryngeal cancer, that your doctors tell you not to drink because it could cause laryngeal cancer again? yes. and so he knows that. he knows from his own doctors that drinking can cause laryngeal cancer. that is both evidence that alcohol could have been a cause the first time around, cannot be ruled out. you know what? it is also evidence that he did just like everyone else. people do things that are bad for their health, not because they are forced to and not because it is a horrible addiction. he chooses to drink alcohol, even though he is been warned, even though he knows it could cause laryngeal cancer. now, the other potential cause that we asked dr. califano if he could rule it out was gerd, this gastroesophageal reflux disease. and he told 2088 mr. murphy that there was no evidence that he had gerd. and you are going to see that was a surprising statement because gerd is all over the medical records. it is mentioned over and over and over again. he never checked the records. their expert did not do his homework. he came in, he spent less than two hours, and he said smoking had to be the cause. first of all, you did not get the military records that say way back in the '50s, mr. crawford was reporting chronic stomach problems. chronic symptom problems. i know that does not say "gerd," but let us look. and here we are, very specific. "reflux. reflux disease." this is right at the university of florida for the pre-op evaluation. in other words, this is when he was going in for his surgery. now, it is hard to believe but their expert, dr. califano did not even know some of the most important medical records in this case. when mr. crawford had his surgery and had he done his homework, instead of just saying, well, it had to be smoking, he would have seen that mr. crawford had reflux, which is another cause of cancer. 2089 and here we go, in martin memorial, he has a history of reflux. 2006 diagnosis: esophageal reflux. pre-op diagnosis: gerd, which is reflux. the patient has been seen with gerd. he has a history of gerd. gerd, it is all over the medical records. now, you have to evaluate the credibility of every witness. now, you did not have -- because the deposition was read, you did not get a chance to see his facial expressions, et cetera. but i submit to you that under oath, under oath, dr. califano said this patient did not have gerd. this man had no history of gerd. i'm not calling people liars. you decide. he is said he did not have a history of gerd. that is absolutely false. and the reason has to be, the only explanations are either he never looked for other risk factors because he wants to blame smoking and he is not even going to see if there is evidence of gerd or alcohol; or he did have the records, which means he did not do his homework or he knew it and he simply ignored it. there is no explanation. what he said was dead wrong. this guy's doctors have been saying over and over again that he has this history of 2090 reflux. we saw the american cancer society and johns hopkins say that those are potential causes. we do not have the burden of proof. i cannot prove a negative. i cannot prove something that did not happen. they have to prove what did happen. they have to prove that his cancer is caused specifically by smoking. well, we asked dr. califano, he got his cancer in this area called the glottis. what about nonsmokers? where do they get their cancer? same exact place. they get cancer in the same place that someone who did not even smoke would get. then he talked about what has been the history and the course of mr. crawford's cancer. and obviously, he mentioned that many people that have laryngeal cancer die. mr. crawford did not. and he was asked about survival rates: is there a clue in the survival rate to tell whether the particular case of larynx cancer is associated with smoking or not? and he admitted that nonsmokers, the larynx cancer that is not caused by smoking, that leads to a better survival rate. and that is another piece of evidence that is consistent with the fact that his larynx cancer has not been proven to be caused 2091 by smoking because he has a survival rate that is more like people who never smoked. you saw some questions about testing. and it was interesting that the plaintiff's emphasized that there was a test for a virus called "hpv." you have never heard a word about hpv from me. no one is claiming hpv is a cause. it is not a cause. it is not in this case. but they spent a lot of time basically bragging, "hey, we did a test," and it proved he did not have hpv. no one is claiming he did. but here's the test that dr. califano said they did not do and that they could have. he said there are tests for genes, and these genes are called "tumor suppressor genes." they are genes that are activated, and they are usually associated with smoking-related cancers: p16, p53. that is what dr. califano said. those are the types of tests that can tell if an individual cancer is related to smoking. they did not do it. so they did the test for something that is not even in the case. he said it was nearly worthless to perform that test, and they want to get credit for it. but what they did not do is the test that their 2092 own expert said could have told us. so even dr. califano, dr. califano who wants to not look at the medical records and ignore the other causes, even he admitted that that test was not done. they have a burden of proof, ladies and gentlemen. and i submit that once you go past the fact that none of his own doctors in all of those records never found that it was caused by smoking, they have already failed. but when dr. califano comes in and we prove that he ignores the other causes, that he ignores the other causes, he says he does not agree with the american cancer society and the public health experts, and then admits they could have done this test and did not, there is no way they have met their burden of proof. as you saw, in an individual case of larynx cancer, it is very difficult to determine the exact cause. they have not met their burden of proof, and none of his doctors back it up. now, let us talk about question 4, and that is comparative fault. so let us back up before we get to 4. here is the order you will be getting them in. 2093 we already discussed number 1. they have failed on their burden of proof. they are trying to argue something that his own doctors never found. they are trying to use a doctor who did not even look at the medical records on these key issues, and you should find no. they did not meet their burden of proof to establish that cigarettes were a legal cause of his cancer. on number 2, the issue of whether he is addicted, we have already talked about that. you should find no. on number 3, was addiction, not smoking, was addiction a legal cause? we know from all of the evidence you saw from mr. crawford that it was not addiction that was causing him to smoke because when he changed his mind, when he said one year from now, "i'm not going to smoke. i'm going to do this plan. i'm going to taper down, and i'm not going to relapse," suddenly, addiction had no effect. addiction was not the reason he was smoking. but addiction definitely was not a legal cause under the instructions the judge gave you. we talked about reliance. and in his own words, once again, on cross-examination, he admitted he did not rely. and so on 5 and 6, you 2094 should find no. and on questions 7 and 8, you should also find no. mr. alvarez asked for $15 million. i have no idea where he got that number. i have no idea where they get that number for a man who said that tobacco companies did not make him start to smoke, who said when he made up his mind, he could do it. i have no idea where they get that number, 15 million for a man who said 20 years before this injury that he believed smoking was dangerous. but if you do reach this, if you do reach this level, you are going to be talking about comparative fault. we know he is admitted that his brother is the only one who got him started, and his mother is the one who bought him cigarettes. you see all the evidence that he did not rely. when you do comparative fault, consider the following: from the '50s on, he read articles saying it could cause cancer. he was familiar with the newspapers and magazines we have shown. by the '60s, his own daughter says, the warning was not telling him anything he did not know. 2095 by the '70s, he personally believed he could get cancer from smoking cigarettes. by the '80s, he continued to smoke. all during that time that he believed it was dangerous and that he said it could cause cancer, he was smoking these filters. and now he is saying, "i'm not responsible." let us do a test. when he saw a piece of information that said and convinced him that smoking was dangerous, what was his reaction? did he quit and then avoid his cancer? no. he said he believed the surgeon general, and it had no effect. when tobacco companies said something or when he went a year without seeing a tobacco company, did he quit smoking? no. was there someone sitting at r.j. reynolds that could have made a choice for him? and the answer is no. but what happened when he made the plan, as he told dr. samuel at the examination, that for the first time he made a serious effort to quit, yet he admitted to dr. samuel that had not made serious efforts before, what happened then? did he quit smoking? did he quit part of his smoking? no. he quit all of his smoking. 2096 and what in his own words was the only reason that he stopped smoking? was it fifty percent something and fifty percent reynolds, or 5 percent because they say he is going to be 5 percent responsible? no. he said the only reason and the only change was that he changed his mind. and it was his mind. it was not r.j. reynolds' control. when he changed his mind, his smoking stopped one hundred percent, and he never relapsed, even though every day there were kools in the house from his wife. and think about that. if he was really an addict, do you think he would go 12 years without picking up a pack of kools? this is a man that changed his mind, and one hundred percent of his smoking stopped. and he has admitted, as you saw in the instructions, that he is a cause of his own injury. you should find one hundred percent responsibility because nothing that reynolds did was going to make him quit, and nothing that reynolds said made him start. but everything that he decided made him quit, and all of his smoking stopped when he made the decision. nicotine did not change. if he was addicted, that did not change. what changed was his 2097 mind. mr. alvarez talked about punitive damages. and you need to know that punitive damages is a request for more money. it is going to be paid to mr. crawford. so it is not going to anyone else. it is to mr. crawford. the court is going to instruct you to determine if he is entitled to punitive damages, to extra money, and that is money over and above the 15 million that mr. alvarez is asking for now. you would have to find, first of all, you cannot use the findings. mr. alvarez says this is the law of the case. well, it is not on punitives. judge dresnick is instructing you: you cannot consider the findings from the prior lawsuit. those findings on negligence and concealment, you cannot consider them. this is his claim. as the judge has instructed you, on this claim for punitive damages, you may not seek to punish reynolds for any harm suffered by any person other than mr. crawford. so all of those statements about 400,000 deaths or diseases he did not have, this is only for mr. crawford. you cannot compensate for other smokers. other smokers may have valid claims. who knows? that is not in this lawsuit. only 2098 mr. crawford is. and the judge will tell you that you cannot seek to punish reynolds for any harm inflicted upon mr. crawford except those caused by the punishable conduct. and what this means is the things that reynolds did that were legal, the things that were not part of the conspiracy that they are talking about, reynolds has a right to make cigarettes. cigarettes are legal. and reynolds had a right to advertise in the 1930s and 1940s. dr. proctor told you there was no conspiracy, no conspiracy at all when he started smoking and that the conspiracy did not cause him to start smoking. and finally, the court's instruction to you, you cannot punish reynolds for conduct that did not cause harm inside the state of florida. inside the state of florida. that is judge dresnick's instruction to you. and you can take into account any mitigating evidence. i'm going to just show you some of the mitigating evidence, some of the reasons. remember that the standard that mr. alvarez said is they would have to prove that reynolds had an entire lack of care and that that entire lack of care, 2099 under the instructions, has to result in causing his injury. well, they say it is because you concealed. let me ask you this: were the risks of smoking really secret from someone like mr. crawford? were the risks of smoking secret such that he should be -- that we should be punished and he should get even more than 15 million? well, dr. proctor admitted that 100 years ago, people talked about smoking causing throat cancer 100 years ago, not just today; that nicotine as a poison was known for centuries. nicotine was the reason people smoked. that was known 100 years ago. that is their expert. and that is what they have to show is reason to punish. this is something that was known. we knew 100 years ago. the state department of -- health department of florida was talking about addiction. dr. proctor agreed in the alabama schools, in the alabama schools, remember, he lived in the state of alabama. and alabama required, as you can see, everyone in every grade, regular instruction in all grades on the effect of tobacco. dr. proctor did not dispute this is what the textbooks in the alabama schools said. 2100 nicotine is a poison. if some people get so used to it that they want to smoke all the time, they cannot do without it -- obviously, that was not mr. crawford because when he chose to quit, he did. and it says telling fourth graders in the 1940s that tobacco harms the throat, the same area where he got his cancer. i'm just going to flip though these. you have seen all of these. you know since the 1920s, the '30s, the '40s, some of most popular magazines in the country printed what dr. proctor said was secret. and when you are taking into account has mr. crawford proven that reynolds had such an entire lack of due care and harmed him so much that reynolds should be punished, we already know that he said 20 years earlier he knew the risks. we know when reader's digest and newsweek and all of the popular magazines of the day and in the alabama newspapers, the newspapers that dr. proctor never read, the newspapers where he grew up, it was repeatedly covered, over and over and over again. from the surgeon general's report, look what the health officials said in the 1950s. the surgeon general himself said, our position is we have informed the public. he is not saying the 2101 public has been deceived or mr. crawford, certainly. look at what the national cancer institute said: this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public. there is no reason to give punitive damages when the public was informed according to these officials. here is the coverage of the surgeon general report. this is in alabama, where he lived. here it is in florida. here is the health department saying nearly everyone has heard about it. here is the warning label that he saw that his daughter said he already knew the risks when this came out. even in greensboro, the small town, in the weekly newspaper, repeatedly covering smoking and causing cancer. this is the 1970 warning that he said that he believed. and from then on, there is no dispute he said he believed that smoking was dangerous and that it could cause cancer. the court: mr. belasic, you have about another five. mr. belasic: okay. i'm going to need about ten minutes. 2102 the court: all right. mr. belasic: now, this was supposedly -- this was the conspiracy that dr. proctor talked about, hill & knowlton. and the first thing that i want to remind you is he said the conspiracy did not cause mr. crawford to smoke. well, but this is mr. crawford's case, and he has to prove that. and his own expert says it did not cause him to smoke. dr. proctor admitted that ctr; that when they ran that ad, it actually scared people. it did not fool people; it scared them into cutting down. the surgeon general says that these health claims -- he showed you all these and said he made health claims -- look what the surgeon general says happened: intended to reassure they were actually likely increasing consumer awareness of the suspected health risks of smoking. and so now they want to punish you for something that even the surgeon general says actually increased consumer awareness because when people saw ads about the kools taste or effect on the throat, all it did was remind them again why smoking was controversial and why smoking was dangerous. we do not have to guess because we know that mr. crawford has said for at least 20 years before 2103 he smoked or before he got cancer, before he quit, that he knew those risks. they were going to show you -- unfortunately, that was the video where dr. koop -- they did not play the audio. this was the last statement from dr. koop, the famous surgeon general. this is the last time he weighed in on this case. and this was in 2002. look what he said: the choice to light is always yours. he does not say an addiction is the cause of your cancer; that once you smoke or once you call yourself addicted, you are just inevitably going to get it. he said the choice to light up is always yours. that is the surgeon general. no matter how much you smoked, the choice is always yours. they showed you this right on the last day with our expert, dr. samuel, the 2010 surgeon general's report. look what it says. no one can make you quit. no one can do it for you. even if you smoked for many years, you can quit. so despite everything they say about the tobacco industry, people can quit. they are not being stopped. and they are quitting. look, in just four years after the warning, 2104 30 million people quit. 30 million. by 1982, 30 million people had quit, and 95 percent just did it on their own. there is no reason to award punitive damages for a legal consumer product that 30 million people could quit, and the people who quit do it on their own, just like mr. crawford did. dr. koop said a few years later, it was up to 40 million, and 95 percent did it on their own. and their own expert, jack henningfield, says it is now up to 60 million people. if that is a conspiracy and if mr. crawford could actually meet his burden of proof and you had to decide a conspiracy to get people to smoke when in fact 60 million people quit smoking, i submit to you that that is simply an improper amount of money to ask for. to ask for $15 million for a man who knew the risks for 20 years and admits he could quit and says it was only his changing of his mind that did it, and now they want extra money. look at what dr. henningfield said about the design of cigarettes. are they really more dangerous? he said even if you did a roll-your-own, take roll-your-own tobacco and put it in paper, it would be just as addictive. 2105 today's modern cigarettes are not more addicting. he talked about ingredients, but the government has known about those for 30 years. the fda regulates them, and there is no indication that any ingredient in any cigarette that mr. crawford ever smoked had any relationship to his cancer. the fda is regulated. they said the filters were a sham. and what was the evidence for that? there was one document that said something about the illusion of filtration, all right? has anyone ever looked at the people that smoke filters and see if they get more or less cancer than the people who do not? yes. the surgeon general has, and many other studies. here's what the surgeon general has said over the years -- this is when mr. crawford was smoking: people who smoked filters with lower amounts of tar, they get less lung cancer. 1981, surgeon general: today's filter-tip cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer. that is the surgeon general, not a tobacco company. 1989, again, this was the year he quit smoking, so these are talking about the kind of cigarettes he smoked: smoking filters reduces the 2106 risk of lung cancer. now, they can show other studies, and perhaps they will, that dispute this. but let me ask you: does this prove that the tobacco companies are horrible liars that were doing a scam? the surgeon general himself says that the people that smoke filters, they tend to get lower cancer rates. that is not a bad thing. that is a good thing. there is no way that this filter issue means that he should get even more money. there is no entitlement to punitives. in 1990, lower risk of lung cancer for people who smoke filters. now, you are entitled to take into account any mitigating factors. you heard that r.j. reynolds worked with the government to make safer cigarettes, and it was called the tobacco working group, the less-hazardous cigarette program. you heard that r.j. reynolds president, 1968, 50 years ago, told his employees, told the head of research: you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. foster a relationship with the government and a request for mutual understanding, and let us continue and increase our efforts to make a safer cigarette. this is a secret document, too. and 2107 it is not saying let us hide stuff or not make a safer cigarette. he is telling them to cooperate with the government and make a safer cigarette. and so you heard that for ten years, there was a government program, and then it was shut down. it was shut down by the father of the man they chose out of all of the doctors. it was shut down by mr. califano, the lawyer that was with hew. after that, the government abandoned their efforts to make a safer cigarette, even though they thanked reynolds for their cooperation. but reynolds did not stop trying to make a cigarette. look what they did -- or a safer cigarette. they made premiere. the research showed there was less carcinogens in premiere. remember, this is the secret government meeting. it is a secret government meeting from the office of smoking and health in 1989. dr. proctor admitted that while he may have heard about it, he had never even read this is. this is the government saying there are less carcinogens in the premiere cigarette. they said it was so safe, they were actually worried about it. the panel was concerned about a cigarette that is actually safer. the premiere 2108 studies indicated that cancer risk associated with smoking premiere was lowered significantly, but it did not change heart disease. so r.j. reynolds made a cigarette that significantly lowered the risk of cancer. was the government happy? did they say, "you guys have acted in good faith; that is a good thing to do for health"? no, they were worried with it. they were actually concerned that reynolds might make a safer cigarette. and what do they say? they say, "let us go to war. let us not wait for research but go to war against reynolds' new product, the new, safer cigarette." what do they do? here they are. they are bragging about getting premiere pulled off the market with negative publicity. look what they conclude, what the government concludes. they reached a consensus that they need to get an expert panel to attack, to attack the new products. that is a product they thought was safer. mr. alvarez talked about outrageous conduct. what would you think if reynolds had invented a safer cigarette, and they quashed it? and if he had a secret document that said, "we can make a 2109 safer cigarette"? because he does not. and he has not shown you that. i've shown you this. who was it that bragged about killing the safer cigarette? who was it that stopped reynolds from putting it on the market? dr. proctor admitted it was the united states government. and look what proctor said, dr. proctor: "that is very interesting. it makes the government look kind of pathetic there." i think "pathetic" is an understatement. reynolds spent an enormous amount of time to make a safer cigarette, and the government got it banned. when you consider whether mr. crawford gets millions of dollars more because he said he is entitled to punitives, remember, the only safer cigarette that was going to reduce the risk of cancer was made by reynolds, and the government banned it and laughed about it in that meeting. dr. proctor said they were pathetic. let me finish up with this: one of the things that mr. alvarez said, he said, "we should get punitive damages because there is a need to deter other companies' future bad conduct." and you should know that the tobacco industry today is completely different than it used to be. what they 2110 claim was done, everything they complained about, is now subject to regulation. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. belasic: your honor, this is -- mr. alvarez: you know what? go ahead and say it. mr. belasic: dr. proctor said it. the fda regulates the tobacco industry. they regulate the manufacturing of cigarettes, the marketing, the distribution. i asked dr. proctor: "does the fda have control over ingredients now?" he said yes. so it is not a secret. they are now regulated by the food and drug administration like a drug. the fda even controls nicotine deals. the government, the government agency regulates them, and they can regulate marketing to young people. so you have a society now in which tobacco companies, the manufacturing of the cigarette, the advertising, and what goes in it is controlled by the government regulatory agency, the fda. they are subject to the same restrictions. there is no need to deter that kind of conduct. they do not have the 2111 power to do what they want. the government regulates them. and all of these institutes, ctr, tirc, they are long gone. dr. proctor said they were disbanned in the late '80s. it is been 15 years before they ever existed. and now on reynolds' website, it says right off the bat that smoking causes disease, that it causes cancer, and it is addictive. there is not going to be whatever he calls the "conspiracy." that is no longer ongoing. there is no longer a dispute. and for that reason, there is no way that mr. crawford is entitled to get punitive damages on top of a damages award that they have not even justified in the first place. and in my last minute, i'd like to remind you of one thing, and that is when mr. crawford says it is his legal cause, even if -- even if you found that he met some definition, and they do not have a doctor to back it, and they do not have the official definition, and none of his own doctors believed he was addicted, did -- it actually, legally and directly, cause his disease? no. because there is something in the middle, something that can stop the smoking and could stop 2112 him from ever getting a disease. and there is a man in the middle. that man is mr. crawford. and the reason we say that is because mr. crawford said that nothing changed when he stopped smoking. nothing changed except his mind. and you cannot think of a case where someone says, "i have had a horrible injury and it was caused by someone else" and you could just change your mind and avoid it. but that is this case. and that is what mr. crawford said. he was the man in the middle. no one could choose for him. reynolds did not make him smoke. those advertisements did not make him smoke. and he knew the risks. when he changed his mind, suddenly, addiction had no effect on him, even if he could prove it. addiction was not the legal cause of this man's cancer. if it was smoking, it was the choices that he made and the decisions that were up to him. for that reason, you should vote no on the last question as well. thank you for your your time, ladies and gentlemen, and for your concentration.