closing argument by the plaintiff mr. rosenblum: may it please the court. good morning. let me first say on behalf of mr. crawford and our side of the case -- but i think i can also speak in this instance on behalf of r.j. reynolds and its attorneys because i know that we all feel the same way about this issue -- which is thanking you for your close attention and your service in this case. even though it has been a little bit shorter than we initially told you it was going to be -- we 1957 initially thought it was going to be about three weeks -- we recognize that two weeks is a very, very long time for anyone, and we know it is a big commitment, and we very, very much appreciate your attention. we notice that you are paying attention, you are taking notes. everyone has noticed it, and we very, very much appreciate that fact. i'm going to speak first about a few issues relating to class membership, and then mr. alvarez is going to speak probably after a break about some other issues. so let me talk to you about class membership. as his honor told you, the first issue you have to decide in this case is whether or not mr. crawford was a member of the engle class. and in making that decision, you are going to answer a couple of questions which i'm going to talk to you about in a moment. but what i want you to keep in mind first and foremost is that class membership has nothing to do with fault, and class membership has nothing to do with whether or not mr. crawford was aware of the health effects or health risks of smoking. that has nothing to do with class membership. once you determine that mr. crawford is a 1958 class member, then you are going to be asked questions about comparative responsibility, and that is where issues about fault and awareness come in. but they do not come in in determining whether or not he was addicted to nicotine, and they do not come in in determining whether or not smoking cigarettes was a cause of his -- i'll say "laryngeal," just because i'm used to saying it that way -- his laryngeal cancer. i want you to keep that in mind because i suspect that when r.j. reynolds has an opportunity to address you in its closing argument, mr. belasic is going to spend a lot of time talking about what he thinks the evidence has shown about what mr. crawford knew or what mr. crawford believed or what mr. crawford was told by others. and that has nothing to do with what i'm talking about right now, which is class membership. so the first question is going to be: was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of william crawford's laryngeal cancer? and the first thing i want to talk to you about is what we have to prove in the case. and the judge has already told you that this is our burden. "the greater weight of the evidence" means 1959 the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. and the reason why we have the scales there is because greater weight of the evidence really just means that whoever tips the scales 51 percent has proven the case by the greater weight of the evidence. this is not a criminal case where you have to prove something beyond a reasonable doubt. this is a civil case in our civil courts, and because of that, this is the burden of proof we have to have. we just have to tip the scales ever so slightly, 51 percent, to prove to you -- mr. belasic: object to the "51 percent." the court: overruled. mr. belasic: it is not in the instruction. mr. rosenblum: we just have to tip it ever so slightly, 51 percent, to prove to you that mr. crawford is in fact a class member. in doing so, the first thing we are going to talk about is whether or not smoking cigarettes was a cause of his laryngeal cancer. i pause a little bit when i say "a cause," and i'm going to explain to you in a moment why i say that because you do not have to find that smoking cigarettes was the only cause of his laryngeal 1960 cancer. it only has to be a cause of his laryngeal cancer. and his honor, judge dresnick, already read to you an instruction where he said to you that smoking cigarettes is a cause; it does not have to be the only cause. it has to be found as a cause, and it can act in combination with other causes. i'm going to explain that to you in a moment, but i want you to keep that in mind as we start talking about what the evidence was in this case. so what is the evidence about whether or not his laryngeal cancer was caused by smoking cigarettes? well, let us start with this: you heard the testimony -- or you heard the deposition testimony read to you of dr. califano, and you heard about dr. califano's qualifications. i will not go through all of that with you right now, but you know what he does. you know that he treats head and neck cancer; that he lectures internationally on this topic; that he is performed between 100 and 200 total laryngectomies, which is the ultimate procedure that mr. crawford had; that he teaches other doctors. you heard about all of that. but one of the things he started out telling 1961 you is that ninety percent of the time, patients with laryngeal cancer smoke cigarettes. in other words, ninety percent of all laryngeal cancers are caused by smoking cigarettes. now, there is been no evidence to the contrary presented in this case. you have heard nothing by the other side or by any other doctor that said, "wait a minute, that is not true; it is only true that 20 or 30 or ten percent." you have heard nothing other than the fact that ninety percent or more of all laryngeal cancer is smoking-related. if we stopped right there, if that is all i had to say to you about whether or not mr. crawford's laryngeal cancer was caused by smoking, in light of the fact that you know he smoked -- and we are going to talk about his smoking history -- if i said nothing else, that is the greater weight of the evidence. the greater weight of the evidence is 51 percent that i have to prove. and i'm starting off by telling you that ninety percent of every laryngeal cancer is smoking-related. i could stop right there, but we are not going to stop there because you heard additional evidence of additional reasons why it is smoking-related. so we start with the fact that ninety percent or more are 1962 smoking-related. but then dr. califano discussed with you the other reasons why it is smoking-related; not just because of some statistical association, but the real reason and the additional reasons why it is smoking-related. he told you he took into account mr. crawford's smoking history. he took into account the cell type. you remember he discussed the squamous cell carcinoma, what that means? it is sort of a flattened appearance, et cetera. he said that is almost always associated with smoking-related cancers. he described the fact that the tumor was what he called "well-differentiated," and he said that is a hallmark also of a smoking-related tumor. it is a well-differentiated tumor. and he ruled out other causes which i'm going to talk to you about now. you remember that dr. crawford [sic] said there really are not that many known causes of laryngeal cancer, but there are a couple that he wanted to talk about. so not only are ninety percent of all laryngeal cancers smoking related, and not only is mr. crawford's cancer smoking-related because of 1963 these other reasons, but he ruled out the other causes. you remember there was some testimony about the hpv virus, the human papillomavirus. well, that is not an issue in this case. it is an issue to the extent that he talked about it and ruled it out. and you heard the testimony, and there is been nothing to the contrary. mr. crawford's slides were tested. there was no hpv virus. end of story. hpv has nothing to do with this case. now, one of the other causes that you heard some testimony about was this issue of drinking alcohol. and i want to discuss this with you because i'm going to tell you two things about the issue of alcohol: number one, it has nothing to do with mr. crawford's laryngeal cancer; number two, even if you think it did, it does not matter. i'm going to explain that to you in a second as well. but this is what the testimony is about alcohol: the first thing you heard -- and, again, this is all completely unrebutted, undisputed; you heard no evidence to the contrary from the other side -- that it is exceedingly rare to find a patient who has developed laryngeal cancer who 1964 drank alcohol and that did not also smoke cigarettes. in fact, it is so rare that you see it about 5 percent of the time, about 5 percent of patients. so when we talk about the greater weight of the evidence, we start with the fact that 95 percent of the time, you are not going to have a person develop laryngeal cancer from consuming alcohol, no matter how much alcohol, without also smoking cigarettes. so we start with that. and then when it comes to how much alcohol you would have to drink in order for alcohol to actually cause laryngeal cancer, how much would you have to drink in order for it to cause that cancer? and again, this is completely unrebutted. you heard nothing to the contrary; no contrary evidence from reynolds, from any doctor that came in and said califano is wrong, this is not the case. this is the case. this is the only evidence in the case. you would have to drink four alcoholic drinks a day for a period of decades. decades. there is absolutely no evidence in this case whatsoever that comes close to anything that even resembles that. nothing at all. 1965 and, of course, dr. califano told you that alcohol, in his opinion, did not contribute in any way to his laryngeal cancer. but this is the part i want to talk to you about right now. remember, i said i was going to say two things. i was going say, number one, it played no role; and, number two, even if you think it did, it does not matter. here's that part. what dr. califano said was the combination of cigarette smoking plus alcohol intake has a magnified effect that is greater than either substance alone in being associated and causing laryngeal cancer. what that means is if you drink alcohol and you smoke cigarettes, you have a greater likelihood of developing a smoking-related laryngeal cancer. because what dr. califano then said -- this is what he was asked. he specifically was asked: if a person drinks alcohol and smokes cigarettes and that person develops laryngeal cancer, what would your opinion be regarding whether the smoking of cigarettes was a substantial contributing factor to the development of the laryngeal cancer? and his answer was it would be a substantial contributing factor. 1966 so even if there is some suggestion or if you are struggling and you are thinking to yourself, well, you know, i'm not sure; maybe this alcohol thing might have contributed in some way, the only way that mr. crawford loses on this question of whether or not smoking cigarettes caused laryngeal cancer is if you believe and you find that he would have developed his laryngeal cancer if he never smoked a cigarette. if he had never picked up a cigarette, would he have developed laryngeal cancer? and there is no evidence in this case at all that would support that finding or that conclusion. the conclusion is clear that it is from smoking cigarettes. that is what dr. califano told you. you have heard nothing to the contrary from r.j. reynolds. and even if you think that alcohol may have played a role, remember, the burden here and the question is: did smoking cigarettes play a legal cause? was it a legal cause, not the legal cause. it does not have to be the only cause. that is what his honor, judge dresnick, just told you about. you also talked about some other risk factors. i bring this one up because i found this one 1967 somewhat interesting. you may remember that when dr. califano's deposition was read to you, there were questions that were asked of him at the deposition by one of the attorneys for r.j. reynolds, mr. murphy. mr. murphy asked dr. califano questions about, well, is asbestos exposure a potential risk factor for developing laryngeal cancer? and when you heard that testimony, you may have been thinking to yourself, well, that is interesting if asbestos could be a risk factor for laryngeal cancer. i wonder if mr. crawford was ever exposed to asbestos. well, dr. califano's deposition was taken on august 14th of 2003. a month before that -- mr. alvarez: 2013. mr. rosenblum: i'm sorry, 2013. i apologize. a month before that, a month before mr. murphy asked those questions, r.j. reynolds had responded in writing to some of our questions, which we read to you, which we put into evidence, and r.j. reynolds was asked: do you have any information that william crawford has suffered from or was exposed to asbestos? and their answer was: reynolds states it is 1968 not in possession of reliable information suggesting that plaintiff has been exposed to asbestos or suffered injuries as a result of asbestos exposure. a month before, they were asking about, what about asbestos? r.j. reynolds had already said to us, "there is no asbestos in this case." so there is no asbestos in this case. it is just not an issue. you may have heard this testimony about this gastroesophageal reflux disease, what they refer to as "gerd." i bring this up because when mr. murphy questioned dr. califano, he asked him: is gerd a potential risk factor for the development of laryngeal cancer? and dr. califano said, "no, actually, it is not. it is something that we are studying, but it really is not a risk factor." and then mr. murphy showed him a study and said, "well, what about this study that suggests it?" and then there was some discussion about why that study did not apply because they did not examine heavy smokers. 1969 and then dr. califano said there are tons of other studies that say the exact opposite. my point in bringing this up is simply that what you are hearing from r.j. reynolds or what you have already heard and what you will hear, i suspect, in their closing argument is that it is everything but smoking. that he developed laryngeal cancer because of asbestos, well, wait a minute, that cannot be right because we admit there was no asbestos. he developed laryngeal cancer because of gerd, gastroesophageal reflux disease, but the only expert called in this case, the only expert called in this case said no, that it was not gerd; it was smoking cigarettes, and gerd has not been proven, has not even been proven to do that. no, it was not cigarettes, it was alcohol. but there is no evidence that he smoked four -- i'm sorry, that he drank four drinks a day for decades. and if even if you think alcohol played a role, the only evidence in this case on that issue is that the best it does is it magnifies the effect of the cigarettes, causing the laryngeal cancer, which makes it smoking-related. we have already talked about this. 1970 let me pause just for one second and say that i think it is significant that they did not call a single witness to testify that his laryngeal cancer was not caused by smoking cigarettes. i'll tell you why. i expect one of the things you might hear is, "well, look, it is not our burden. we as the defendant, r.j. reynolds, we do not have to prove anything, so we are not going to call an expert. so it is their burden to prove it." i want you to think about the fact that they did call an addiction expert, which we are going to talk about in a moment. reynolds did not sit back and say, "wait a minute, we do not need to call an addiction expert to try and convince you that he was not addicted to nicotine. it is not our burden of proof." but when it comes to this issue, i'm guessing you might hear that. so the first question you are going to be asked, the first class membership question you are going to be asked is: was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of william crawford's laryngeal cancer? and i submit to you that the overwhelming evidence, the only evidence in this case, is that 1971 yes, it was, and you should answer yes to that question. the next two questions deal with addiction, and they are also part of the class membership: was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause? there you see the word "a" again; not the only cause, a cause. a cause. which is what the judge has already told you. now, both of these questions have to be answered in the affirmative. in other words, both of these questions have to be answered "yes" for him to be a class member. i'm going to talk to you about both of them. first, i said to you in my opening statement that what is not going to happen in this case is you are not going to be told by his honor, judge dresnick, that this is what addiction means; this is the definition you must apply for addiction. remember, i said to you addiction is whatever you find it to be, based upon the evidence. so you are not going to be told that in order to believe that he was addicted to nicotine and cigarettes, you must apply the dsm-v -- which dr. samuel talked 1972 about, and we will get to that in a second -- you must go through these criteria; and if he does not meet them, he is not addicted. you are not going to be told that. in fact, you are not going to be told you have to use any particular definition. so was he addicted? let us start with this -- i think you saw this in opening statement: the difference between how much a social smoker smokes versus how much an addicted smoker like william crawford smoked over his smoking lifetime. you heard he started at 7 years old, smoking a few cigarettes a week. and by the time he was 15 years olds, he was a pack-a-day smoker. and he went up to a pack and a half. these are some of the same factors that you have already heard the evidence that we talked about in opening statement, but this is what came out in the evidence: that he smoked regularly for 38 years; he smoked a pack to a pack and a half a day; that he smoked when he was sick. you remember that testimony where he said that even when he was sick, he smoked his cigarettes. he smoked the last thing before he would go to bed and the first thing when he woke up. he smoked in bed. he smoked at home. 1973 he smoked at work. he smoked in his car. immediately before and after church. it took him over a year when he tried in 19 -- at the end of 1988, it took him over a year to actually successfully quit smoking, and i'll talk to you about that in a second in the context of what dr. samuel had to say about that. he tried cold turkey, he tried chewing gum, he tried eating candy, he tried nicorette. he tried long walks to get his mind off of smoking. he attended the american cancer society class to stop smoking. his family told you, janet -- you heard his daughter -- he was addicted. mr. crawford told you himself he was addicted. he started cutting down. and when he tried to cut down, this is what would happen. what would happen when he tried to cut down? was it as simple as him putting down a cigarette and walking away for the last time? when mr. belasic was questioning mr. crawford, it almost seemed as though the theme was, he made up his mind one day, he put down his pack of cigarettes, he walked away, and he never smoked again. but that is not the evidence. that is not 1974 what happened in this case. you heard that what happened is when he would try and stop smoking, he would get nervous, he would get irritable, he would get upset. he felt like he was having withdrawal symptoms. he felt a strong urge to smoke. he had trouble getting along with his family. now, you did hear the testimony from dr. henningfield, who we played, who is an expert, clearly an expert, on nicotine addiction. and you heard his videotaped deposition, and we wanted you to hear this really for two reasons. one of the things dr. henningfield told you was you do not have to be an expert to diagnose addiction, nicotine addition. you do not have to be an expert. remember, he said that to you. anybody did do it. you look at these factors. and that is why we did not call an expert to say that mr. crawford was or was not addicted. that is your decision. that is your job. you decide whether or not he was addicted based upon the facts. but it is helpful to understand some basic parameters about addiction that dr. henningfield did talk to you about. so he told you a couple of things that are 1975 important: that people were misled and did not make an informed choice in the '60s, '70s, and '80s. here's a good one: just because you are able to quit does not mean that you are not addicted. dr. samuel, by the way, the defense expert, agreed with the same thing. why is that important? because you heard multiple times in this case that 50 million people have quit. fifty million people have quit. almost as if saying, "well, none of them were addicted because they quit." and we know that that is not the case because we know that dr. samuel, on the defense, and dr. henningfield both agreed that the fact that you quit does not mean that you were not addicted. that makes common sense because whether you apply this to nicotine or whether you apply this to heroin or cocaine, if a person was using heroin and they are ultimately able to stop using it, you are not going to say, "well, they stopped; i mean, clearly, they are were not addicted. it was not affecting them. they stopped." or they were using cocaine and they stopped. they stopped, so that is it. they were not addicted. 1976 that is not the case. that is not the science of addiction, and both experts agree upon that. what he told you was that if a person smokes more than 11 cigarettes a day, they would get prescribed the highest dose of a nicotine patch. and if they smoked greater than 25 cigarettes a day, which mr. crawford testified he did, they would be prescribed the highest dose of nicotine gum. why does that matter? a person who is addicted needs the highest dose of nicotine gum; not a person who is not addicted. here's something interesting. he also told you when he talked about what nicotine does to the brain, the actual physiological changes to the brain, he said they looked at the mris, the scans of the brains, of smokers and nonsmokers. this is something that they saw which was really incredible, that smokers' brains had 400 percent more nicotine receptors in them. you could actually see it on a scan. it is not someone doing a study on rats. these are human brains. people are looking at them and saying, "when i look at a smoker's brain, they have 400 percent more nicotine receptors in the brain." 1977 and in terms of how addiction leads to disease, how does it cause disease, dr. henningfield told you: addiction is the interface. that is the word he used, "interface," between cigarettes and disease. it drives the smoking that causes you to develop disease. i'm going to talk to you about dr. samuel, the defense expert who you heard yesterday on the issue of addiction. a couple of things about dr. samuel. you know you did hear that although he is treated a lot of patients, i think after a little bit of wrangling, he did admit that in fact he is only treated one, maybe two patients solely for nicotine dependence. he was saying, "well, i treat thousands of patients that have all kinds of problems, including nicotine dependence." but when he was asked: "how many have you really treated just for nicotine dependence or nicotine addiction," the answer was "well, i think i treated one or two." he has not published in this field. he has not lectured on nicotine addiction. he is a psychiatrist who treats patients. that is what he does. he does not hold himself out as an expert on nicotine addiction. 1978 he advertises his services. i know he does not agree with the word "advertises" services. he does not think that is what he is doing. but whether it is an advertisement or not, he certainly does not hold himself out as a person who has any particular expertise in the issue of nicotine addition. he is not been asked to consult by the surgeon general, the national institute of health, or any other governmental agency on issues of smoking and health or nicotine addiction. and he also admits that being able to stop does not mean you were not addicted. so the fact that mr. crawford stopped -- let us just pause there for a second -- the fact that he stopped smoking does not mean he was not addicted according to dr. samuel, their own defense expert. and dr. henningfield, of course, agrees with that because that is a correct statement. so it is not a simple as, well, wait a minute, he is stopped. so he cannot be addicted. it is absolutely not that. yes, he did stop, and he was addicted, and dr. henningfield and dr. samuel both agree that the fact you stop does not mean you were not addicted. i found it interesting that the one study that 1979 dr. samuel relied upon when he was testifying -- you may recall this -- there was some testimony about a study and some -- they were testing some agents. it got a little bit confusing. but what i thought was interesting about the study is that, if you remember this, the study that he was referencing actually cited dr. henningfield. i think at one point, mr. alvarez, if you recall, there was something up on the board. mr. alvarez said, "oh, that actually -- the study you are talking about actually cites jack henningfield," the expert that the plaintiff called on nicotine addiction. and he said, "yeah, that is right. it does." dr. samuel has minimized mr. crawford's quit attempts because what he basically says is -- and it is clever -- what he basically says is, "look, this guy tried one time to quit." now, you heard that he tried for over a year to quit, so how do these things exist together? how is it possible it took him a year to quit, but he tried one time to quit? but, you see, if you turn that into one big, long quit attempt, which is what he said, he said he made up his mind at the end of '88, and that was 1980 one attempt to quit. and even though it took him 14 months or it took him a year, that was one quit attempt. and then he says, based on that, he tried to quit one time in his entire life. and based upon that, he was never addicted. he never had the motivation to stop smoking because he only really tried once. but you heard the testimony of mr. crawford. it was not that he put down his pack of cigarettes on one day in 1988 and then he never looked back. that was not the testimony. the testimony was he had relapses. he told you this. he relapsed multiple times during that year. that is why it took him a year. it did not take him a day. it did not take him a week. it took him a year. it relapsed multiple times. he had to taper down. it was not easy. it was not as simple as i've decided that i'm now motivated, i want to quit, i'm putting them down, and that is it, and i'm never looking back. that is the way dr. samuel presented to you how mr. crawford stopped smoking. it is up to you to decide whether you think that is consistent with the evidence or not, and we do not think it is. i think the fact that 1981 mr. crawford testified it took him over a year to quit smoking, i respectfully disagree with dr. samuel. i do not think that that is one quit attempt. mr. belasic: objection to counsel's opinion, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. rosenblum: i thought perhaps the most telling thing that dr. samuel said, the most telling thing he said in evaluating whether or not you want to believe everything he had to say is when mr. alvarez asked him, "let me ask you a question. let us assume that mr. crawford smoked two packs a day, three packs a day, four packs a day -- four packs a day, that is 80 cigarettes a day -- four packs a day for 50 years, i want you to assume that to be true. in your opinion, would he be addicted to nicotine?" and he said no, not based on those factors alone. do you remember that, when he said that? four packs a day for 50 years. and mr. crawford still would not be addicted, according to dr. samuel. one of the things the judge will talk to you about, and he already did, is you may consider a 1982 number of things when a witness testifies, including the demeanor of the witness. now, it is how the witness came across, how they testified. i think what you saw was dr. samuel did not really like answering questions. a lot of things -- a lot of his responses were, "can i explain that?" "dr. samuel, where do you work? "well, can i explain that?" "dr. samuel, well, did you read mr. crawford's deposition? "well, can i explain that, please?" there did not seem to be that much frankness, and he seemed -- mr. belasic: objection. counsel's opinion. the court: overruled. mr. rosenblum: there really did not seem to be that much frankness and forthcomingness in the way he testified. and he could not even admit some basic things. this is what the judge has already read to you: you may properly consider, you may consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying; the frankness or lack of frankness, intelligence, the interest the witness may have in the outcome of the 1983 case, the means and opportunity the witness had to observe, et cetera. and i think one of the things that he also said -- i think you remember this -- was when mr. alvarez said: "have you ever been asked to testify on behalf of a plaintiff's lawyer in a tobacco case?" and he said, "no, i think that would be a conflict of interest." do you remember he said that? now, why would that be a conflict of interest unless you have chosen sides? there is certainly no conflict. according to dr. samuel, he is calling balls and strikes. he is an umpire. he is just sitting back and saying "they are addicted or not addicted. i'm here to tell the truth, and i do not have any ax to grind one way or the other." but he told mr. alvarez that working for a plaintiff's lawyer would be a conflict of interest. there is only a conflict of interest if you have chosen a side. you heard about different tests for addiction. we will go through them very, very quickly. i think the facts themselves, without applying any test, would convince you he was addicted to 1984 nicotine and cigarettes. but you heard about the fagerstrom test, and you saw some of these questions that -- this is what dr. henningfield talked about -- how soon after you wake up do you smoke your first cigarette? and mr. crawford said within the -- actually, what mr. crawford said was within the first two minutes of waking up, but certainly it is within the standard of five minutes of waking up. and dr. henningfield explained to you how significant that is. remember, he told you two things. he said, number one, the amount you smoke; and, number two, how soon after you wake in the morning do you have your first cigarette? those are the two biggest indicators of your level of addiction, of whether or not you are really heavily addicted. so we look at this: do you find it difficult to refrain from smoking in places where it is forbidden? yes. he talked to you about that. he would go outside to smoke. when he went over to his daughter's house, she did not want him inside, so he would go outside. 1985 remember, difficulty does not mean impossible. in other words, it is not like he was able to put the cigarettes down for the whole day and say i'm not going to smoke. "difficult" means you have the craving, "i feel the need to smoke, i'm going to smoke before church, i'm going to smoke after church, i'm going to smoke outside, i'm going to smoke outside of the restaurants once they tell me i can no longer smoke in the restaurants" where he initially did smoke. which cigarette would you hate the most to give up? he told you the first in the morning. how many cigarettes do you smoke a day? we put 21 to 30. that is a pack to a pack and a half, but if a pack is 20, it is an insignificant difference. whether you think it is 11 to 20, 20 at the high end, or 21 to 30, we are talking just a difference of a number of cigarettes. do you smoke more frequently during the first hours? yes. do you smoke even if you are so ill that you are in bed most of the day? and the answer was yes. 1986 so you look to see how he scored. and you can see that his score clearly is very high dependence based on this fagerstrom test if you think this test is even relevant if you want to look at a test. then we talk about the dsm-v criteria. we talked about dr. samuel and is he believable, will you give weight to his testimony? one of the things i think you should consider is he said that mr. crawford did not meet any of the criteria. do you remember that testimony? he did not meet any of it. there was not a single thing in the dsm-v that he believed mr. crawford met. so i want to go through a few of them to see if we agree. one criteria was tobacco was often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period of time than was intended. you recall mr. alvarez asked him, well he began smoking at 7 years old; do you think that when he was 7 years old, he intended that he would be smoking all the way into his 50s? and then the doctor said, "well, wait a minute, wait a minute. you are taking this out of context. that is not what it means." 1987 but that is what it says, and this is the testimony: he gradually built up from a few cigarettes per week to one and a half packs a day over the span of 45 years. second one was: is there a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control the tobacco use? and you heard about that. he cut back, he relapsed, he cut back. he was actually successful after multiple failed quit testimonies. a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain and use tobacco. dr. samuel would not even give this one to mr. crawford. you saw we talked about a great deal of time. we went over this with you, the thousands of minutes and the amount of time and the number of cigarettes and how much time and the number of days. but dr. samuel says, "no, this does not meet even that criteria." did he spend a lot of time? no. he did not even spend a lot of time. craving or strong desire or urge to use tobacco. and he told you -- these are some of things you have heard before -- he smoked while he was sick, in restaurants, in his office, at the movies, before and after church. 1988 recurrent tobacco use in situations which are physically hazardous; example, smoking in bed. i want to pause for a second on this one because i think you probably remember this. mr. alvarez showed this to dr. samuel, and he said, "dr. samuel, mr. crawford told you there is no question in this case that mr. crawford smoked in bed, right? in fact, he smoked every night in bed. is not that true?" and dr. samuel said, "yes, that is true. i remember that." there is nothing to the contrary. mr. alvarez said, "okay, so this says "recurrent tobacco use in situations in which it is physically hazardous." and the example given by the dsm -- we did not have this; this is actually what it says in the dsm -- it says, "for example, smoking in bed." so mr. alvarez naturally said to dr. samuels, "so naturally, at least we must agree upon this one, right? wrong." dr. samuel then said -- and you will recall this -- wait a minute, i asked him about that. and i specifically asked him: "did he put his cigarette out before he went to sleep? and since he told me he did, it is not physically 1989 dangerous, and therefore he does not meet that criteria." i know you remember that. and then there is two other criteria. tolerance, meaning that a need for an increased amount of tobacco. we have already talked about the fact that he increased and increased during his smoking and withdrawal symptoms, which we talked about, and you have seen that from the evidence. we talked about nicotine. is it addictive? now, everyone -- dr. samuel says nicotine is an addictive substance, but let us talk about how addictive it is. these are just things that you see in this case. the national institute of drug abuse: nicotine is highly addictive. the world health organization: that tobacco contains a highly addictive psychoactive ingredient -- psychoactive ingredient -- nicotine. this is from the world health organization. the center for disease control, cdc: cigarettes are designed for addiction. nicotine is the highly addictive drug in cigarettes that keeps people smoking, even when they want to quit. and the surgeon general: nicotine is a highly 1990 addictive drug. it keeps people smoking, even when they want to quit. research suggests that nicotine is as addictive as heroin, cocaine, or alcohol. now, dr. samuels says, "wait a minute. it is not really like that because when you are getting off of heroin, it is much worse when you are getting off of the nicotine." that may be true. there may be more severe withdrawal when you are getting off heroin or alcohol, he was talking about, or cocaine. but there is no denying -- and this is from the surgeon general as well -- that nicotine is as addictive as heroin, cocaine, or alcohol. so when mr. crawford smoked a pack to a pack and a half a day for 38 years and 7 years before, beginning at 7 years old, he was ingesting this substance, this poison, that is as addictive as heroin, cocaine, or alcohol. and he continued to smoke it for at least 38 more years. and he tried to quit, and he had withdrawal symptoms, and he smoked even when he was sick, but he was not addicted. the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addictions such as heroin and cocaine. that is the 1991 surgeon general. and we talked about cigarettes are designed for addiction. can you play the video? no? just some more information: nicotine is a drug that is a profitable, highly addictive drug. teens are more sensitive to nicotine. addiction is a disease, not a free choice. and this is from the surgeon general: nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. the prevalence of individuals diagnosed as nicotine-dependent is higher than that for any -- for any other substance abuse disorder. any abuse. heroin, cocaine, all of those combined are not as addictive in terms of the prevalence -- of the dependence as nicotine. and here is what -- here is really what the industry has to say about how important nicotine is; how really, really, really important it is: a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation and would therefore almost certainly fail. health claims alone without flavor or 1992 nicotine cannot sell cigarettes. most smokers would rather quit than switch. tobacco products contain nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. "our industry" -- this is r.j. reynolds talking right here, r.j. reynolds -- "our industry is based on design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine." what you are going to hear -- back in, i think it was 19 -- i think it was 1980, back in september of 1980, the industry was talking amongst themselves and saying the following: that the matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend free choice if the person was addicted. i suspect you are going to hear when mr. belasic gets up that mr. crawford made his choice. it was a free choice, and he was not addicted. and that is what they were saying back in 1980. you have already heard from the surgeon general, the '88 report. it is addiction. there is no question. it is similar to drugs like cocaine and heroin, and there is no question about that. 1993 can you play this or not? mr. alvarez: we have about seven minutes. yeah, go ahead. mr. philipson: what happened to the volume? mr. alvarez: go to the next one. mr. philipson: go to the next one. mr. rosenblum: and when we talk about legal cause, addiction being a legal cause of injury -- and judge dresnick read this to you -- contributes substantially. did the addiction play an important role? but for the addiction, if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked a pack to a pack and a half a day for over 38 years and develop laryngeal cancer? this is how addiction legally causes laryngeal cancer: mr. crawford was addicted to nicotine, he smoked, the smoking causes laryngeal cancer, and he had his voicebox removed. dr. califano, the only expert called in this case and called by us on the issue of whether or not his laryngeal cancer was smoking-related, gave an opinion on this. here's what he said: i asked him, "i'll ask you to assume, doctor, two things for my next 1994 question. i want you to assume, number one, that william crawford was addicted to nicotine and cigarettes. i want you to further assume that as a result of his addiction, he smoked approximately a pack per day for approximately 40 years. based on those assumptions, do you have an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical probability as to whether or not william crawford's addiction to nicotine was a substantial contributing cause of his laryngeal cancer? "answer: yes, it was. that is how addiction causes disease." these are the questions you are going to be asked after the first question about whether it was caused by smoking cigarettes: was william crawford addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the answer is yes. was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? that means that if you think that he enjoyed smoking a little bit or if you think he smoked for some reasons that have nothing to do with addiction, you still answer this -- you still answer this question "yes" because if addiction played a role, did it play a substantial role? did 1995 his addiction play a role? the only way you answer no is if you say his addiction had nothing at all to do with his smoking, just like his smoking had nothing at all to do with his laryngeal cancer. thank you, judge. closing argument by the plaintiff (continued) mr. alvarez: may it please the court, counsel: good morning. 1996 so i just want to pick off -- start off with where mr. rosenblum left off. and once you establish, once we have proven to you that he is a class member -- and i submit to you that we are not going to prove it just by the greater weight of the evidence; i mean, i think we blew the doors off that. we are way past that. this is -- this is a very clear case of addiction causing someone to smoke for over 40 years and that the type of cancer that he had was caused by smoking. this is not a close call on that. so once you decide that he is a class member, the judge has instructed you that you have to accept the law of this case. you have to follow the law. the law in this case is that r.j. reynolds has already been found negligent. r.j. reynolds sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective and placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. you have to accept that. you have to accept that they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact 1997 concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and fourth -- and this one is key and crucial -- that they agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information concerning the health effects and addictive nature of cigarettes with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. this is the law of the case, and you have to accept it. we do not have to prove to you that the reason he began smoking was because of anything that r.j. reynolds said. that is not our burden. we do not have to prove that to you. their product sustained his addiction. they fertilized the soil, so to speak, okay? they created this atmosphere that smoking was normal in the '40s and '50s and all the way through. they created that for a purpose, for a specific purpose: to get young people to start smoking, to get young people to think it is cool. it is the "in" thing to do. they made it glamorous in the movies. and the whole time, the whole time, they had one purpose in mind: to keep people smoking, keep 1998 people addicted. and they were going to stop at nothing, at nothing, including but not limited to destroying internal documents, so that it does not ever see the light of day in a courtroom. and luckily, some of these were spared, and we are able to prove to you document by document, year by year, that this conspiracy existed. and not because we are saying it; by their own words and admissions through many documents. we have them now, and we are able to prove this conspiracy. there may be many conspiracies that you never could prove. this is one that we could prove. destroy all formal reports and the like. remove certain reports from the research files. the successful defense of our present and future suits. as an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the report which appear objectionable. that is evidence of the conspiracy. and when they had research that was going to come back bad for them, they had a plan for that, too: compare the cigarettes with cigarettes made ten years ago to show that the new products were less hazardous. the writer felt that the legal implications from such a study would be tremendous 1999 and would preclude industry participation. they knew that if they came up and participated in studies that showed that smoking caused cancer or it was addictive, that they were going to get sunk. so they purposely did not participate in any of those studies that they knew that was going to come back bad for them. they shut down research. they shut down research when they knew it was going to come back bad for them. these are the documents. they are in evidence. they are in evidence. please look at them. please look at them. there is a box -- you are going to get a box full of documents. they are in there. i mean, we gave you snippets of it, but they are there. the conspiracy existed, and it is documented in their own words. what would they do when the surgeon general -- there is the hypocrisy -- there is a hypocrisy of this whole argument because for almost 50 years, the tobacco industry and r.j. reynolds denied that smoking caused cancer and it was addicting. for 50 years, they told everybody in the world, it is unproven. we are going to show you all of that. 2000 but then, but then they come into the courthouse, and they say this man from greensboro, alabama should have known. he should have known. he should have known that smoking was bad. and then when the surgeon general comes out and says smoking can cause cancer, they attack the surgeon general. this is what they say: "we must learn to distinguish the real facts about tobacco from unjustified, emotional campaigns based on the health scare technique." that is r.j. reynolds. we believe that the number one problem is the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public; the surgeon general's statement that there is no honest disagreement among experts on effects of smoking is false. it is a gross insult to the scientific community. that was their position, to call the surgeon general that he was not serving the american people; that he was giving them false information, when the opposite was true. claims that cigarettes are addictive, irresponsible, and a scare tactic: the claim that cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to cocaine and heroin or alcohol use is irresponsible. 2001 they called the surgeon general "irresponsible." the message to the american public and in particular american youth is that using illegal drugs such as crack or heroin or alcohol has the same risk of addiction is smoking. to convey this message is to invite disaster and trivialize the serious drug problem faced by society. and so what was their whole purpose? why did they -- why do they target young people? why do they target young people? why? because they knew there was a product that they were making; that if you used as directed and smoked as much as you wanted, which is what they wanted you to do so that their company could get rich, what would happen? they would die. thirty, 40, 50 years later, people would die. what did they have to do? they called them "replacement smokers." that is the word they called them, "replacement smokers." so they targeted the kids. these are our replacement smokers. these are the ones we want for the next 30, 40, years. when they are done with them, we will keep marketing to the young people. that was the scheme. that was the conspiracy. 2002 that is why this case is so egregious. young adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers. line up these students as consumers. school days are here. line up the most popular students. there is no doubt from their own internal documents that they were targeting kids as the replacement smokers for the future. that is wrong, and they should be punished for that. we had deliberately played down the role of nicotine; hence, a nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him and no desire to try it. instead, we somehow must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking in the hopes that he will find himself then discovering the real satisfaction obtainable. so after you decide that he is a class member, there will be three questions that mr. rosenblum told you about. the next question is: well, who is responsible, and how much? and the question is: please state the percentages of any fault that was a legal cause of mr. crawford's -- of william crawford's laryngeal cancer that you charge to r.j. reynolds tobacco 2003 company and william crawford. and, you know, there are two sides to every story. when you hear somebody got divorced, it is usually both sides are responsible to some degree, right? and here's where you get to decide percentages. we have admitted some responsibility, and we are saying, you have got to put something down for mr. crawford, and we want you to put something down for mr. crawford because maybe he should have tried harder and sooner to try to quit. so we admit that. but you know what? he did not know the truth from them. they did not come out and tell the truth until ten years after he quit smoking. so a lie is not the same thing. when you compare a lie to what he should have done, it is two different things. so the large majority of fault in this case belongs to the defendant, not to mr. crawford. judge him on who he was and how he grew up and where he grew up and what he believed and who he believed. and i would suggest to you that the number should be closer to 95 percent for r.j. reynolds and 5 percent for william crawford. that is a fair, 2004 reasonable breakdown when you talk about someone who is lying and someone who is listening. now, we have seen some of these. they made it normal. they made smoking normal. they marketed it to young people like mr. crawford. that is what they did. here's some of the things that you saw. go ahead, please, and play the video. (video played.) man: tens of thousands of doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine, were asked: what cigarette do you smoke, doctor? the brand named most was camel. yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoked camels than any other cigarettes. man: do you inhale? then you are better off smoking phillip morris. and here's how you can prove it. light up a phillip morris. take a puff. get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly let the smoke come directly -- (singing.) man: mickey mantle, what you do you say, mickey? man: it is not hard to say why more folks 2005 enjoy camels than other brands. woman: do not say "cigarettes." say "phillip morris." man: pall mall? is there any other kind? woman: not for you, there is not. nothing but the best for mr. ricardo. man: i've got a better idea. let us take a winston break. that is it. winston is the one closer cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that sense of blend. man: yeah, fred. (singing) woman: -- is good smoking. i sure wish you could taste it. woman: i am tasting it, grannie. man: your mouth feels clean, your throat refreshed. the finest leaf tobacco, mild, refreshing menthol, and the world's most thoroughly tested filter. that is -- woman: do you think we had something to do with that? man: yeah. i think that -- woman: cigarette manufacturers do not make movies. man: what do you think, that the movie maker 2006 just showed marlboro on his own? woman: perhaps the movie-maker was a marlboro smoker. mr. alvarez: this is how he grew up. this was the world back then, a world that was shaped, a world that was created by them; by the billions of dollars they spent in advertisement over the decades; billions that they spent to create this atmosphere of normalcy. and millions of people, millions of people believed it, including william crawford. and we talked about -- the conspiracy started in 1953 and did not stop until the year 2000. they had an opportunity. they had choices. corporations have choices, too. and they made a choice and things could have been different if in 1953 they would have told the world and william crawford that smoking had been proven and that it was dangerous for you. the world would have been a different place. it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? this is 1953. they knew it. but they had the 2007 gall in 1954 to publish this frank statement and say there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes. and right before the surgeon general's report was being -- going to be published, the surgeon general asked the tobacco industry: send me a list of all of the constituents in smoke, in cigarettes, that are cancerous. and they respond -- i'm sorry. okay. and they respond that none of the chemical substances listed there, to our knowledge, has been found by scientists' research to be harmful to the health of a smoker in the amounts reported to smoke. the problem with that is that was in 1963, right before the surgeon general report came out. okay? two years before -- their own research shows that carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particular -- particularative smoke. so they knew, and i think we have a list here. and there is a list there of all the things that they knew caused cancer that they listed internally. but what they told the surgeon general was that none of their things caused cancer; none 2008 of the compounds in smoke caused cancer. they lied. they knew they were lying when they did it. they knew they were lying when they did it. and this whole campaign of creating doubt and controversy was done on purpose. and let me tell you why it was done on purpose. if you have an addictive smoker and they hear two competing messages -- they hear one message from healthcare officials saying, "look, smoking can cause cancer. it is dangerous." right? and you have an addicted smoker, and the maker of the product is spending billions of dollars marketing and telling you, "no, it has not been proven. and just in case, if it is, we are going to put a filter on it. and if you smoke a filtered cigarette, you are going to be fine." if you have an addicted smoker who is hearing these two competing messages, which one do you think an addicted smoker is going to accept? and they knew it. and that is what this campaign of controversy and doubt was all about. they knew that and said, "all we have got to do is give them a reason. all we have got to do is give them an excuse." the most important story, type of story is 2009 that which creates doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease. and then they come up and send out these things called "tobacco and health research." they send them to doctors and scientists, and they came up and say these alternative theories. they say everybody born in march -- we did a study. people who were born in march, they have a higher chance of getting lung cancer. every possible theory except smoking they put out there so scientists, doctors, and the public would doubt that smoking caused cancer. it was a purposeful, intentional way to get people to doubt it so that people addicted to smoking would keep smoking; keep buying their cigarettes. they spent $50 million on the tirc, the ctr, on this campaign. mr. philipson: 500. mr. alvarez: i'm sorry, 500 million. for nearly 20 years, the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for 2010 victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. that is a confession. that is a confession. they had all of their talking heads out there, every chance they could, talking about it. and from 1970 to 1994, every chance they had, they went on tv, they were in the newspapers, everywhere, casting their web of doubt so they can catch as many addicted smokers and keep them smoking. mr. philipson: you skipped two slides. i do not know if you wanted to -- you are missing about -- go ahead. mr. alvarez: that is okay. let us go. let us hear from them. let us hear their own words. (video played.) man: will you accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business? and that is where we send -- man: if we do find any of it we consider harmful, and so far we have not. we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette. 2011 man: we want to be the detectives just as much as the surgeon general and anybody, and we will cooperate in every way. (inaudible) tar and nicotine, i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements; that there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the surgeon generals, through the ama. through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them; and if they are found, they will be removed. man: there is no program that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. man: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they proven to be safe, mr. cullman? man: i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. mr. alvarez: these guys have no shame. these guys have no shame and no regard for human life. and from 1970 to 1994 -- 2012 is this the one we just played? mr. philipson: no. we did not play it. mr. alvarez: let us hear more from their own words. i think sometimes you do not want to hear it from me. i'm telling you to read their documents and listen to them. (video was played) man: the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown. in fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer. man: and as far as i'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply do not know. woman: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. man: it may not be harmful. you are not convinced. woman: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. man: it is not known which cigarettes cause cancer. it has not causally been established. man: do cigarettes cause cancer? man: i do not know if they do or not. woman: i'm not in a position to give you a diagnosis or an answer. man: we do not know what causes cancer in 2013 general right now, so i think that we may find what causes cancer and we may find some relationship which has yet to be proven. mr. alvarez: i mean, the documents are the confession. these are the lies and the documents are the confession, and we got them. we got them. and now you have seen them, and you are obligated to follow the law in this case and do what is right and fair. and they can make -- they can make a safer cigarette. they can take nicotine out. they could reduce the level of nicotine so that it is not addicting. it is within their power and control to do it. they can make a cigarette that is higher in ph so people do not inhale it. they can do all of those things to make a safer cigarette, but they choose not to because they want people to continue to smoke and get addicted to the nicotine so that people keep buying their cigarettes. this whole thing about filters was a scam from the beginning. they knew it. they knew it was a scam from the beginning. in 1950, there was less than 1 percent of all cigarettes sold in america had filters on them. they knew -- that was part of their campaign to get people to think that, well, 2014 if this is something bad, put a filter on it, and it will take all the bad stuff out when they knew that was not true; that the filter does not make the cigarette safer. in fact, it makes it more dangerous. so let me tell you, one of the questions, 4 and 5, are related, and they are very important questions. number 4 is: did william crawford reasonably rely to his detriment on any statements of material facts made by r.j. reynolds tobacco company that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. crawford's laryngeal cancer? well, you know what? they confessed to it. they confessed to making those statements. and you heard from mr. crawford that he believed them. now, the next question is -- the court: you have about 12 minutes -- mr. alvarez: i may need more time. was any statement referred in question 4 on which mr. william crawford reasonably relied to his detriment made after may 5, 1982? 2015 so you are probably going, what is this may 5, 1982? we have not heard any evidence. and you have not. may 5, 1982, has a legal significance in the case but has nothing to do with your consideration with regards to -- do not speculate, well, i did not hear anything about the facts in the case about may 1982. it has legal significance for us. let me tell you why. you heard his testimony. he kept believing up until he started to quit in 1988, until he was -- he got older. he is 53 years old, he started getting more health conscious. he said, "you know what -- for some reason, at that age, at that time, because when you are 20, you know, you do not think the same way as when you are 30. and when you are 30, you do not think the same way as when you are 40. and when you are 40 --" and you could do the math and keep going up and up. people change the way they look at things and the way they see things. by the time he was in his 50s, he finally came around. okay? he finally came around, and he stopped believing. but that did not mean that they stopped their lies because they continued their lies all the way through, past may 5, 1982. and 2016 let me show you the evidence of that. (video played.) man: (inaudible) it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? man: through my tenure? man: yes. that is so. man: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? man: yes. man: there is a statement that the tobacco -- man: we issued that statement, yes. man: as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement. man: yes. mr. alvarez: a person is justified on relying on that statement that cigarette smoking does not cause disease. the president of american tobacco company is saying that. do you remember the admissions that we showed you about how much money? look what happens after 1982, okay? the figures -- actually, they spend more money. after 1982, they spend more money getting the word out. look at that. it goes from a few 2017 hundred thousand dollars to millions of dollars after 1982. they ended up spending more after 1982 to get the word out, to cast doubt and confusion, to tell people that filters worked better. and those are the figures. look. they go from '81, 5 million to 8 million. it peaks out at 16 million in 1990. and here's more evidence of their post 1982 reliance evidence: communications have been on the up trend this year. our four speakers covered a quarter of a million miles, logging nearly 800 appearances including 300 hours on the air. our public -- our new publication unit turned out a dozen new publications and distributed over a quarter of a million copies. the tobacco observer has reached a circulation of 86,000. our films have been seen by about 750,000 people this year for a cumulative audience of three and a half million. they had a strategic plan to continue their lies past 1982, and mr. crawford continued to believe until 1988. and this is what he said: "and do you believe those statements when you continued to smoke in the 50s, '60s, '70s, and in through the late '80s? "answer: yes, i did." this was his testimony here in this court. "now at some point, did you stop believing the tobacco companies? "answer: yes, sir. "and when was that? "it was the latter part of 1988." well after 1982. "and why did you smoke filtered winstons and kools? "well, the advertisement was that they -- if there was something wrong with them, they would take out -- the filter would take out the bad stuff in cigarettes." they wanted him to believe that. i mean, the whole world "filter" means that: it takes something out. you filter something out. and there is more testimony over and over again that he said it was not proven. he saw it on the tv. saw it in newspapers. you remember his testimony. so the next question has to do with: did mr. crawford reasonably rely to his detriment on any act taken in furtherance of the conspiracy of r.j. reynolds tobacco company's agreement with 2019 other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. crawford's laryngeal cancer? and the answer to that is yes, because they were not alone. they went in cahoots with other tobacco companies. they helped form the tirc and the ctr and the tobacco institute. they were shoulder-to-shoulder, neck-and-neck with these guys. this was a conspiracy, industry-wide, never seen before. and did any of these acts referred to in question 6 on which mr. crawford reasonably relied to his detriment occur after may 5, 1982? the answer to that is yes. they continued on until 2000. he stopped smoking in 1989. and this is 1994, four years after he stopped smoking. this is evidence of the conspiracy. (video played.) man: would you raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? please consider yourself to be under oath. 2020 man: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. man: i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and yes or no: do you believe nicotine is not addictive? man: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. man: mr. johnston? man: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication -- man: we will take that as a no. again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. i would just like to have this for the record. man: i do not believe that nicotine from our products are addictive. man: i believe nicotine is not addictive. man: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. man: i believe that nicotine is not 2021 addictive. man: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. alvarez: i mean, this is one of the clearest evidence of the conspiracy when you had the heads, the ceos, not just a chemist saying that when they are own internal documents say that we know that it is addictive. and we know what we are pedaling is addictive, and we know that if we stop putting nicotine in cigarettes, we are going to go out of business. so one of the things that we talked about in voir dire is compensatory damages. in our system of justice, in the civil justice system, it is not an eye for an eye. the only thing we can with come in here and ask you for is money damages. that is what we have to do. this is the how our system works. and so you have to figure out -- you have to come to an agreement on what is a fair and reasonable amount that should compensate mr. crawford for everything that he suffered up to this point and going on into the future. he is had a hole in his neck for 21 years. he breathes through that hole. he lost one of the 2022 things that is so fundamental to being a human being, which is the ability to speak with your own voice, to be heard in your own voice. that is such -- it is to the core of how we are and how people see you and hear you, and that is been taken away from him. and not an hour goes by or a day goes by where he does not have to go underneath that handkerchief and expel mucus from his throat, day in and day out. and you have to be the judge of what you think is fair and reasonable, based on what he is gone through. and i'll suggest to you that what he is gone through is significant; that no amount of money can compensate him for that. but your job is to try to find an amount that is reasonable in light of the evidence. and i can only make a suggestion. okay? you may think it is too low, you may think it is too high, or you may think it is just right. but i will tell you this: what we are not doing is giving you a number that is high, saying, "well, we are going to go high because we know that you are going to go lower." we are going to tell you what we think is fair and reasonable and just in light of the 2023 evidence and the enormous suffering that this man has gone through and will continue to go through every day of his life and what he is gone through for the last 21 years of his life. to just ask a -- to answer a simple -- just to say yes to anything, he is got to put a machine to his throat. and we think the amount of 15 million is fair and reasonable in light of the evidence. the court: in one minute, you will be at 45. mr. alvarez: i've got, like, five minutes left. thank you, your honor. the court: all right. mr. alvarez: the last question we are going to ask you to do -- talk about is punitive damages. and the standard is clear and convincing evidence, you know, should -- we have to prove that we are entitled to punitive damages are warranted in this case by the clear and convincing evidence. the judge read you that standard, and that is: conduct causing loss, injury, or damage to william crawford that was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life. well, if lying, lying about the health effects 2024 of your product so that you can make a product and continue to sell it for decades and make people sick and die and have them lose their vocal cords, if that is not flagrant, if that is not intentional, then nothing is. the conduct showed such an entire lack of care, of conscious indifference to the consequences, wanton or reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the public, reckless indifference to the rights of others, equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights, that is exactly what they did. so when you are asked -- this is the last question: please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company under the circumstances of this case. when you check this "yes," make it the biggest check mark of them all. make it big because this case screams for punitive damages. if there is a case where a corporation should be punished for their lies -- mr. belasic: objection to counsel -- the court: sustained. mr. alvarez: you heard the evidence in this 2025 case, and you decide whether r.j. reynolds should be punished for their lies and for the harm that they caused mr. crawford. and the punishment is to deter other companies so they do not act the same way that they did. please make that check mark the biggest one. thank you. the court: all right. thank you. we are going to take another short break. we are going to take ten minutes so that -- so that mr. belasic starts at 11:30. i am going to order lunch for you all so at whatever time it arrives, we are going to break, and you will go into the jury room and eat some pizza. i hope everybody likes pizza. so we are going to have that. and it arrives when it does, but i asked for it to show up at about noon. and he will break, and then he will continue his closing. we know about your problem at 1:30, and so well take a ten-minute break now. you are in the middle of closing arguments, so remember my instructions. do not begin deliberating or discussing until you have heard all of the closing arguments and my final instructions and go in there finally to begin to deliberate. 2026 that is the first time you can discuss this case with each other. all right. let us take ten minutes. mr. alvarez: may it please the court, counsel: i've only got a few minutes left. i had the pleasure of being the first one to address you all, and i'm going to have the pleasure of being the last lawyer to address you. we did not get a chance to play the video of the surgeon general, general koop. we would like to play that right now for you, please. (video played.) man: -- told so frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free choice. you start when you want, and you quit when you want. but anybody who is ever smoked knows that is not true. what does the record, the longtime record, say is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco? man: the indications are very clear that the people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting are those who began smoking at age 14 or 16. i think the studies all over the world in every country and every culture, the younger you start, the greater 2361 the addiction, and the more difficult it is to quit. man: you said that you consider tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin. is not that an overstatement? man: no. i think the evidence is very clear if you understand what we are talking about. addiction is a specific physiologic problem. and the manner in which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or to heroin. mr. alvarez: thank you. mr. belasic put up some portions of mr. crawford's trial testimony regarding him acknowledging or knowing the risk in 1970 when the warning labels came out, and that he knew and understand and appreciated the risk of the warnings. i'd like to read to you, if we could, what he also said. "so did you quit smoking or try to quit smoking in the 1970s when you saw the warnings because you got scared, or because you were concerned that you were spending too much money? "answer: spending too much money." the next portion of his trial transcript: 2362 "now, mr. belasic asked you some questions about the aflac policy, right? "correct. "was the policy just for cancer, or was it for other things, too? "it was a cancer policy. "question: and what -- were you concerned that just in case it was not -- it had not been proven, that you wanted to -- you took out an aflac policy? "answer: i did. "and when did you -- and when you took out the aflac policy, did you know that -- were you convinced that smoking caused cancer, or did you believe it was unproven? "i believed it was unproven, and that is not the reason for the policy." and i said, "what was the reason for the policy? tell the members of the jury. "my wife wanted to take it out -- take it out because so many members of her family had cancer, and she was concerned that we needed it, and that is the main reason. "so did the main reason have anything to do with smoking? 2363 "answer: no." and why is this important? because he made a connection saying, well, in 1970 he knew, and he went and got the aflac policy. do you remember him saying that? the warnings came out in 1970. the aflac policy was in 1974, four years later. does that sound like someone who saw a warning, got concerned, and ran out and got a policy? he waited four years. one thing had nothing to do with the other. he said that none of his family members said anything about him being addicted. can you please put up the testimony of janet cook, his daughter. "did you believe your father was addicted to cigarettes? "i know my father was addicted to cigarettes. i just do not believe it. i know that. "so your thought -- so you thought your father was addicted? "yes, to cigarettes, to nicotine. "when did you first believe your father was addict -- was an addict? "probably in the '80s." 2364 and this is a woman who is a social worker, who works with people with dependency issues. and also, about the drinking, this whole drinking thing, look what she says about that. "how much alcohol would he typically drink when he drank? "a few beers. two or three beers. "did you ever see your father drunk? "answer: never in my life. "did you ever consider your father to have a problem with alcohol? "answer: not at all." now, he showed you two records from basically the same -- two records, two months apart in 2008. in 2008. that is 16 years after he already had his vocal cords removed. sixteen years. and those two records, when you put them in context with the hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of medical records -- and there are people on this jury who have -- who work in hospitals -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. alvarez: look at the medical records. go through them. you will see that the overwhelming number of notations on there is that he is a social 2365 drinker. mr. belasic said that it was not a secret that smoking caused cancer; that no one told him anything he did not know. well, that was the problem, okay? the problem is, that is the whole purpose of the conspiracy. the whole purpose of the conspiracy was to cast doubt. they knew it was not a secret. they knew the information was out there. the whole purpose of the conspiracy was to get people to doubt it. and in fact, that position that they are taking in court that everyone knew, that is not the position that they were espousing in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s and until -- and in the '90s. that was not the position. what they were saying is it was not proven. today in court they are saying, "yeah, it is proven, and he should have known." but that is not what they were telling people back then. that is not what they were telling people back then. and if it was so well known, and if it should have been so well known to a man from greensboro, alabama, do not you think it should have been that well known for the executives and the scientists at r.j. reynolds tobacco company? if they are telling 2366 you he should have known, the same goes for them. the only difference is that they knew the truth, and they lied about the truth. that is the difference. there was a slide up there about that we did not test him for some sort of gene type in the pathology that would have come out that it was smoking. hey, trust me, if that test would have come back positive that it was not for smoking, we would have heard about it. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. alvarez: thank you. the defendants had, just like we did, had the ability to test for those things. both sides had the ability to test for those things. 2372 now, with regards to the causation, all we heard was, well, it could be gerd. it could be alcohol. it could be asbestos. but, you know, they had -- they do not have a burden of proof of anything. but if they wanted to prove it, one of the things they could have done is they could have called a doctor instead of just cite to a website to say that his cancer was caused by gerd, or his cancer was caused by alcohol, or his cancer was caused by asbestos, when there is no evidence of that. none. zero. and even if it was alcohol, and even if it was gerd, the overriding factor is always the smoking. and the legal cause instruction, or the concurring cause instruction, says that it could work and operate with other factors and things. so even if you think that maybe gerd did it or maybe the alcohol did it, according to the law, the concurring cause instruction, if it operated with smoking, it is a legal cause. and with regards to laryngeal cancer being caused by smoking, there is no dispute in this case that that is what it is. it is a finding in this case. it is one of the things that the judge read to you. there is no dispute that smoking can cause 2373 laryngeal cancer. there is no issue whatsoever in this case. it is a finding. you get a copy of the jury instructions; it is going to be in there. they read a portion of dr. califano's deposition, which said it would not have made a difference if he smoked filtered cigarettes or unfiltered cigarettes; he still would have gotten the cancer anyway. that is the whole point. filters do not keep you safer. you smoke believing that filters do something, filter out, but they do not. that was the whole point. filters did not work. and they were sold to smokers in the '50s and the '60s and all the way through the '90s as a safer alternative when, in fact, they were not. he talked about how they cooperated with the government and the tobacco working group. but we showed you a document that showed that murray senkus, the guy who was in charge of it -- what did he say? he say, "i'm only joining if" -- "and i'm telling you right now, if me joining, i'm never going to admit that smoking causes cancer." that was their cooperation. and with regards to making -- they said -- the criticism was that the government did not agree to allow them to develop a safer cigarette. the 2374 problem with a safer cigarette that they were trying to develop was, it may have decreased the amount of lung cancer. but what the study showed is -- do you know what it increased? the number of heart disease. and what is the number one killer? heart disease. heart disease actually kills more people than lung cancer. that is why the government did not bless it. here's the other thing: they put part of the surgeon general report in there that said that if you quit for ten years, your risk of getting cancer comes back to a nonsmoker. and that is true. and that is what makes this case so egregious. because if they would have told people earlier, if they would have confessed the truth, more people would have quit. there would have been more than 50 million americans quitting. if they would have started in 1953 or 1966 when the first labels, or '70 or '85, or when the surgeon general reports came out, if they would have told people the truth, more people would have quit sooner, and more cancer and more harm and more suffering would have been avoided. and we do not have to prove to you that anything that reynolds did caused him to start 2375 smoking as a child. we do not have to prove that. that is not part of the conspiracy. once the conspiracy started, he continued to smoke because of the conspiracy. here's the other thing that does not make sense: if everyone knew, and it was not a secret, okay, because you have got to think that these tobacco executives are smart people. they are very sophisticated. they are very, very smart. they spend -- you know, they have a lot of resources to spend in research. if they are so smart, and everybody knew, then why did they spend half a billion dollars trying to convince people that smoking had not been proven to be dangerous? why would they throw money away like that if everybody knew? if everybody knew, these smart executives, why would they spend half a billion dollars? the question about reasonably relied. well, that whole scheme of them, they knew that tobacco companies may have some credibility issues, so that is why they got scientists and doctors that people would trust to get out the word that smoking had not been proven. and remember that? of the 14 doctors that came out and signed that study, 13 of them were on 2376 the payroll of the tobacco company, and the other one they did not know because he was russian, and they could not check. that is how they got the word out. so was it reasonable for mr. crawford and millions of other people to rely on doctors and scientists and tobacco companies and other people who were saying that it had not been proven back in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s and into the '90s? the court: get ready to wrap up. mr. alvarez: i am. i'm going to go to the last thing. i have more, but i'm going to wrap up now. mr. belasic said that he wanted you -- that i wanted you to give my client $15 million. i do not want you to give him anything. i want you to do justice. i want you to be fair. i want you to be just in this case. and if you think $15 million is not just, and you think it is more or less, he is going to accept whatever verdict you render him. thank you.