mr. kaiser: may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. kaiser: what i'm going to do in my closing argument is put the verdict form up, and i'm going to, as best as i can, based on the evidence in this case, help you answer each question. 2541 so i'm going to begin with number 1, "was antonio cuculino addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was that addiction a legal cause of his coronary heart disease?" and i've got to tell you, the issue of addiction in this case is simple. and why do i say that. you heard evidence, mr. cuculino tried nicotrol spray, the inhaler. mr. cuculino tried wellbutrin, the drug. mr. cuculino tried laser therapy. mr. cuculino tried acupuncture. mr. cuculino tried hypnosis. mr. cuculino went to a smoking cessation clinic. mr. cuculino was prescribed chantix. so there is two questions. number one, what does it mean that he tried all of these different smoking cessation aids? it means that addicted smokers must find it very hard to quit if they have all of these things on the market in order to help you quit. and number two, and most important is this: a person who does not have a compulsive need to smoke, a compulsive need to use a psychoactive substance, can put it down anytime they want and walk away because they are not addicted. the distinction is an addicted smoker that 2542 needs things to help him quit, that is the distinction. you would never need to give someone who is not addicted chantix. you would never need to give them anything to help them stop because they are not addicted in the first place. no doctor in his or her right mind would write a prescription to a nonaddicted smoker for chantix, because we have heard that chantix has very serious side effects, it gives you nightmares, suicidal thoughts, it is bad for your heart. and so it is a real simple issue here as dr. goldman, our expert that we called, said in all of the thousands of patients that he has treated for addiction, in all of the thousands of patients he has counseled for smoking, he has never once prescribed any smoking cessation aid to a nonaddicted smoker. the issue is simple, as to number 1, the answer is "was antonio cuculino addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" it is a resounding yes. "was that addiction a legal cause of his disease?" that answer is yes as well. why? the fact that mr. cuculino had a compulsive need to smoke cigarettes, a psychoactive substance, meant 2543 that he was not able to quit. if he was not addicted, he could have put the cigarettes down and avoided getting sick. if he was told in 1989 you have got to stop smoking because of your health and he was not addicted, unless he was crazy or a lunatic, he would be able to put the cigarettes down and walk away and never smoke again. so the addiction caused the heart disease because he had this compulsion to use a psychoactive substance, that is all that means. so on your verdict form, when you consider the evidence, number 1 is yes. number 2, "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of antonio cuculino's coronary heart disease?" you have heard from dr. feldman, you heard from dr. phillips. one of the most important instructions for you is going to be the believability of witness instructions. you saw dr. phillips answer questions on direct, you saw him answer my questions on cross. there was quite a difference, was not there? dr. phillips was the person whose opinions are continuing to evolve. dr. phillips is the person 2544 who never apparently read marie cuculino's deposition. dr. phillips is the person who never looked at the insurance application and the medical application until they were sent to his attorney this week -- last week. dr. phillips was the person who, when information did not support his opinions, he discounted that information. he discounted the insurance applications. dr. phillips was the person who when asked on cross examination whether he mentioned one iota, one time, diffuse disease in his deposition started out by saying i think i did. when he was pressed further, he said i do not remember. and when he was pressed further, he said no, i did not. dr. phillips was the person who when he was asked was not this the first time you mentioned the fact that, in your opinion, mr. cuculino did not follow his doctors' orders, he said, "i thought i said that in my deposition." "do you remember saying it? let me show you your deposition," i said. "i do not remember." and finally when pressed, "no, i did not say it." that is dr. phillips. 2545 and so when you consider what dr. feldman had to say about it, you will see that mr. cuculino's heart disease was absolutely caused by smoking. because even dr. phillips will agree that the consistent thing we know, the consistent fact we know is that mr. cuculino smoked from a young age, he smoked a lot, and he smoked for a long time. even dr. phillips agreed with that. and if you recall from the testimony of dr. feldman, dr. feldman started out and he told you that mr. cuculino's heart disease was premature cardiovascular heart disease because he had his first heart attack at 49 years of age. no question about it. dr. feldman also told you that he went from coronary artery disease to coronary heart disease by virtue of having a heart attack. so in 1994, according to dr. feldman, when mr. cuculino had his heart attack, he developed coronary heart disease. dr. feldman told you of the modifiable risk factors he was able to identify, first and foremost was cigarette smoking, and also high blood pressure that was basically controlled, and at high, it was only mildly high. dr. feldman also said that blood pressure 2546 alone, given mr. cuculino's age when he had his heart attack, would not have contributed to that extent that would have caused mr. cuculino to have his heart attack at 49 years old. it would have had to have been the combination of smoking, first and foremost, along with blood pressure. and he said something else about the combination of the two, if you remember. dr. feldman also talked about this metabolic syndrome, he said that there was really no problem with mr. cuculino's weight up until the time he had his heart attack. and he told you that "it is very important, the interaction between cigarette smoking and mild high blood pressure can be synergistic." and remember how he explained that. it is not one and one is two, it is one and one can be five, one and one could be ten, that is how he explained the synergistic effect. remember what he said, not only is cigarette smoking an independent risk factor all by itself that it can contribute to heart disease, but he said when you have cigarette smoking along with other risk factors like high blood pressure, that even causes the high blood pressure to be more of a risk factor. that is called the multiplicative 2547 effect or the synergistic effect. so cigarette smoking on its own is a risk factor, and cigarette smoking coupled with another risk factor is even more of one. and remember dr. feldman said there was no evidence of this metabolic syndrome at the point when mr. cuculino had his heart attack. and so again, as dr. feldman said in his opinion here, was that "the overwhelming majority of this gentleman's cardiovascular disease in 1994 was related to his significant cigarette smoking, coupled a little bit with the synergy of mildly elevated blood pressure with no evidence of a significant lipid problem, that his cholesterol -- that is his cholesterol, no evidence of significant blood sugar problem and no evidence of metabolic syndrome." and something else dr. feldman said, "that when you smoke in terms of damage to your heart, there is a dose response." and what does that mean? that means that every single dose of smoking contributes to the disease process. so you cannot exclude one brand of cigarette from another. every little bit causes damage to the extent to where dr. feldman said there is a direct toxic effect of 2548 cigarette smoking from the first cigarette. the very first cigarette starts the disease process. and he also -- remember he said, "if you stop smoking, talk in terms of risk reduction." and he said, "if you stop smoking, there is a period of about one and a half to five years where your risk goes down to where you are the equivalent of a nonsmoker." now, do not get that confused with any suggestion that if you quit smoking, the plaque that had built up, the damage that had been done goes away. that damage stays there. because remember what dr. feldman said? "even when you stop smoking and you have progression, you could have progression when every other risk factor is controlled." remember he said that. and also, the fact is that the cigarette smoking still contributes even if you have stopped because the cigarette smoking has caused the damage up until the point that you do stop. so there is no problem with the fact that mr. cuculino had progression after he stopped smoking because the damage was done from his 50 years of smoking. the bottom line is, as dr. feldman told you, it was the cigarette smoking that caused mr. cuculino's heart disease. and so there is no 2549 question, nothing else caused it. the only other thing that caused it was his mildly high blood pressure, but as dr. feldman said, it was the cigarette smoking that was a substantial cause of mr. cuculino's heart disease. so in answer to number 2, "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of antonio cuculino's coronary heart disease," the evidence suggested it was, and you should answer yes. now, the next part of the verdict form is called legal cause. and after you have answered yes to the first two questions, you will then have the benefit of the engle findings as judge cueto read them to you. and that means, as you know by now, we do not have to put on any evidence to prove any of these findings. and so the legal cause part on the verdict form, if we are able to show legal cause, we have proven that the -- we have proven our claim for strict liability and we have proven our negligence claim, because we have proven that the cigarettes that antonio cuculino smoked that were manufactured by philip morris and rjr caused his disease. and what is legal cause? just what i said, that the cigarettes that were manufactured by the defendants caused mr. cuculino's heart disease. 2550 so let us take r.j. reynolds. you remember in opening statement, mr. reid came up with this figure of a seven-year pack history of smoking their brand of cigarettes. mr. cuculino smoked seven years of r.j. reynolds cigarettes when he smoked pall malls. and so you take a seven pack-year, that could be a pack a day for seven years. and then the question becomes, did that cause, did that contribute to mr. cuculino's disease. well, of course it did because remember when mr. -- dr. feldman said, it is a dose response. so the fact that mr. cuculino quit smoking r.j. reynolds product in about 1965 means nothing, because he switched to another brand and continued smoking, so that the disease process continued after he quit smoking r.j. reynolds brands. and so by way of illustration, as mr. reid said in his opening statement, if he had a seven-year pack history of smoking, if he smoked a pack a day of his brand for seven years and quit, then the smoking of his brand did not cause disease. well, let us see that. let us put up the seven-year? mr. reid: could i ask what we are putting up 2551 before we put it up? the court: what is it that you are putting up? mr. kaiser: we are putting up how many doses that would be. mr. reid: oh, okay. mr. kaiser: so if you have a pack a day for seven years, and there is 365 days in a year, that would mean there is 2,555 days where mr. cuculino smoked a cigarette for every one of those days. if you take that number of days and you multiply it by 20, which is the number of cigarettes in that one pack, that amounts to 51,100 cigarettes in that time period. now, how many puffs does one take in an average -- on the average of a cigarette? one? certainly more than that. two? ten? let us say eight. if based on eight puffs of a cigarette -- mr. reid: objection, there is no evidence of that in the record, your honor. the court: excuse me. mr. reid: i object, there is no evidence of that. the court: i'm going to tell the jury that remember that what the lawyers say during this phase of the trial is not evidence. rely on your 2552 own memory of what the evidence is in this case, okay? mr. kaiser: use common sense and just figure out how many puffs someone would take of a cigarette before it is done, and eight is probably conservative. and if you take eight and multiply it by the number of cigarettes, you end up with 408,800 puffs over a seven-year period. the question then becomes of the 408,800 puffs of all of those chemicals in the cigarettes, can you say that that would not contribute to mr. cuculino's disease? and of course it would. because by the time he starts smoking philip morris' brand of cigarettes, when he starts smoking philip morris' brand of cigarettes, he is already got 408,800 puffs invested in the bank, and that does not go away. and so there is no question, he has to smoke now 408,800 puffs less of his new brand before he gets his illness. so absolutely, his smoking of r.j. reynolds cigarettes contributed to his disease in that respect just by virtue of the number of puffs over that seven-year period. secondly, he was addicted to those cigarettes. and the fact that he was addicted meant he had this compulsive need to continue smoking, and it does not 2553 matter if he continued smoking r.j. reynolds brand or another brand, the fact is he was addicted to their brand of cigarettes, which caused him to continue smoking whatever brand it was. so that fact in and of itself that he was addicted and could not stop contributed to the disease process. so you have two reasons, his addiction to r.j. reynolds cigarettes, his addiction to the pall malls, and the number of puffs of whatever chemicals that were in there, we know there are carcinogens and a whole bunch of other chemicals, and you add that together, was that significant? certainly was. so the answer to the part of the question "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendant r.j. reynolds tobacco company a legal cause of antonio cuculino's coronary heart disease?" the answer is yes. the same question, "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendant philip morris a legal cause of antonio cuculino's coronary heart disease?" well, obviously, if smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes was a substantial cause, a legal cause, and he smoked -- mr. cuculino smoked their brand for about seven years, the fact that he 2554 smoked philip morris' brand for almost 40 years, obviously, smoking those cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. cuculino's disease. remember, it is the dose effect, it is the combination. there was not just one brand of cigarettes smoked here. if you had a situation where seven years of smoking was not enough for mr. cuculino to get his disease, in combination with the additional 40 years, that would mean, and this is silly, that would mean that he could smoke a brand for seven years, another brand for seven years, another brand for seven years, another brand for seven years and have 35 years of smoking these different brands for seven years, but he would not be liable, he would not be sick from anyone's brand. now we know that is inane. so in answer to those questions, yes, yes, and finally, we are on next question, number 3, which is the reliance component. and the question is, "please state as to each defendant whether antonio cuculino reasonably relied to his detriment on that defendant's statement or omission of material fact or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes not otherwise known or available to 2555 mr. cuculino, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his coronary heart disease." remember dr. proctor's testimony. he was the historian of science. and what he talked about was the fact that early on, before cigarettes became popular, it was the actions of the tobacco companies, including r.j. reynolds, including philip morris, that popularized cigarettes. and he explained to you the various methods by which the cigarette companies used to popularize their cigarettes. and one of the things he talked about was their mass marketing efforts, where they utilized every medium available. remember skywriting, and billboards, and radio, and television, and they got their message across and they had the funding to do that, so that using all of these methods of mass marketing, cigarette smoking, according to dr. proctor, was normalized. the cigarette companies, r.j. reynolds and philip morris, created a climate at the time that mr. cuculino started smoking such that it was a normal behavior, and that is why, when mr. cuculino was asked why did you start smoking? he gives the answer that everybody else gives who started at that time. because, what, everybody was 2556 doing it. it was cool to do it. why do people respond in that way when they are asked? because that was the climate that was created by the tobacco industry, where you could walk into this courtroom in 1950 and smoke a cigarette. where you could walk into a doctor's office in the '50s and smoke a cigarette. where you could go into any public building and smoke a cigarette. where you could sit at your desk all day long and smoke a cigarette. where you could ride in a compact elevator with a bunch of people and smoke a cigarette. why you could go to a college and sit in a classroom and smoke a cigarette. why you could go on an airplane and smoke a cigarette. why you could walk into a restaurant and smoke a cigarette. you see the pattern here? cigarette smoking was normalized. it was a normal part of behavior. and people like mr. cuculino saw the ads. when he walked into a store, he saw posters. when he walked on the street, he saw billboards. when he was able to watch television, when his father let him, he saw commercials on tv. and remember when he was on the witness stand, what did he say? he said he saw that little guy johnny, and he 2557 identified with johnny because at the time, he was the same size as johnny. and what did he tell you? he told you that johnny would say "call for philip morris." and you know what johnny did not say? "and they will kill you." and he started smoking. so it is not a question of him relying on one statement, it is a question of his relying on thousands of statements, thousands of statements that came from the advertising campaigns of r.j. reynolds and philip morris. and you heard mr. cuculino describe to you why he switched to marlboros, his wife was smoking marlboros, but he was very familiar with marlboro cigarettes because he said they used to be a lady's cigarette and mr. cuculino was not going to smoke a lady's cigarette. and you saw the marlboro story and they transform this cigarette that was a woman's cigarette into a man's cigarette. where a man smoked that cigarette. where cowboys with tattoos on their hands smoked that cigarette. where someone like mr. cuculino could be a macho man smoking that marlboro cigarette. so can i tell you what statement it was he 2558 relied on? of course i cannot. but i can certainly tell you that because mr. cuculino saw all these ads and was exposed to their advertising campaign, he saw and heard thousands, thousands of statements from the tobacco companies. and he relied on those statements that he heard, and at no time when he started to smoke at eight did he ever know or was told by the cigarette companies that, by the way, this stuff will kill you. this stuff will get you addicted. because johnny roventini was not telling him that. and the marlboro man was not telling him that. and that is the reliance component. and i submit to you that on both of these reliance questions, number 3 as i read it, as to both companies, r.j. reynolds and philip morris, the answer is a resounding yes, because each one of these tobacco companies advertised their product, marlboros, pall malls, they each advertised their products, and it does not mean a lick. it does not mean a thing that when mr. cuculino saw johnny roventini, he did not smoke their cigarettes. what it means is that he got their message regardless of the brand he ultimately picked because they were all in this together. and number 4, speaking of together, "please 2559 state whether antonio cuculino reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement or omission of material fact made in furtherance of that defendant's agreement to conceal that omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes not otherwise known or available to mr. cuculino, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his coronary heart disease." for the same reasons i already explained to you, the answer for r.j. reynolds, yes, for philip morris, yes. there is no question, ladies and gentlemen, about this man's reliance on their ad campaigns and their statements that they made. and it does not matter if mr. cuculino did not read the frank statement to cigarette smokers. it does not matter if he read the publications that they sent to the doctors. it does not matter if he read the white papers that were sent to the senators. what matters is from that information that was conveyed to those people, the climate was maintained so that he still thought it is fun to smoke cigarettes. that is what that means. so the fact he did not see the frank statement, big deal. what he did see was the ad campaigns. 2560 that is reliance on their advertising. and they were not truthful in their campaigns for him -- to him. and so that is the concealment and the conspiracy or the agreement to conceal. and so next on your verdict form is the apportionment of fault. and lest you think for a minute that this case, as you were told in opening statement, was about just mr. cuculino, you are, in the words of mr. heimann in his deposition, dead wrong. this case is about the choices that were made by philip morris. this case is about the choices that were made by r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and this case is about the choice that mr. cuculino ultimately made when he was eight years old to start smoking. and remember we spoke in jury selection about what age are people held responsible and accountable for the things that they do? at what age do you think people are responsible? and by and large, the folks said maybe 16 or older. ms. gallagher: objection, your honor, it is outside the record. the court: overruled. 2561 mr. kaiser: do you think someone like mr. cuculino, when he was eight years old, made an informed choice to smoke cigarettes? do you think you could say, "that is mr. cuculino's choice, that is his fault, because he should have known better?" do you think mr. cuculino should have been responsible at eight years old for starting smoking because he did not go to a public library and check out the medical journals that had these studies on epidemiology from the '50s? do you think mr. cuculino is responsible for not going to the library and reading those articles that were in german and spanish? and the answer is of course not. and the cigarette companies, r.j. reynolds and philip morris, knew that. what better person to be seduced by the allure of the rod, of the cigarette than an eight-year-old? what better person to be seduced by the allure of the athletes pitching the product and the actors and the actresses pitching the product and the politicians pitching a product, an eight-year-old or an adult? cigarette companies knew exactly what they were doing when they were targeting people like this man to pick up a cigarette and smoke. 2562 and so the question becomes, well, who is at fault here? who is at fault here? we have already said we accept some responsibility for mr. cuculino's maybe not trying hard enough to quit. and i'm going to tell you what, we do not accept one iota of responsibility for mr. cuculino's choice to start smoking because that is their fault. that is philip morris' fault, that is r.j. reynolds' fault. let me demonstrate how. and you remember, these are the companies' internal documents that were never supposed to be published, that were confidential documents. and what is not on here, ladies and gentlemen, is that in 1953, remember, r.j. reynolds had a chemist, a bench chemist, named claude teague, and claude teague wrote this memorandum to people in his company, and talked about the risks of tobacco smoking, the carcinogens in tobacco smoking, and the fact that tobacco in cigarettes caused cancer. they knew that in 1953. well, did any other companies other than r.j. reynolds know that in 1953? you bet you. you bet you. what do we have here? you remember their response, the cigarette companies' response? in veritext cuculino v rj reynolds volume 18 january17, 2014 1953, they responded to the medical evidence of the dangers of smoking for one reason. do you think it was for health concerns? do you think it was for public safety? absolutely not. their only reason for responding was because of their bottom dollar, because their shares of stock were dropping. they could care a lick about the public. they wanted their shares of stock to rise because they were losing money. and they met at the plaza hotel on december 14th of 1953. and what did they do? they did not hire medical doctors to research this issue. they did not hire medical people to see how they were going to respond to the public. they hired the largest public relations firm in the country, hill & knowlton. and as a result of them hiring hill & knowlton, there was this december 1953 forwarding memo that was issued, confidentially. and what did they say in this memo? the hill & knowlton people were interviewing these tobacco researchers. and what did they say? "fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." look at that. fortunate. they were happy about it. because they knew that cigarette smokers could not 2564 break their habit of smoking. early on in 1953, these defendants knew about addiction. and they were happy about it. because they were going to get young smokers smoking their product, and they were going to get them for a long time. and they also said would not it be wonderful, "boy," with an explanation, "would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette?" what does that mean? it means in 1953, these people that got together to join and form this conspiracy at the plaza hotel knew that their cigarettes caused cancer. and what was their response, when they had this information before mr. cuculino had it, because remember, he did not go to the library and read the articles and interpret the articles, philip morris and r.j. reynolds had this information before mr. cuculino had it. they had a choice, do we tell people like mr. cuculino, an eight-year-old boy? do we tell the public so they could be warned about what is going to happen if you do buy our product? no. no. they chose to not tell the public. that was their choice. 2565 now, whose fault is that? is that mr. cuculino's fault? of course not. is that r.j. reynolds' fault? is that philip morris' fault? you bet it is, because they made the choice, not mr. cuculino, to not tell them. they did not tell them about addiction, they did not tell them about the health risks of their product in 1953, interestingly enough, when this man started smoking, at eight years old. and so what did they do. two weeks after this meeting in december of 1954, they issued their frank statement. they issued their promise that they made to consumers, knowing full well about the cigarettes cause cancer and it was addictive, and what do they do? they are going to be committed to hiring the best researchers to get to the bottom of this controversy. well, they knew there was not a controversy. dr. proctor told you there was already a scientific consensus about the dangers of smoking. and yet what did they do? they created this ruse to fool the public into believing that they were going to hire these researchers to research the issues of smoking and health. and you know what? they did hire researchers. they hired competent, 2566 decorated researchers who did everything but research on smoking and health. and you saw in the frank statement, they are pledging, a, an assistance to the research effort into all phases of tobacco use. and paramount to the companies was the health and safety of the community. and we know that is poppycock. because they knew at the time what their cigarettes were doing and did not tell them. and they issued this bogus frank statement that they were going to be committed to research. and you saw the names of the companies that were there, you saw the names philip morris, american tobacco company, brown & williamson, which became r.j. reynolds. r.j. reynolds was there. all the heads of the big tobacco companies were there and they all signed on the dotted line when the frank statement was issued. and this did not last for a week. this did not last for a month. as dr. proctor told you, this campaign to create doubt about the health risks of smoking, this fake controversy that they caused, that they created, the defendants and others, lasted for 50 years. 50 years. and you see after this, more examples. 1963, veritext cuculino v rj reynolds volume 18 january17, 2014 we got brown & williamson, and they later became part of r.j. reynolds, what did they say in 1963? moreover, nicotine is addictive not habituating, it is addictive. which they knew from 1953. 1963, they still know it is addictive and they also know they are not selling cigarettes because they taste so good. they do not sell their cigarettes because it is so pleasurable after a nice hot cup of coffee. they are selling their cigarettes because they are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. and what better way to get nicotine to your brain than that little rod called a cigarette. and they knew it. and they knew it, and did not say a word to mr. cuculino. is that mr. cuculino's fault because they did not tell him? of course not. that is the seller's fault, that is the seller's fault like the analogy to the car and the buyer who buys a car not knowing about the dangers because the seller does not tell him. and we move on. 1964, philip morris, what did they say? the surgeon general's report comes out. pretty alarming because now the surgeon general is saying there is no question cigarette smoke causes cancer in men. big news. it made big news. 2568 and what was the response by philip morris? was the response, look, this is really serious, it is nationwide about the health risk of smoking, do we tell the public? do we agree with what the surgeon general says? no. instead, all they were worried about was giving smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. concerned about the public's health? concerned about mr. cuculino's health? of course not. they were concerned that someone like mr. cuculino might quit if he heard about the surgeon general's report, which he said he did not. and so in that vein, they were more concerned with making sure that people like mr. cuculino, through their efforts, were given a psychological crutch to continue smoking. do not worry about this health scare, it is nothing. they were more important. how are they going to do it? let us use humor and satire, apply the light touch. let us do not be serious and agree with anything. satire. and then we see almost 20 years later, the tobacco institute in their roper proposal, what did they say about their campaign of doubt? their strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed, which means in 1972 they were lauding their success 2569 of creating doubt. and they even said, what was the strategy? a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt. just like the evidence said in 1953, and now we are up to 1972. creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. because they know for 20 years or more already what cigarettes could do. they knew 20 years before how addictive it was. and they admit in 1972 that their strategy was brilliantly conceived, and it was a holding strategy to create doubt, and they continued it up until 2000. these are the choices that were made by the tobacco companies, by r.j. reynolds, by philip morris, not antonio cuculino. so when you are apportioning fault, can you give any fault on that to mr. cuculino? of course you cannot because he is not making the choice to create doubt. he is not making the choice, this campaign of creating doubt. and there is more. and you remember how we finished our case. we played excerpts from the talking heads, from the executives of the cigarette companies. and what did they say? remember the mantra that dr. proctor was talking about. "if we find anything damaging in our product, we will take 2570 it out," knowing full well they could not take it out. "if we find anything damaging in our products, we will close our business." oh, come on. and that was the mantra. and you see a 1972 planning memo by claude teague, 1972. and what is he saying in 1972, almost 20 years after their conspiracy began? "happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique." they were giddy about it. "happily." this is in their own confidential documents. happily for them, our smokers get addicted and they are going to have to use our product for a long time. and in 1978, philip morris, what are they writing? and remember you heard in mr. reid's opening statement, "you are not going to hear anything that the tobacco institute -- industry research committee was a front. there is not going to be any evidence of that." and what is philip morris saying in 1978, almost 25 years later? "the tirc was set up as an industry shield in 1954." remember, dr. proctor said that it was a shield, it was a distraction from the truth. "tirc is acting as a front." it was a shield and a front in 1978. privately they are acknowledging it. are 2571 they telling the public? should mr. cuculino know that, oh, i should not believe this stuff, it was all a front, a shield? of course not. but they know it. and then we go up to 1994, you saw the waxman hearings, where each of the companies' executives under oath were asked whether or not smoking is addictive, and each one in turn "smoking is not addictive. we believe that nicotine is not addictive. nicotine is not addictive." this is 1994. "we do not believe it causes cancer." in 1994. who is at fault for making all these statements? mr. cuculino? he did not utter a word. it is the sellers' fault. it is not buyer beware here. it is their fault. this case is not about mr. cuculino, it is about the defendants and mr. cuculino and your ability to apportion fault based on the evidence in this case. the clerk: 30 minutes. mr. kaiser: and with that, i have some questions here that you need to think about when you hear the closing arguments from defense counsel and consider these questions and see how the defense attorneys are going to respond to that. 2572 and we are going to consider a balanced at fault so that, number one, why do the defendants fail to address their statements made in their confidential internal documents? remember all you heard in opening statement from one of the attorneys was that, well, yes, you are going to see some of these internal documents, and there were some stupid statements. well, you see you heard that in opening statement. that is not evidence. and you certainly heard no evidence from this witness stand from anyone explaining why these statements were made and why they were stupid. did not hear anything about that. and so you have got to question why do the defendants fail to address their statements? why do not they pick up their internal documents in front of you and say this is why we said that? this is what we meant when we said the tirc was a front. this is what we meant when we were giddy about cigarettes being addictive. this is what we meant when we said happily, that people will get addicted. this is what we meant when we said nicotine is an addictive drug. this is why we 2573 did not address the public when we knew in 1953 that cigarettes were addictive and they could kill people. so keep in mind during the closing arguments why did not they address those arguments? and you know what, they will not do it in their closing argument. they will not. you will not hear any explanations as to why they will not address their statements. and you know why they will not address their statements? because if they do address their statements, they have to admit fault and if they do not address the statements, you know they are wrong, you know that is an admission by silence of their fault. and you will not hear a word about documents and why they made these stupid statements. and secondly, why do they act as if they do not exist? why is it when they question dr. proctor they want to put out these few articles in the newspaper and these reader's digest articles that mr. cuculino did not read and the florida health notes from 1900 before mr. cuculino was born and the 1605 counterblaste to tobacco, and all of these things they want to show that oh, mr. cuculino would have known all this stuff, he would have known that the cigarettes were banned, the sale of 2574 cigarettes were banned in 1908 in florida. he would have known all that stuff. why do they act that they do not exist? why do not they comment on their white papers they distributed to hundreds of thousands to combat that information? why -- ask yourselves, why do not they get up here and talk to you about their health notes and their letters, their newsletter that they were sending out talking about bald people and lung cancer and people born in march, about all these publications they were sending doctors and senators and all these influential people? ask yourself, why do they keep acting like that? why will not they talk about their response to the reader's digest articles and their response to all this other information that might have existed in life magazine? and they will not do it. guaranteed, they will not address why they ignored their own attack to try to discount this message which they did. remember dr. proctor, they were very successful in getting people to believe their message. so you have to ask yourself why are they acting like that? well, because if they do not exist, all there would be is evidence that 2575 mr. cuculino should have known about this bad information, that is why they do that. and if they come up here and start talking about their response, they are going to have to admit fault. and if they ignore it, which they will, by silence, they are admitting fault. when the defendants knew by the '50s, and i have already showed you, 1953 that cigarette smoke contained carcinogens and could cause cancer, why was it their choice not to tell the american public and mr. cuculino? you see if they get up here and respond, and guaranteed they will not. and ask that question, why did you all get that information, know that information and not tell anybody? if they get up here and admit that, they are admitting fault. if they get up here and do not say anything, their silence is an admission of fault. when they knew that nicotine was an addictive drug in the '50s, why did they choose, not mr. cuculino, why did they choose not to tell the american public? that is a question you need to ask and see if any of these defense attorneys are going to say this is why we did not tell the consumer. they are not going to do that. they are going to 2576 ignore it. the fact is if they did talk to you about it, they would have to admit that they were at fault. if they do not talk to you about it, their silence speaks volumes because they know they are at fault and they cannot talk about it and they will not. while professing to accept an interest in people's health through the frank statement and cooperating with those tasked with safeguarding the public health, why did the defendants ridicule the surgeon general's report? remember on cross-examination, well, were not the defendants thanked by the surgeon general for their contribution? they were thanked. they got a thank you. and you know what they did not do? they did not tell the surgeon general's report {sic} what they knew about addiction. they did not tell them they knew that nicotine was an addictive drug. they did not tell them they knew about the carcinogens in their product. they did not do any of that. but they professed to cooperate with the surgeon general, and the second his reports were issued in '64 and '72 and '88, they ridicule him. now, why do they do that? why on the one hand 2577 are they publicly able to say, look what we are doing, and privately -- and publicly, they are ridiculing them? see if you get a response to that. the response is going to be they got a thank you. they gave him the green monster, that book of bibliographies where you could buy it for $8 and mail it. that is what they did. why did the defendants respond to the strong evidence linking cigarettes to cancer, of which they were already aware, with a campaign designed to create doubt about the health risk and addictive nature of cigarettes for the next 50 years? that is on them. that is not on mr. cuculino. see if they get up here and talk about their campaign to create doubt for 50 years, and you know they will not because if they do, they will have to admit fault, and if they ignore it, it still does not go away. their silence speaks volumes. did the defendants want antonio cuculino to believe their message about more research being needed, no proof that cigarettes were dangerous, bad things would be removed in cigarettes if they were found, and they would close their business if it was found that their cigarettes were dangerous to health? 2578 of course, they wanted him to believe that because if he believed that, he continues smoking because the jury was still out and they are not going to address that with you. because if they address it to you, they are going to have to admit that they were at fault. they are not going to do that. you know why? they take zero fault here. they say they are zero percent at fault and it is all on mr. cuculino as if he is to blame for all of these things. he is to blame for their knowledge; he is to blame for their concealment; he is to blame for their not disclosing the information that they knew. of course not, that is silly. and finally, if mr. cuculino did believe their message, who is more at fault, mr. cuculino? or the people that are trying to make him believe in their denialist message in their controversy that they created? of course the cigarette companies. and so that is -- the court: who has got a phone on in here? mr. kaiser: and that is the seller's fault. that is r.j. reynolds' fault. that is philip morris's fault. that is the fault of all the companies that got together in 1953. and so what is 2579 the fault of antonio cuculino here? antonio cuculino maybe, maybe did not try hard enough to quit. that is it. that is his fault. when antonio cuculino was eight, i've already been through this, did he make an informed decision? did he have the judgment to be able to determine whether or not he was doing something that was sound? and, of course, the answer is no. and the tobacco companies knew that. and that is why they targeted people like antonio cuculino, because they knew they were the ones who were going to be the most convinced to start smoking cigarettes because it was cool. and so we get to mr. cuculino's fault. and so how much do you want to put on him? well, i mean, there is different ways to do it. and the bottom line is this: at some point, it really became common knowledge that smoking is bad. whether mr. cuculino heard it or saw it, in 1989 when the doctor in the medical record told him after he had chest pains you need to quit, okay? that was on him. that was on him. did he heed the message? no, he did not. he did not try. that is on him. 2580 there is no question about it. we accept responsibility for mr. cuculino when he was told in 1989 you have got to stop and he did not try, that is his fault. that is his fault. and in 1990, that is his fault. and in '91, that is his fault. up until 2000, he finally did try and quit. so what do you have, you have 11 years where mr. cuculino failed to try to quit and we accept responsibility to that. now, 11 years, we put 11 percent for him and put 89 for the defendants because after 2000, mr. cuculino does try and quit and he tried everything under the sun you heard. now, do you really think he is not trying when he is spending money, when he is spending time and he is going through all of these things and he takes chantix, not once but three different sessions knowing of the risk because he is having nightmares? can you really say that, you know, he just did not try hard enough, he just was not motivated, because some doctor after the fact said, "well, you must not be motivated." "yeah, i guess you were right." what does that mean? the fact is from 2000 until the time he stopped, he tried. and you cannot fault him for trying. and you cannot fault him for that. and he 2581 did quit. and the only reason he was able to quit in 2009 was because of chantix. and even the good dr. phillips acknowledged that all the other smoking cessation aids are not good. they are not successful. but mr. cuculino thankfully was able to quit in 2009. so put 11 percent on him. he acknowledges that responsibility. for the time that he at least did not try, there is no excuse for that. he was put on notice in 1989 from the doctor. put that on him. and you have got 11 percent and 89 percent for the defense. and so when you fill out the verdict form, however you want to do it, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, the total is 89, however you want to break that down, and 11 for mr. cuculino. let us talk about damages. we talked about in jury selection the fact we are seeking non-economic damages, something you cannot really quantify, but i'm going to help you do it. everything we do in our lifetime is based on units of time. we all wear watches because we are driven by time, we have to be somewhere at a certain time. you go to bed at nighttime, you get your eight 2582 hours of sleep, you go to work, eight-hour, ten-hour day. everything is based on hours. athletes play sports, quarters in football, time. 15 minutes a quarter. basketball 12 minutes a quarter. college students take courses based on hours, three-hour course, four-hour course, 15 hours a semester. everything we do is based on time. people that work for a living, they get paid by the time that they work. they get paid per hour. you take an athlete, they make tremendous sums of money for what they do. they work hard, they do well, they get paid for what they do. they have an off season, they go on vacations, they get ready to play the next season. actors and actresses make astronomical sums of money for what they do. they entertain people, they make lots of money, they finish a movie, they go home, they go on vacation, they come back and make another movie. they work hard. they make a lot of money. teachers, they teach kids, they do a good service, they do not make as much money. what is it, $30 an hour. ms. gallagher: objection, your honor, outside the record. 2583 the court: sustain. mr. kaiser: they make money. they teach kids. they go home after the day, they have the summers off, and they come back and they teach kids. expert witnesses they get paid for what they do. what do they get paid, $750 an hour to testify? they do their job, they do their review, they give their opinions and they go home. well, antonio cuculino got a job also. philip morris and r.j. reynolds gave antonio cuculino a job when they lured him into smoking and the job was that he was going to suffer from progressive heart disease. that is the job that he was given. and i say progressive because it is not going to get better, it is going to get worse, and that is because of the cigarettes that he smoked. and so mr. cuculino never in his mind would have applied for this job. in a million years would he want this job. in a million years would anybody want the job that mr. cuculino was given. of course not. mr. cuculino has no benefits with this job. mr. cuculino has no vacation time with this job. mr. cuculino has no down time with this job. it is not an eight-hour job, ten-hour job, it is a 24-hour 2584 job because his disease does not go away. and mr. cuculino does not have a retirement plan. mr. cuculino retires when he dies, whenever that may be. and so the question becomes should mr. cuculino be compensated by the hour just like other people are that work? of course. other people volunteer. other people want a job. mr. cuculino did not. other people enjoy their work. mr. cuculino obviously does not enjoy his job. so the question then becomes what is an hourly rate that we can assign to mr. cuculino based on the acts of the tobacco companies in this case. you know, what is it that is going to be a just and appropriate figure? who in their right mind would want to trade places with mr. cuculino and take this job. ms. gallagher: objection, golden rule. the court: sustain. mr. kaiser: would someone do it for a million dollars an hour? probably not. would someone do it for anything? probably not. mr. reid: objection, that is a continuation of the same argument, your honor. the court: sustained. 2585 mr. kaiser: i'm not. the court: sustained, move on. mr. kaiser: so we have to arrive at a figure. and what i've done here is to give you different versions of -- mr. reid: could we come sidebar, your honor? the court: certainly. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. kaiser: and so what is fair and just and appropriate under the circumstances in this case? let us look at mr. cuculino. what is his life like since he is gotten this disease? you have heard what veritext cuculino v rj reynolds volume 18 january17, 2014 his daily activity is. he sits and watches tv. his wife works in philadelphia as a cashier in a cvs. while he used to be active and go fishing and tinker with his race cars and go lobstering and he owned boats, he does not have that anymore. he cannot certainly go on the water now for fear of having a heart attack and not be around any hospital in time, so he does not do that, he sold his boat. he cannot walk around the island like he used to because he gets chest pain and he is wedded to his nitroglycerin, he has to spray it because he gets his angina, this shortness of breath and chest pain. and so he is sedentary now. and we know that the doctors tell him he needs to exercise, but this man cannot, his arteries are done. and so he sits in a sedentary lifestyle watching television. what did he tell you? their marriage is a lot different now than it was before. there is no intimacy in the marriage, you have heard that. that is something that is lacking now, it is very important and it is lacking. and mr. cuculino has told you that he thinks constantly about what can happen with the next 2589 heart attack. he fears that next heart attack because he believes he could die. and just a -- you know, it is a terrible thought for him to have to go through every day, thinking to himself that as i'm walking, as i'm sitting, i could just have this one heart attack and i'm not going to survive. and that is what happens, he is got this progressive disease and he keeps thinking about this. and mr. cuculino told you that the way he feels now is that he believes he is a burden to his wife. how sad is that? that because of his health reasons, he is a burden to his wife. and so mr. cuculino's life right now is really doctors' appointments, hospital stays, and 15 medications a day. and it is only going to get worse because the disease progresses. but in terms of damages, take the time that he was diagnosed in 1994 and go 15 years to when he stopped smoking. and assign a damage award for just that. and you do not even need to go further if you do not want to. even into the future, you do not need to go any further than that, and what is a comparable figure. this is what i believe the evidence shows. and you could go to a high range, a low range, or a mid range. 2590 based on the evidence in this case, $10 million is appropriate in order to compensate mr. cuculino for the injuries that were caused by the defendants in this case. the clerk: 12 minutes. mr. kaiser: you might go lower, you might want to go higher. but what i'm saying is, confine yourselves to the period of time that mr. cuculino was ill with heart disease from 1994 up until the time in 2009 that he quit. it is up to you. you might decide, no, he is entitled to future damages. you have heard the defense say, well, if the progression of the heart disease is continuous and he is not smoking, it must not be from smoking. but that is not the case. the case is that smoking is still attributable to his progression because the damage is there. all i'm asking and all mr. cuculino is asking is that he be compensated up until the time he stopped smoking about $10 million. and there is more because this case has shown by a greater weight of the evidence that mr. cuculino -- that the defendants should be punished for their acts. and we believe we have proven by a greater weight of the evidence that mr. cuculino is entitled to 2591 punitive damages. ms. gallagher: your honor, object. that is the wrong burden of proof. mr. kaiser: by clear and convincing evidence on this one. we have to prove entitlement to punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence, which is a different standard than the greater weight. and we have shown you by clear and convincing evidence, number one, the tobacco companies knew about the health risks of smoking their product and chose not to tell the public. that was not by accident, that was by design. that is intentional. that is reprehensible. the defendants wanted smokers like mr. cuculino to become addicted to their cigarettes. they wanted them to start smoking at a young age and continue smoking for a long time. the defendants marketed their cigarettes to people that were impressionable like mr. cuculino. they engaged, the defendants did, in a conspiracy to create doubt about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. did not last for a day, it did not last for a week, it lasted for 50 years. that was by design, not by accident. 2592 the defendants lied to the public about the health risks of smoking. they created this controversy that did not exist, and it continued for 50 years. the defendants lied to the public about nicotine not being addictive when they knew full well from 1953 on that their product was addictive and that they were selling nicotine, not cigarettes. millions of people have been harmed from the defendants' intentional acts from smoking cigarettes, and they know that. ms. gallagher: objection, your honor, williams, state farm. the court: yes. mr. kaiser: that was already ruled on in the -- the court: well, let us go sidebar. please, no speaking objections. (the following is at the bench.) ms. gallagher: your honor, this is harm to others. it is williams/state farm. mr. kaiser: and this is what you allowed in because it goes to reprehensibility. the court: okay, overruled. (in open court.) 2593 mr. kaiser: millions of people have been harmed from their products, from their intentional acts. and what does that mean? that goes to their conduct, their reprehensibility. and if you find that their conduct is reprehensible, then we are entitled to punitive damages. and you know what else? they continued flue curing their tobacco. remember dr. proctor talking about that? they continued to do that knowing that flue curing was what allowed smokers to inhale the smoke and get that smoke all the way into their lungs. and they continued to do that even after they knew about the dangers of their smoking. all that had to be done was to not use flue-cured tobacco so that people like mr. cuculino could not inhale the smoke and perhaps they would not have gotten diseases. and so when you consider all of these factors here, we have shown by the clear and convincing evidence that mr. cuculino is entitled to punitive damages in order to punish the defendants for their conduct and to deter them and others from future conduct. and so, ladies and gentlemen, i ask that you 2594 consider the evidence in this case, you consider the testimony of the witnesses in this case, and that you award mr. cuculino $10 million compensatory damages for his pain and for his suffering as a result of his progressive heart disease, as well as finding that he is entitled to punitive damages. thank you. mr. kaiser: if you noticed on that harry reasoner clip, what did he say? he was talking about choice as it related to adults. he did not say anything about children eight years old. he said the responsibility of the choice is with an adult. so consider that. let me just run again, the sequence of the verdict form, i promise i'll be brief this time, and as far as addiction, i do not mean to beat a dead horse because it really is not a choice anymore, but let us just talk about a couple of things here. you know, was it a question of mr. cuculino just enjoying that cigarette so much? or was it a question of addiction? and number one, look at all the attempts he made to quit. and as i said before, when the man was on chantix with all of the risks and the side effects, and he even told you he had these nightmares, but he still took it and he took all of these things because, why? because he was addicted. he did not need any of these things if he was not addicted. all he needed to do was to throw the cigarettes down and walk away. and this is 2679 pure common sense. it is simple why an addicted smoker is different than someone who is not addicted. the nonaddicted smoker does not need that. this is due to an addiction, not enjoyment. and the fact that mr. cuculino was able to quit on thanksgiving or days after thanksgiving of 2009, you have heard not one shred of evidence other than from dr. goldman. that does not mean that he was able to quit the day before. that does not mean that he was able to quit in 1956. that does not mean anything. it meant that he was able to quit on the day that he was able to quit. that is all. number two, this is a man who is smoking after heart attacks. he is smoking after these catheterizations and stentings. he is got about 13 stents in his arteries. he is smoking after heart bypass surgery. you think this is a man who, despite all of these things, enjoyed smoking so much that he is going to continue to do it knowing that this is what is going to happen to him? or is it a question of maybe the man is addicted and he is addicted to this psychoactive substance? number three, no, he enjoyed it because, as he 2680 said, it relaxes him. now, remember, and i do not want to get it, but we showed you a document during the case, and in that document, from philip morris i believe, what did it say? what is the reason people give when they are asked about why they smoke? two responses: it relaxes me or it stimulates me. and the conclusion was these people do not know why they are smoking because the complete polar opposites of what people are telling or saying for why they smoke, it relaxes me, it stimulates me. if mr. cuculino really thought cigarettes relaxed him, then there must have been something really pathological going on because consider this. if he needed a cigarette every hour or 20 cigarettes a day for 50 years because it relaxed him, then what is going on with his health that he needed to be relaxed that often during the daytime every day for 40 years? the bottom line is when he says it relaxed him, what it did was it got rid of the withdrawal symptoms and the jitters if he did not smoke. that is what this means. it relaxes me, read i'm addicted, and i'm not getting withdrawal symptoms when i smoke, that is why i smoked 20 cigarettes a 2681 day for 50 years. this is a man who stopped going to movies, according to his wife, when he was no longer allowed to smoke inside the theater. this is a man who, if he was in a car, he could not stop -- and he needed to smoke, he would make the person stop the car so he could get out and smoke. that is not someone who enjoys it so much that he needs to do this; that is the person who is addicted. and we put up here one pack per day for 15 years. now, what does that mean? you know, just figure out something that a person could like. a person could like eating pizza. a person could eat pizza once a week. a person might get sick of pizza after a couple of weeks and decide, you know what, i'm not having pizza this friday. i might not have it next friday. that is someone who likes something, but they do not have to do it constantly. they will get bored of it, they will get sick of it. but to think that mr. cuculino smoked a pack of cigarettes a day for 20 years, do you think that is enjoyment? do you think maybe if it was a question of his enjoyment and not his addiction, that maybe he will take a day off because he is bored, maybe i'll take a weekend off? 2682 i do not need to smoke, i'm busy. maybe i'll take a week off. i've been doing this 30 years, i'm getting a little sick of it. no. the point is he was addicted and could not stop during that time. it was not a question of enjoyment. and finally, if you figure out 50 years of smoking -- and i could do the same thing with puffs based on eight puffs per cigarette. if you have a pack a day for 50 years, and there is 365 days, and 365 days in a year amounts to 18,250 days of smoking, which translates into 365,000 cigarettes that mr. cuculino smoked, times eight puffs on each one, that is 2,920,000 puffs of cigarettes. we know that for every one of those 2,920,000 puffs, he got doses of nicotine. and we know that nicotine is an addictive, dangerous drug. how many puffs do you think it takes to become addicted? 2,920,001? i mean, 2 million was certainly enough, 2,900,000 puffs was certainly enough to where mr. cuculino was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes that he smoked. it is not a question of motivation. it is not a question of not trying. mr. cuculino was addicted to smoking. and ultimately, it was the chantix 2683 that he took that took out the urge to smoke, and that is why he was able to quit. as far as the heart attack and his coronary heart disease and whether or not the smoking caused it, look, this is simple. take dr. feldman's credentials against dr. phillips' credentials. because both expert witnesses have the ability to consider the same records, to review the same depositions, to review everything that they got, and yet their conclusions were totally opposite. well, how do you explain that? someone is wrong. so if you just take their credentials, you are going to see one is a lot more controllable than the next. dr. feldman has been publishing since the '80s and continues to publish to this day. dr. phillips has not published in 30 years. dr. feldman has been the principal investigator on countless studies, including relating to smoking cessation, including related to metabolic syndrome. dr. phillips has not done anything related to smoking and health and never been a lead investigator in that regard. dr. feldman has lectured worldwide on the subject of presentation as it relates to coronary 2684 artery disease, which includes smoking and health, and he told you he is been doing this for years and lectures worldwide. dr. phillips has not. dr. feldman has actually written and published on metabolic syndrome. dr. phillips has not. dr. feldman has one case remaining after he testified in this case where he is going to serve as an expert witness. dr. phillips after he leaves has 15. the bottom line is dr. feldman is a cardiologist who happens to be an expert witness on occasion. dr. phillips is an expert witness who happens to be a cardiologist on occasion, and who gets $750 for his testimony, and you see what you get when you pay $750 for someone like him. and i submit to you, based on the credentials and lack thereof and based on how that man appeared on the witness stand that he was not credible whatsoever. and you know what, mr. reid alluded to this, and the fact is that the best truth mechanism, the best truth-telling mechanism we have is through cross-examination. because you saw how this man, dr. phillips, answered questions on direct, and you saw how he answered my questions on 2685 cross-examination. and his demeanor changed dramatically. and his answers changed dramatically. and his memory changed dramatically to where he was stammering and apologizing and not remembering. and how many times did i take his deposition? i said it was serious heart disease. and he said it was moderate three-artery disease where he did not mention one word about diffuse disease until yesterday. so i submit to you when you evaluate the testimony, it is dr. feldman who is the credible witness here and not dr. phillips. and you know what, what is interesting is here is dr. phillips basically telling you that mr. cuculino had every risk factor under the sun except smoking. and he even used demonstratives. did not even mention the word "smoking". "it became lifestyle choices." even if he had every risk factor, do you know why smoking is still a substantial cause of his heart disease? because according to dr. feldman, smoking magnifies every other risk factor if they exist. smoking is the substantial factor whether it is 2686 an independent risk factor as dr. feldman said or whether it is combined with other risk factors. there is no doubt in this particular case, and according to dr. feldman's testimony that it was the 50 years of smoking a pack a day of cigarettes from day one up until he finally stopped, and even the progression later, that caused the heart disease, that caused the coronary artery disease. and it does not matter whether mr. cuculino stopped smoking r.j. reynolds products in 1965 or 1966. you do not look at it in isolation because dr. feldman said, remember, it is a dose response. so all those questions that i was -- that i failed to ask dr. feldman? no, there was not a failure to ask that question. dr. feldman answered the question. there is a dose response to smoking. so from the first puff on, you are contributing to the disease so that 480,000 puffs later, you are along the way for a disease. and just because mr. cuculino did not have a heart attack in 1965 when he stopped smoking pall malls does not mean that he did not already have disease progressive, he most certainly did. remember what dr. feldman said, in young smokers, you see plaque developing. you could live 2687 with plaque development for a long time until it finally manifests itself with a cardiac event, and that is what happened in this case. there is no question on the verdict form, yes, to both questions that mr. cuculino's heart disease was a result of his smoking cigarettes. now, the comparative fault in this case -- let me just backtrack for a sec. one more thing on addiction. ms. gallagher made something about mr. goldman's simplistic definition of addiction. interestingly, you did not hear from any expert from the defense about addiction to give a more complex definition. you heard dr. goldman, they did not refute his testimony with their expert. dr. proctor, by the way, they did not call -- the defense did not call their own historian to say, no, no, dr. proctor is wrong, let me explain. the defense used dr. proctor as their own witness when they got their exhibits in through him. i'm sure dr. proctor would love to have some other experts be able to testify just as he does to save him from flying around florida all the time. but the bottom line is, they did not have anyone come in there and contradict anything that 2688 dr. proctor had to say. now, comparative fault. and i'm not going to go over the charts again. but you know what, the answer lies in their own documents. the answer lies in the document that i showed you early on battelle hippo, and it says it all about comparative fault so i can just be brief. remember the battelle hippo i showed you that says they are in the business of selling nicotine? on page 3 of that document it goes on "it is difficult to assess the effect of the report," that was the surgeon general's report, "on causes of action arising prior to its issuance. logically, it would be argued the report does no more than to collate preexisting knowledge, knowledge as available to the buyer as the seller. "but logic might, in the minds of a jury, yield to the emotional reaction that if this knowledge was available to the seller, it was up to him, having the means to do so, to make the product safe. "a jury might, whether instructed or not, operate on the theory of comparative negligence. true, the buyer was negligent in smoking a product he knew was dangerous, but was lulled by the seller 2689 and the seller's negligence was the greater in failing to make his product safe." there is your answer by the defendants right there. and more telling is the fact that at the time mr. cuculino started smoking as an eight-year-old boy, he did not know the dangers of smoking. so while it was certainly his choice to pick up that cigarette and he will tell you it was his choice to pick up that cigarette, he picked up that cigarette as an ill-informed eight-year-old boy, and that is because tobacco companies, r.j. reynolds and philip morris, when they knew in 1953 that their cigarettes caused cancer and their cigarettes were addictive, they did not tell him and they had every opportunity to tell mr. cuculino and chose not to. they chose not to. and something else. you have seen them say, well, mr. cuculino could just quit any time when he did not know that it was bad for him. you know, the warnings did go on the packs of cigarettes, and mr. cuculino recalls seeing a warning. but he said i did not pick up my cigarettes to look at a warning on the side of the pack. i picked up my cigarettes to get a cigarette and smoke it. 2690 and so when mr. cuculino saw a warning on the cigarette pack, the problem is, and tobacco companies know it, "the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." that is again the words of the tobacco industry. and so even if mr. cuculino, after 20 years of smoking, sees a warning on a pack of cigarettes, what is he going to do? he is addicted at that time, and there is a lot more to it than just knowledge of a warning. when a person is addicted, an addicted person, what do you think their reaction is when they see something like a warning on a cigarette? what do you think their reaction is wherein they are in denial? they want to see anything they can that gives them the incentive and the psychological crutch to continue smoking, to continue their addiction. they want to hear that, hey, smoking might not be bad. smoking is hazardous. but there is no lung cancer, there is no -- what is the interpretation that mr. cuculino is 2691 going to take away from the warning that says smoking might be dangerous? he is going to look at that and say, well, it might not be. i can continue smoking -- ms. gallagher: objection, we are outside the record here. the court: sustain. mr. kaiser: in 1966, when the cautions went on the cigarette, what did the government say, not the tobacco companies. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." now, what is an addicted person going to do when he sees that caution? it is not endorsed by the surgeon general, it was not a warning made by the tobacco companies, it was the government that mandated it. from 1953, when r.j. reynolds and philip morris knew about it, did they tell mr. cuculino? did they warn him then? did they do it in '54, '55, '56? no, they did not. no, they did not. now, let me briefly talk about reliance. and there is some suggestion that the advertising campaign that was raised by r.j. reynolds and philip morris and other tobacco companies somehow did not talk about smoking and health. well, wait a minute, did not we see commercials during our case 2692 in chief? "more doctors smoke camels than any other brand." is not that a health risk -- is not that a health concern there? "more doctors smoke camels." "guard against throat scratch." "look at your t zone." every one of the advertisements concerned health. every one of the advertisements promoted the safety of the cigarette and the beauty of the cigarette and the concealment, it is the concealment in this case that is key because what the tobacco companies were doing when they were advertising their beautiful product with their beautiful women and their outdoor activities and their yachting and their country club scenes, they were not telling the smoker that their product was unsafe. they were not telling the smoker that their product was addictive and they knew it and so that is the smoking and health aspect of this. it does not matter if mr. cuculino read the frank statement. it does not matter if you talk about the counterblaste that king james wrote. it does not matter if he did not read columbus's diary. it does not matter if he did not read john adams' letter to his priest. what matters is that 2693 mr. cuculino relied on the advertising campaign by the tobacco companies every step of the way and as i said before, when little johnny, who he identified with, mr. cuculino, made his pitch to call for philip morris, he did not say these products will kill you and addict you and it is that on which mr. cuculino relied. and what do i mean by that? remember the climate that was created by the tobacco companies when they glamorized their cigarettes in the movies, when they made it the thing to do so that everybody that started smoking said it is cool, you will be an outsider if you do not smoke, and that is why people like mr. cuculino, the leader of the pack, the person who is his own man, he started smoking because he said it was the cool thing to do. well, picture it on the other extreme. what happens if when mr. cuculino was a kid, the climate was such that it is today, where smoking is bad and everybody knows it, where smoking is restricted and you cannot smoke everywhere that i talked about earlier, where smoking was seen as something that is bad and everyone knows it is bad and everyone knows it can cause cancer because a lot of people have 2694 firsthand experience with family members that have become sick? what happens if the climate back -- now was like it was when mr. cuculino was a kid, who was just starting out? mr. cuculino, as the defense portrays as his own man, as someone who could not be told what to do, as the leader of the pack, well, if cigarette smoking back then was as uncool as it is today, do not you think the leader of the pack might not have started smoking? that is what reliance is and that is what happened in this case. they played upon mr. cuculino's age. they played upon mr. cuculino's lack of judgment. mr. cuculino was eight years old and certainly relied to his detriment on the advertising campaign of the defendants in this case. and finally on damages, you could compute actually an hourly amount based on what i am asking you to impose here, $10 million. you could actually figure out on your own how that would equate into an hourly rate to compensate mr. cuculino, and you might go back and arrive at this hourly figure and you might decide, you know what, that is not even enough, he deserves more or 2695 you might say, you know what, maybe it should be a little less. but that is for you to decide. we are not trying to make mr. cuculino rich in this case. we are trying to hold the tobacco companies, r.j. reynolds and philip morris, responsible for his heart disease. that is all we are trying to do. and the punitive damages, mr. reid puts up all these requirements that we have to show. well, do not you think we have shown their reckless indifference to human life when they know that people like mr. cuculino, eight years old, who was impressionable, and they know their products kill people and they know their products addict people and they do not have a care in the world because they did not tell him? does not that smack of intentional, an intentional act, a reckless disregard of someone's life like his, when they know this information and they do not say a word? but they helped the surgeon general and the surgeon general thanked them profusely and they ridiculed the surgeon general every step of the way. why? why? that is why these companies need to be published for their intentional acts, for 2696 even having the gall to target kids like mr. cuculino when he was eight years old, to target people like that to get smoking, because they wanted someone like mr. cuculino to smoke, like mr. heimann said in his depo, they wanted people to smoke at a young age. they wanted people to smoke a lot. they wanted people to smoke for a long time. they wanted people to smoke their brand. the clerk: 15 minutes. mr. kaiser: and that is intentional. that is a reckless disregard, and that is why they deserve to be punished in this particular case. now, i ask when you go back to the jury room, you consider all of this evidence and you compensate mr. cuculino for his injuries caused by philip morris and r.j. reynolds. thank you very much.