ms. gallagher: thank you, your honor. going morning, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good morning. ms. gallagher: mr. cuculino lives his life the way he wants to, without regard to the consequences of his decision. and he always has. going back to when he was eight years old, and he got in trouble on purpose so he and billy could create a diversion to go smoke a cigarette that they knew they should not; by giving an excuse, an asthma excuse to get out of gym in high school; seeing a girl on a porch and taking his car and running it over the sidewalk and pinning a neighborhood kid against the wall; participating in illegal and dangerous street racing, then drag racing and motorcycle racing, continuing to race after a motorcycle accident put him in the hospital for six months. mr. cuculino may not have graduated high school, but he used his street smarts throughout his life to get the things he wanted and to do the things he wanted. but now, mr. cuculino says he is a victim, that he knew nothing about the health risks of smoking until after he had his heart attack in 1994, that 2596 he was fooled, that had he only known that there were health risks of smoking, he would not have started smoking or he would have quit sooner. but his lifestyle choices tell a different story. and his smoking decisions are consistent with his other lifestyle choices. you heard throughout the course of this trial the lifestyle choices that he made, and many of them had the potential for serious health consequences. you heard that he had a poor diet. you heard that he did not exercise. you heard that even after he was diagnosed with hypertension and diabetes, he did not change that pattern. he continued to eat poorly, and he continued not to exercise. he did not take his medications as prescribed. why? because mr. cuculino lives life on his terms. and that is okay. because those are his decisions to make. but because those are his decisions, he is the one responsible for the consequences of his decisions. mr. cuculino was the only person who could decide whether to smoke or whether to quit. nobody could do that for him. as he told you, it is a personal decision. a person decides whether they 2597 are going to smoke or whether they are going to quit. and you know that he really feels that way because now, after all these years and all that he has gone through with his heart disease, that he believes is related to smoking, he would not tell his adult daughter not to smoke because it is her decision. it is a personal decision. and we all have the freedom to make decisions about how we are going to live our lives. we all make a decision whether we are going to smoke, whether we are going to exercise, whether we are going to eat right. and those are our decisions to make. we have the freedom to make those decisions, but with that freedom comes accepting the responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. and it is for his freedom to make those decisions that he is asking you to award him $20 million. now, like mr. kaiser, i want to go through the questions on the verdict form with you. but i'm going to go in a little different order, because that way i do not have to repeat myself. so i'm going to start with question 2 and then go back to 2598 question 1. but as i go through these questions, i'm going to put up some boards here that i think tell you everything you need to know to answer those questions. so let us start with question 2. question 2 is, "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of antonio cuculino's coronary heart disease?" what did you learn from dr. feldman? dr. feldman said, "and it is your opinion that if mr. cuculino had never smoked, that he still would have developed coronary artery disease, it just would have been later in life?" and his response, "correct." now, you notice when mr. kaiser was going through the questions, that all of the questions in this case were about mr. cuculino. they are not about other smokers. they are not about whether other smokers' diseases were caused by smoking cigarettes. it is about mr. cuculino. this case is about whether smoking was the legal cause of his heart disease. now, you have heard the term "legal cause" several times, and the judge gave you an instruction on it. you might have noticed it was 2599 quite long. but what legal cause basically comes down to is was something a substantial contributing factor. in this case, but for mr. cuculino's smoking, would he have gotten heart disease? or put another way, would he have gotten it anyway, even if he did not smoke? and both experts told you that mr. cuculino was going to get heart disease. the difference in their testimony is when he was going to get it. dr. feldman said, yes, mr. cuculino was going to end up with heart disease, he just did not tell you when. now, you heard a lot about mr. cuculino's lifestyle choices, probably more than you cared to hear about his lifestyle choices. and you heard about the variety of risk factors that mr. cuculino had for the heart disease that he got. and there were a number of risk factors mentioned, and mr. cuculino had just about all of them. and another interesting thing is that dr. feldman and dr. phillips both agreed that mr. cuculino had all these risk factors, it is just that dr. feldman quibbles with when mr. cuculino first had these risk factors. 2600 and in thinking about the testimony between these two doctors, i want you to think about who knew the records, who knew the dates, who knew when medications were given, who knew mr. cuculino's health history and looked at those and put them together, and that was dr. phillips. he is the one who put them all together for you. so let us look at some of the risk factors that both experts agree mr. cuculino had. family history. let me start with that one. remember what dr. feldman said when his patients ask him what do i do to make sure i do not get heart disease? pick your parents carefully. well, you cannot do that any more than mr. cuculino could not do that. mr. cuculino could not pick his parents, both of whom had heart disease and died of heart troubles. he could not pick his parents. likewise, he could not pick his parents with regards to his hdl. remember the good cholesterol? as dr. phillips explained to you, we have two kinds of cholesterol, we have good cholesterol, hdl, and then we have bad cholesterol, ldl. and you want the hdl to be high and the ldl to be low. and unfortunately for mr. cuculino, he has 2601 that genetic marker that gives him low hdl. and as dr. phillips explained, there is not really much you can do about that. that is just genetics. so there is nothing he could do about that, but because it is genetic, as dr. phillips explained, he is had that for a very long time. it is not like ldl that comes along gradually, that you develop over time. hdl is something you are born with. so mr. cuculino had hdl, a low hdl, and that was a significant risk factor. and we know that he had that before his heart attack, because as dr. phillips said, he is had that likely since adolescence. so let us look at bad cholesterol. the ldl was too high. now, you have heard some conflicting testimony on this. you have heard that there are records that show that mr. cuculino had -- was on medications for his high bad cholesterol back to the '70s. and then you have also heard mr. cuculino come in and say i was not on medication for cholesterol, whether it was triglycerides or ldl, back in the '70s. this is the same person who told you that he does not remember dates and cannot tell you what medications he is on now. 2602 but you know what? it does not matter. because what both experts agree was that at the time mr. cuculino had his heart attack in 1994, his doctors immediately put him on cholesterol medication. you do not put a person on medication to reduce their cholesterol if it is not high. so although we do not have a chemistry, a lab value like we do later on, that tells you the specific numbers, you know that in 1994, mr. cuculino had to have high cholesterol, otherwise, his doctors would not have put him on medication for it. and high cholesterol, the bad cholesterol, is like conditions -- other conditions mr. cuculino has, like diabetes, like hypertension. you do not wake up one day and have high cholesterol. it is something that happens over time. so although we do not know how long mr. cuculino had high bad cholesterol for sure, we do know that he had it before he ever had his heart attack. another risk factor, age and gender. mr. cuculino cannot help it that he is a man and that men are more likely to get premature heart disease. that is one of those things you do not have any 2603 control over. he also cannot control that he is growing older. we all are. and mr. cuculino, as dr. feldman told you, the prime time for men to start developing coronary artery disease is between 40 and 60. and mr. cuculino was smack dab in the middle of that with his coronary artery disease at 49. another thing he could not control. but then we can talk about something that mr. cuculino would have some control over, his hypertension. and again, there is a question here -- there is a question here as to whether mr. cuculino had hypertension, if he was on medications for hypertension going back to the '70s or if it was the '80s. remember, there were three records from three different hospitals that all recorded that he was on blood pressure medication back into the 1970s, '78. well, that information had to come from mr. or mrs. cuculino, because doctors do not make histories up. again, mr. cuculino says, no, i was not on medication for that in the '70s, but we do know that mr. cuculino was on medication for high blood pressure at least as of 1987. and we know that it 2604 was likely before that, because the first record we have says that it is a blood pressure checkup, checking up what has already been diagnosed. and as dr. phillips told you, the medications he was on and the doses that he was on indicate that this was not his first appointment for blood pressure, that you first start with one diuretic and you work up, because if you give somebody too much blood pressure medicine, it is going to get so low, they will pass out. so clearly he had been being treated for his blood pressure for some time. but again, how long he was being treated for his blood pressure does not matter, because at the time of his mi, we know that he was being treated for hypertension. he was on medications for it. in fact, he had been on five different classes of medications in order to control his blood pressure. and, as you saw in these records, this record is from 1991. "patient's hypertension appears to be out of control due to poor compliance with meds." he was not taking his medications as he was supposed to. and let me digress here for a minute. because i think the plaintiffs may be trying to say that 2605 mr. cuculino has only been noncompliant with meds recently since he got on medicare. and that is for you to determine whether they have the money to do -- to pay for those drugs. but this is back from 1991. back in 1991, mr. cuculino was not compliant with his medications. he told you he does not like taking medications, he does not even like taking his heart medications. this is not something new. this is a lifestyle choice that mr. cuculino has done throughout his life, because he does not like medicines, so he does not take them. now, getting back to our list of the risk factors that mr. cuculino had. he had hypertension. and the thing that you also know about hypertension from both experts is that you can control it to some extent. if you take your medications like you are supposed to, you have a much better chance of controlling your hypertension. if you watch your diet, if you exercise, you can help with your hypertension. and mr. cuculino was not doing that. what other risk factors did mr. cuculino have for heart disease? the things we call lifestyle choices, diet, exercise, and smoking. 2606 now, you heard about mr. cuculino's weight and you saw the chart of bmis that showed that he was overweight, not obese, but that he was overweight in the years leading up to his heart attack. and he also had central obesity, or, as dr. phillips called it, the apple shape rather than the pear shape. men often get the apple shape, and for whatever reason, that is connected to a higher risk of having a cardiac event, and mr. cuculino had that. mr. cuculino did not exercise. the records are all over the place. you know, he goes down to key west, he is on disability, he is walking five miles a day, then he stops walking, then he walks two miles, then he is capable of walking a mile, then he can go up stairs, and then he cannot. it is all over the place. but what we do know is that mr. cuculino was not exercising on a regular basis. that is also a risk factor for having cardiac -- or coronary artery disease, and he was smoking. and then the last thing you heard about as a risk factor for his heart disease was metabolic syndrome. and that may be something that you were not familiar with before you came into this 2607 courtroom. dr. feldman agreed that mr. cuculino had metabolic syndrome, he just said it was after he had his heart attack. well, dr. phillips explained to you why and how he knows that mr. cuculino had metabolic syndrome before his heart attack. and he told you what the criteria is, that there are five different factors, and if you have three of them, then you have metabolic syndrome. and so what do we know about mr. cuculino? we know that he had hypertension, one of the factors; we know that he had low hdl, the good cholesterol; and we know that he had central obesity, or just meaning he carried his weight around his middle. that qualifies him for a diagnosis of metabolic syndrome. and he had all three of those things at the time of his heart attack. he may also have had high triglycerides, do not know that because we do not have a lab panel to tell us that. but by 1996, he had the other two factors. he had high triglycerides and he had a high blood glucose, the precursor to diabetes. and metabolic syndrome is a very significant risk factor for heart disease and for coronary artery disease. 2608 so if mr. cuculino had all these in 1994, how do you know which one or ones were a substantial contributing factor to his heart attack, to his coronary artery disease? well, dr. phillips helps you with that, because dr. phillips explained to you that there are two kinds of coronary artery disease. one is focal, where you have the whole artery, and you have one place that is blocked, that is clogged. and then there is diffuse coronary artery disease where you take the entire artery and you look at it and it is got different buildup of plaque all the way through the artery. it may be thirty percent here, it may be fifty percent here, but it is spread or diffuse throughout the artery. and that is important because diffuse coronary artery disease, diffuse plaque buildup is associated with metabolic syndrome, not with smoking. and how do we know that he had diffuse disease? we know it from the doctors who did his heart catheterizations. remember dr. phillips and dr. feldman explained that doctors go in with these instruments that are getting smaller and smaller and have these little cameras on them, and so they 2609 can see what is going on in there, and they take pictures, and that is how they can then decide where to put stents, where blockage needs to be dealt with. and the doctors in those cath reports, way back to 1994, described mr. cuculino's coronary artery disease as diffuse. that is how you know that it was the metabolic syndrome that was the substantial contributing factor to his heart disease, not smoking. now, since 1994, mr. cuculino has continued to gain weight and he has developed diabetes. and as the doctors told you, diabetes is a risk equivalent for heart disease, for coronary artery disease. and what that means is that it is a very, very, very significant risk factor. metabolic syndrome is the precursor to diabetes. and he has had those and his heart disease has progressed, it is continued to get worse. now, the other piece of evidence that tells you why smoking is not a substantial contributing factor to mr. cuculino's heart disease is that he quit in 2009. and since 2009, he is had procedures in 2011, he is had procedures in 2013. and remember what dr. feldman told you here. 2610 when you quit smoking, you get the benefit of that decision immediately. within one to five years, your risk of coronary artery disease, that risk factor goes down to someone who has never smoked. so if smoking were a substantial contributing factor to mr. cuculino's heart disease, you would expect that when you remove those cigarettes, when you take them away, when he quits, that he would not continue to have this heart disease. and he has. as recently as october of this year, he had four -- of last year, he had four more stents put in. so the answer to the first question -- i'm sorry, the second question, "was smoking a legal cause of mr. cuculino's heart disease?" is no. now, let me talk about the first question. and the first question is, "was antonio cuculino addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was that addiction a legal cause of his coronary heart disease?" that is really a two-part question, because it is was he addicted, and then was addiction the legal cause of his heart disease. and i've already talked about heart disease, so i'm not going to do it again. let us talk about the first part of that 2611 question, was mr. cuculino addicted. now, dr. goldman came in with his simplistic definition and said, you know, anybody who smokes a pack a day for a number of years, that person must be addicted. but remember in this case, we are not talking about all smokers, we are talking about mr. cuculino. and so the question is not whether other people are addicted to cigarettes, it is whether mr. cuculino was. and you need to consider what dr. goldman told you about deciding whether somebody is addicted. and he told you that you cannot label somebody as addicted unless they try to quit. and he also told you you cannot quit if you do not try. pretty obvious. so your job is to look at all the times that mr. cuculino said that he was trying to quit smoking and decide if those were real quit attempts or if those were simply attempts to get everybody to leave him alone. now, you have heard a lot about the different quit attempts, and you will be happy to know i'm not going to go back through them again with you now. and i do not need to because there are a few undisputed facts about all of them that tell you 2612 everything you need to know about mr. cuculino's quit attempts. mr. cuculino never tried to quit during the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, or the '90s, when millions of other people tried to quit. he never even attempted it. but once you look at his quit attempts, what you will see is that not one of them were his idea. either his doctor said you need to quit, let me give you this; or his wife would read something, would investigate something, and she would then give it to mr. cuculino and say you need to try this. never once did he investigate anything on his own to deal with his smoking. it all came from somewhere else. and the only thing that you have to look at is was this -- were these real quit attempts, was he really, really trying. mr. cuculino never asked for help in quitting. in fact, you know that the only -- the time he was offered different quit attempts by his doctor, he refused it. you have seen this record. this is from 2005. and this will be in evidence. this is a 2005 record. "smoking, patient states he will not stop 2613 smoking because it relaxes him." those were mr. cuculino's words. "he refuses all offers of smoking cessation aids and therapy." and why do i put this up? because it is in 2005, right in the middle of all those quit attempts that mr. cuculino told you about and mrs. cuculino told you about, none of which were his idea. when he is talking to his doctor, he says, no, i do not want any of it. you decide whether he really wanted to try to quit, or was it what mrs. cuculino told you. remember, she got up here and said, "yes, he said he was going to quit, he said he was going to quit, but it was just words. he never followed up with actions." or as dr. carabelli told him, deep down inside, you do not want to quit. and when he thought about what dr. carabelli told him, he said, "you know, i thought he was right. that made sense to me." at least that was his testimony in 2012, before he came into this courtroom. so it is not surprising that mr. cuculino was not successful with these quit attempts because he really was not motivated to try to quit. and the plaintiff wants you to believe that it 2614 was chantix that got mr. cuculino to quit, chantix and only the chantix. well, think about the chantix. mr. cuculino went on chantix in 2006. he went on chantix in 2008. and it did not work. he reduced the amount that he was smoking, but he was still smoking. and then in 2009, he gets back on the chantix, the exact same drug, taking it the exact same way, and it works. well, what was the difference? his wife threatened to leave him. for once, mr. cuculino was actually motivated to stop smoking. you cannot quit if you do not really try. for once he was motivated. and it was funny, because in this courtroom, mr. cuculino came in and said, "yeah, but i did not believe her, she was just kidding. it was not a real threat." but back in his deposition in 2012, he is admitted saying, that was his sworn testimony, "if i did not quit smoking, i would not be married. if i was not successful, it would cost me my marriage." you decide what was the difference between the first time he tried chantix, the second time he tried chantix, and the third time he tried chantix. it was that he was motivated because his wife 2615 threatened to leave him. mr. cuculino is not an addict. an addict is somebody who does not have control over the substance they are using, the substance controls them. you heard after mr. cuculino quit in 2009 how over the next year, when he was with his brother-in-law or his friends, they were all smoking cigarettes, he would say, "give me one," and he would smoke a cigarette and put it down. he did not go back to it. while they were all smoking in the truck for three hours, he did not go back to smoking. and he did that about eight times in the year and has not touched them since. he was in control of his smoking. and we also know that mr. cuculino was not smoking because he was addicted to the nicotine for another reason, actually a series of reasons. in 1970, he was in the hospital for six months with his burns after his motorcycle accident. for two weeks of that, he was in a coma, he could not smoke. in 1994, he was in the hospital for five days. he could not smoke. in 1999, he was in the hospital for ten days and could not smoke, and then he came home and was on pain medication and was dopey and 2616 did not smoke for some period of time, weeks after that. now, why is that important? because dr. goldman told you that nicotine leaves your body in 24 to 48 hours. he told you that the side effects from withdrawal are over in the first couple of weeks. so when mr. cuculino woke up from his coma, when he got out of the hospital in 1994, when he got out of the hospital in 1999 and got over his dopiness from the pain meds, it was not nicotine that made him smoke. the nicotine was long gone from his body and could not be responsible for a physical urge to smoke. it was gone. mr. cuculino made the decision to start smoking again, and that is why he did it. so mr. cuculino cannot be classified as an addict. he was not addicted. but that is the first part of the question. the second part of the question is whether his addiction, the presumed addiction, whether that was the legal cause of his heart disease. and again, we have got that legal cause. but for his addiction, would he have his heart disease. and the "but for" in this case means the plaintiff 2617 has to prove that his addiction was so strong that he could not overcome it in time to quit and avoid his injury. so let us look at the evidence. we know that mr. cuculino quit smoking in 2009, so we know that he can. he told you that he enjoyed smoking, and that deep down, he just did not want to quit. he told you about how he lied to his wife and lied to his doctors, not because he was embarrassed about the amount he smoked, but because he just wanted them to quit bugging him. he did not want his wife bugging him about smoking. he did not want people telling him what to do about his smoking. those were his decisions, and he wanted to be left alone. but even if you put that label on mr. cuculino and say he was addicted, and even if you say that smoking was a substantial contributing factor, you cannot say that it legally caused his heart disease. because if he could have quit, he could have quit in time to avoid his injury. and what this comes down to, was it addiction that kept him smoking, or was it his decision to smoke that caused his heart disease? because if you believe, and i'm telling you, 2618 he is not an addict and it is not a substantial cause of his heart disease, but assuming those two things, go back to what dr. feldman told you, the declining risk, that if he had quit smoking, one to five years later, it would be unlikely that smoking was a cause of his heart attack. and what do you know, 1989, the first time mr. cuculino was told to quit smoking, at least the first time it is documented in a medical record that he was told to quit smoking, and quit smoking asap, that was five years before his heart attack. and that is what mr. kaiser told you was mr. cuculino's fault, that in 1989, he should have quit smoking when his doctor told him to. and if you look at dr. feldman's testimony, it would have been less likely that smoking had anything to do with the heart attack. that is their own expert talking. mr. cuculino had a right to make the decisions he wanted to about smoking, but he is also responsible for those decisions. and the answer to question number 2 is no, because mr. cuculino was not addicted and it was not the legal cause of his heart disease. now, let me mention one other thing about 2619 question 2. it is a two-part question. you can believe that mr. cuculino was not addicted, or you can believe that mr. cuculino's smoking was not the legal cause of his heart disease. and if you believe either one of those things, the answer to the question is no. and the six of you do not have to agree. three of you may think he was not addicted, three of you may think it was not a legal cause of his heart disease. that still means the answer to question number 2 is no. now, when you get to the end of question number 1, it actually tells you no, if you answer no, you are done, you go home. and i'm sure you would like me to just kind of sit on down now so you could get on with this process, but it is my job to summarize all the evidence for all the questions in this case, and so i'm going to go through these others. now, the next one i want to address is question 4. and this question -- question 4 is whether mr. cuculino reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement or omission of material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes not otherwise known or 2620 available to him. it is the health effects or addictive nature of nicotine. mr. kaiser got up and talked about, you know, there was all these people smoking, it was normal, it was normalized. that is not what this question goes to. this question specifically talks about health effects or addictive nature of smoking. it has to be that the tobacco companies said something or did not say something about health effects or about addiction that mr. cuculino relied on that was the legal cause of his injury. there is that legal cause in there again. in other words, was it something that the tobacco companies said or did not say that fooled mr. cuculino? it is not whether everybody is smoking. that has nothing to do with this question. so let us look at whether mr. cuculino was fooled. first of all, he told you he is not aware of any statement, anything he heard from philip morris or r.j. reynolds, anything about cigarettes, nothing about health risks, nothing about addictive, he did not hear any of it. i asked him about ctr, ti, tirc. had not heard 2621 any of those. and then when i asked him: "before this lawsuit had you ever heard about the frank statement mr. kaiser talked about in his closing?" his answer was: "who? "the frank statement. "no." mr. cuculino did not hear anything from the tobacco companies. and if he did not hear anything from the tobacco companies, he certainly could not have relied on it. dr. proctor came in, dr. proctor, their million-and-a-half-dollar expert witness from california, came in and walked through what was going on in the world and in the tobacco industry through the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and on. and he told you a lot of cigarette -- he told you about a lot of statements the companies made, and he showed you a bunch of documents. but he did not connect it to the plaintiff. and dr. proctor specifically told you, "that is not my job. i am not the biographer of the plaintiff. i'm just here to tell you what is going on." well, that is not enough, because the plaintiff has to prove that he relied on something that the cigarette companies said. this case is not about 2622 the general public, it is not about other smokers, it is about mr. cuculino and what mr. cuculino heard or saw and relied on. they have to prove some connection between all those statements on those boards, between the various documents, they have to prove a connection between those and mr. cuculino, and they cannot, because you cannot prove connection and reliance that i made a smoking decision, that i did not do something because of my smoking on something that i never heard. that is just not possible. and that is why -- you know, mr. kaiser says why are not they talking about their documents? that is the reason i'm not talking about their documents is be- -- our documents, rjr's documents, is because they are meaningless in this case if mr. cuculino never relied on them, much less saw them or heard of them. that is why we will not waste your time talking about these documents with no connection to mr. cuculino. so let us talk about the information mr. cuculino did have about cigarette smoking and health. the clerk: 20 minutes. ms. gallagher: thank you. 2623 he had information from the packs themselves. you remember the warning that he remembered was the warning from 1971. "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." that is what he remembered. but he also told you he was not interested in the warnings, that they did not concern him. and they did not concern him because he did not think anything could happen to him. now, mr. cuculino wants you to believe that he knew nothing about the health risks of smoking until 1994, that he had never heard that smoking could cause lung cancer until two years ago. but it is up to you to weigh the plaintiff's credibility. and one of the instructions the judge read you was about credibility. and two of the things he said that you should consider in determining the believability, the credibility of the witness was any interest the witness may have in the outcome of this case and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all the evidence in the case and in the light of your own experience and common sense. mr. cuculino had not heard that smoking was 2624 associated with lung cancer until two years ago? now, there are things i want you to keep in mind when you are thinking about this evidence and what mr. cuculino knew or did not know. and you can start with his family experience. mr. cuculino watched his father with emphysema from the time -- the 1960s and saw him die of heart disease. mrs. cuculino came in and said, "yeah, i knew his emphysema was related to smoking. i knew my mom's was related to smoking." mr. cuculino, the person with the monetary interest in this case, says, i did not know. he never -- says he never understood the health risks of smoking. but you have to consider something else he told you. because the really telling thing that he said was "i never thought it would happen to me." he never thought it would harm his health. he understood that cigarette smoking could be dangerous, he just did not think it would happen to me. what is the "it" other than disease from smoking? in 1994, when the plaintiff was in the hospital after his heart attack, and his wife looked at him when he asked her for a cigarette, 2625 she said, "what are you doing? look where this has gotten you." in 1994, look where this has gotten you. and what does he say? "if it is going to happen, it is going to happen." does that sound like somebody to you who is confused about why he is there, is confused about this now affecting his health? he understood the health risks of smoking long before he ever had his heart attack, he just never thought it would happen to him. and it would make sense that mr. cuculino would know about the dangers of smoking. dr. proctor, we walked him through about all the different things and the general public, how people have been talking about cigarettes being addictive for hundreds of years, people talking about the health risks of smoking for hundreds of years, and how all of this information during the 1950s became a really big story, continued through the '60s. mr. cuculino said i never saw it, i never read the newspapers. but his wife did. mr. cuculino was not waiting on the tobacco companies to tell him something he did not know. let us look, in 1985, these warnings went on the 2626 side of cigarette packs. every single package that mr. cuculino picked up from 1985 had these warnings on them on a rotating basis. "quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health." that is 1985. that is exactly what dr. feldman told you about, the reducing risk. another one, "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy." and what did mr. cuculino tell you about these warnings? they just did not interest him. they did not concern him. what was it that the tobacco companies were supposed to tell mr. cuculino that were not on these cartons, that were on every ad, in 1971 every ad had those warnings on them. that is the only direct communication mr. cuculino ever had from the tobacco companies were the warnings on the cigarette packs and the ads, and he chose to ignore them. now, let us talk about why mr. cuculino started to smoke. because you heard the story about billy coming in and bringing the cigarette to school and they snuck the cigarette and smoked it while they are clapping the erasers. well, what did mr. cuculino tell you? that he 2627 had never really thought about smoking before billy brought that cigarette in. it was not ads that made mr. cuculino smoke. billy is the reason mr. cuculino started to smoke. and then mr. kaiser talked about johnny and the "all call for philip morris." remember that in this question, it is not about did they advertise products, did philip morris and r.j. reynolds advertise products. that is not what gets you to question number 4. question number 4 is asking about concealment about health effects or addiction. they said mr. cuculino identified with johnny because they were both small. fine. did not affect anything about his cigarette smoking. he did not smoke philip morris, he was smoking pall malls. and there is nothing about johnny that was saying something about the health effects of smoking. he is advertising a product. now, the plaintiff smoked marlboro cigarettes, you heard this, again not because of advertising but because his wife did. he goes home one day, he is out of cigarettes, smokes one of his wife's cigarettes, likes the taste, likes the fact that 2628 it is filtered and he does not get tobacco in his mouth. that is why he switched to marlboro, not because of some ad campaign. and even if he switched to marlboros because he liked the marlboro cowboy, that is not something the tobacco company is saying about the health effects or addiction. and that is what you have to have is for the plaintiffs to connect some information about the health effects or addictiveness that mr. cuculino relied on. and we go back to the fact that he could not have relied on anything they showed you in this courtroom because he never saw it. so the answer to question number 4 is no. now, comparative fault, that is the next question. this is where you decide the amount of fault, if any, and again, i do not think you get here, because i think you answer no to question 1 and you are done. but this is where you would allocate fault between the different -- mr. cuculino and the companies. and there is one thing i want to correct here, because mr. kaiser made it sound like you take fault in the air and compare it to mr. cuculino. 2629 he was talking about all these boards and all the things that he says the tobacco companies did wrong. and you may not like what the tobacco companies did. you may not like what they said. but this question does not ask you if you like the tobacco companies or if you think they did and said some stupid things. what it says is, "please state the percentage of fault that was a legal cause of antonio cuculino's coronary heart disease." you cannot take fault in the air, again, we have got to have a connection to mr. cuculino, a legal cause of his heart disease. so again, these statements do not apply to anything in this question unless they can connect it to mr. cuculino. and you cannot put a zero by mr. cuculino's name because he is already told you and mr. kaiser got back up here in closing and said he is responsible from 1989 on. 1989 on when he could have quit. consider that. and it is interesting because supposedly the reason mr. cuculino could not quit was because he was too addicted to quit, and yet he did. think about that when you are answering this question. 2630 another thing you should consider when you are answering the comparative fault question, if you get there, is mr. cuculino's noncompliance with his diet, with his exercise, and with his medications. because there is nothing philip morris or r.j. reynolds had to do with that. there was nothing philip morris or r.j. reynolds did or did not do that kept mr. cuculino from complying with his doctors' orders. and remember this question asks about comparative fault for the heart disease he got. this is something that mr. cuculino said on cross-examination. "smoking is a decision that each person has to make for themselves? "yes." and think about that when you are answering this question, because it was his decision to start, it was his decision to continue. mr. cuculino never relied on anything that the plaintiffs have put up here. there is no connection. he did not pay attention to the cigarette warnings on the packs. he did not think they would apply to him. because deep down, he just did not want to quit. 2631 the clerk: ten minutes. ms. gallagher: his smoking decisions were his own. and for that reason, if you get to this question, you put a hundred percent on mr. cuculino. now, the next question is about damages. here -- since i only have 10 minutes, i'm going to cut a little bit out of this and just talk about what was the cause of mr. cuculino's heart disease. "if it is going to happen, it is going to happen." both experts told you that mr. cuculino was going to get his heart disease, they just differ about when he was going to get his heart disease, and they differ about the reasons he was going to get his heart disease, but that he was. and so they are not asking, and if i heard mr. kaiser right, they are not asking you to compensate mr. cuculino for all of his heart disease because he would have gotten it anyway. whether that is one year later, five years later, there is no testimony on that. but you are being asked to compensate him for the heart disease that they are claiming occurred earlier because he smoked, not for all of his heart disease. keep that in mind. 2632 and also keep in mind that mr. cuculino has had one heart attack. they told you in opening that mr. cuculino had had four heart attacks. well, you now know, after listening to both of the cardiologists, that mr. cuculino had one heart attack 20 years ago. now, the bad news is that mr. cuculino would have ended up with his heart disease whether he smoked or not. but the good news is, as both cardiologists told you, is that he has had no permanent damage to his heart. that his heart still beats, still pumps like a normal person's heart would, someone who has not had all of his cardiac history. so he has no permanent damage to his heart, and that is probably in response to the great medical care he is received. keep that in mind when you are talking about damages. and i'm not going to suggest a number to you, because i do not think you are going to get to this question, but i think $10 million is an insane amount of money and an insane amount of money to be asking to award somebody for some undetermined of time for heart disease that he was going to get anyway. 2633 now, the last question is about punitive damages. and let me just say the purpose of punitive damages is not to compensate. that is what you do with the damages question. punitive damages are in addition to that. so if you get this far, which i do not think you will, you are not asking -- being asked to award damages to compensate mr. cuculino, you will have already done this. this is on top of that. these are additional moneys. and as the judge explained, there is a different burden of proof. it is not a preponderance of the evidence, it is clear and convincing. it is more compelling and persuasive. it must be lacking in confusion and has such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation. you have to really, really believe that the plaintiff is award -- entitled to punitive damages to award them. and those engle findings that mr. kaiser talked about are not enough. those do not get you a yes to this question. the plaintiff has to bring you more. now, remember that this case -- this question 2634 is still about mr. cuculino. it is not about punishing for other smokers or what other smokers may have seen, what other smokers may have relied on, diseases other smokers may have had. this is about harm to mr. cuculino. it can only be for harm to him. and when thinking about this, think back to mr. cuculino's lifestyle decisions. he is the one who made the decisions to smoke. he told you he was not interested in any information on smoking and health. in fact, he told you if it is not about cars, i'm not interested in it at all. think about that when you are looking at this question. you should put in -- if we get to this -- if you get to this question, we will be back, we will have another -- plaintiff may put on evidence. philip morris will put on evidence, rjr will put on evidence, and we will have another closing argument. but you are not going to have to do that because the answer to that question is no. i'm about to sit down, and mr. kaiser gets to come back up here. mr. kaiser gets to come back up here after mr. reid does his closing argument. and i do not get to come back up and say, wait, he is wrong. 2635 and so while mr. kaiser is giving his rebuttal and he is going on about things on these boards, i want you to ask yourself, what would ms. gallagher say if she could stand up. mr. kaiser: objection as to what she would say. the court: sustained. ms. gallagher: i want you to think in your head what does this have to do with mr. cuculino? where is the connection to mr. cuculino? because as you know, i got up in opening and i said this case is about mr. cuculino, it is about his decision to smoke and not to quit despite knowing the risks. mr. cuculino, whose decisions were not impacted in any way by anything the tobacco companies said or did not say. and his testimony said it best. "smoking is a decision that each person has to make for themselves." mr. cuculino's decisions were his own, and he should be responsible for those decisions. thank you for your attention today. thank you for your attention over the last two weeks. we really appreciate your commitment to this jury service. thank you. 2636 mr. reid: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. good afternoon. jurors: good afternoon. mr. reid: good news and bad news, once again i'm last, but once again it is almost lunch. that is the bad news. the good news is i'm not the very last today, so mr. sloman or mr. kaiser will get that at the end of the day. as you noticed in the last week or so, i have not said a lot in this case. i cross-examined dr. proctor because he talked about some very specific -- a few specific things that related to 2639 my client this last week with the medicine, the medical issues. i have not said very much. and there really -- i want to say, first of all, that we really do appreciate it on behalf of the several thousand employees of r.j. reynolds, ms. rodriguez, miss hurwitz, we all appreciate what you are doing, as do all the parties. lawyers typically do not get to be on juries, so i have not been on one, but i'm told that it is always amazing how the synergy -- you heard something about synergy, you are going to see that with, you know, this person remembers this fact, this person remembers this fact, and pretty soon you remember everything. and that is why the system works and that is why, as i told you earlier, i always ask for jury trials in cases that i've handled. but there are really three reasons why mr. cuculino's claims really have no relationship to r.j. reynolds. could we see the first slide, please? first of all, and i'll talk about these a little more, he smoked a minimal number of cigarettes. secondly, he stopped smoking r.j. 2640 reynolds cigarettes 30 years before the heart attack. and finally, the concealment that is alleged in the case had nothing to do with mr. cuculino deciding beginning to smoke, starting to smoke, continuing to smoke, or choosing not ever to try to stop earlier than he actually did. now, on the minimal number, and you heard mr. kaiser was talking to you about so many puffs and so forth. the simple fact is six to seven pack-years, based on the evidence that you have heard from the plaintiff, is less than ten percent of the total smoking. i do not know how many puffs that is, but in this case, it is a minimal amount compared to the total smoking that mr. kaiser claims to have caused the problem in this case. so those are the reasons overall why r.j. reynolds should not be in this case. now, you will be instructed that you have really been trying two separate cases. much of the evidence would relate to both parties. and, in fact, ms. gallagher has given you all the reasons for entering a verdict in favor of both defendants. and i do not want to repeat all of that. 2641 if you will look at the verdict form, number 3, number 3, you have seen that. those two questions apply to both companies, and i'm not going to talk about those issues any more because i think you have heard the reasons for putting the x or the check or whatever you decide to do on the other side. but there is evidence about r.j. reynolds that i will discuss with you in some detail. now, the court will instruct you or has instructed you that you can -- that you must consider the claims of the parties separately. can we see number 4? and this is the instruction that was given. "several distinct claims." "each is separate from the other." "you should consider the evidence as it relates to each claim separately." that means in considering the reynolds' claim, you ignore the smoking and so forth related to philip morris. you act as if these were two separate cases. we try them together for convenience sake, but you have to break them apart and you have to look only at the reynolds evidence for reynolds and philip morris evidence for philip morris. and, in fact, as you have seen, and we will get to those later, the later questions break it out and 2642 ask you specifically to answer a question about the plaintiffs' relationship with philip morris and the plaintiffs' relationship in this case with r.j. reynolds tobacco company. there must be causal relationship between what the plaintiff claims and my client in this case. now, causation is very important and we have talked about it. could we see the next slide, please, number 5? now, i've told you about the bridge because that seemed to me to be a pretty good icon of what we are talking about here. on the one hand you have got r.j. reynolds products and conduct from 1953 to 1965. then you have -- and on the other side you have mr. cuculino's heart disease, 1994 and whatever he continues in the future. and for this case, it is not driving across, you get across with evidence. and that is how you get across the bridge. and when i talk about the bridge of causation, that is what i mean. there has to be a causal relationship between r.j. reynolds and the claims made in this case. now, that means in effect -- if you remember during voir dire, the judge instructed the panel about that. we were talking about one of the 2643 findings. he pointed out there still has to be proof of the causal relationship to the plaintiff. r.j. reynolds admits today, and has for over a decade, that smoking could be addictive, that smoking can cause injury. plaintiff spent a lot of time in this case trying to prove those two facts, and you did not hear anybody get up and contest those two facts. but you had a lot of testimony brought out with dr. proctor and others trying to prove to you something that is really not in dispute in this case, because this case, as ms. gallagher said, is about mr. cuculino. now, the legal standard is to produce or contribute substantially to producing -- number 6, please. -- and you have heard this already today, i will not belabor it. that is what you have to show. that is the connection, that something r.j. reynolds did or said produced or contributed substantially to producing mr. cuculino's heart disease in this case. and i would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, with all respect, that plaintiff has not carried his burden relating to heart disease and 2644 its relationship to r.j. reynolds. now, there are a couple of undisputed facts i've mentioned already. six, seven pack-years of smoking. and 30 years between the cessation of the r.j. reynolds smoking and the heart attack. stopping r.j. reynolds in '65, '66 time period. so with those two facts that are not in dispute, there are three bases for rendering a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds. could we see slide, number 7? number one, there has been no evidence at all that in 1965, when mr. cuculino stopped smoking reynolds' products that he had any heart disease whatsoever. number two, there is no evidence that mr. cuculino's heart disease in 1994 was related to smoking rjr brands, which stopped in '65. and number three, by 1970, mr. cuculino's risk of heart disease from smoking our brands would have been the same as a person who was a nonsmoker because he had quit our product in 1965. now, to try to get around what is the obvious conclusion, the obvious result, you heard counsel this morning arguing that dr. feldman said that it was a -- the first cigarette started the disease, 2645 that the damage stays, he said, with you -- i tried to write all this down -- that it still contributes 35, 40, 45 years later, that the damage is already done. it would have been very simple when dr. feldman was here on the stand, in order to try to carry the burden, the plaintiff could have said, "dr. feldman, did plaintiff's smoking before 1965 cause the heart disease in 1994?" was not asked that question. was not asked. another question that would have been easy to ask, "dr. feldman, would seven pack-years of smoking 30 years before the heart disease have been a cause of the heart disease?" that was not asked. a question could have been asked, "would seven pack-years of smoking lead to some sort of problem in your lungs that would then cause you to have a heart condition 30 years later?" that was not asked. so really what happened today is you heard lawyer argument about this, because dr. feldman answered this question. dr. feldman told you the answer to all of these questions would have been no if he had been asked. let us see slide 8. 2646 dr. feldman said, "how do you explain that, once you stop smoking, what happens to your risk?" this was not my question, this was plaintiffs' counsel's question. well, it -- then he added "with respect to smoking as a risk factor." and dr. feldman did not say -- well -- he could have said, well, you have these residues and you smoke a little bit and it still keeps going or the harm starts -- all these things that mr. kaiser told you today, he could have said it still contributes, the damage is already done, instead he said, "it is been estimated from the time you stop as it relates to your risk for heart disease, but certainly heart disease, that anywhere between a year to year and a half and maybe up to five years, you revert back to your risk of coronary heart disease as if you did not smoke." a person who never smoked does not have that disease, does not have those problems in the lungs that counsel told you about. they do not have the beginning of any sort of disease. a person who never smoked has none of that. dr. feldman said, "you are the same as a person who never smoked." they did not ask him the direct questions, they came up with this argument, 2647 he answered the questions with that. now, can we go to the next slide? that is why when you get to this question, it is number 2(b), and you are asked specifically, "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds a legal cause of mr. cuculino's coronary heart disease?" the evidence requires that you answer that question no. there is no evidence that supports anything other than a no to that question. now, the other claim that counsel makes against my client is that we concealed something. and he claims that we concealed facts relating to smoking and health, and that that caused him to take some action or refrain from taking action. well, once again, the bridge of causation applies. they have got to show that what was concealed had some causal relationship between r.j. reynolds -- and that is why i talk about conduct. number one there, the first line says brands. we talked about that. the second is conduct. there has to be some causal relationship. and so the court has instructed you, -- could we see slide 11? it is not concealment, -- it is common sense. 2648 if you know it, it is not concealment. and specifically in this case, it is not just knowing it, it is otherwise -- "not otherwise known or available." so if it is available, that is the same as knowing and you just choose not to do it, not to pay attention, not to read it. now, you have heard -- the claim seems to be here that the only source of information that exists about smoking is the tobacco companies. that is mr. kaiser's argument. he said over and over why did not the tobacco company tell them. and if you remember dr. proctor -- ms. gallagher said this to you a minute ago that mr. cuculino was not waiting for the tobacco company. well, that is dr. proctor's testimony in this case. i asked the question. "do you believe people are waiting for the tobacco company to tell them about the harms?" and he said, "no." because you get information from many, many sources. so i'm not going to go through it all again, but i made a chart. it is a little busy. i'm sorry, 12. yeah. all right. i'll tell you what that -- it is kind of off the screen. that is a timeline across 2649 the bottom. on the left side, in the blue, those are all the common knowledge things that you heard about, going all the way back. christopher columbus, mark twain, van gogh. that was the cigarette in -- from dr. proctor's book, you remember the cigarette in the skeleton? florida banning it, nicotine fit, and so forth. then you move into the '50s, and you see the blue line going across, from the '50s on, there is coverage of smoking and health in the popular media, and that was life magazine and things like that, reader's digest. then in about 1919, it was the prohibition era where smoking was actually banned because of health concerns. then you pick up with the warnings on every cigarette pack. every time mr. cuculino picked up a cigarette, he got that -- after 19 -- after 1965 or '66 rather, he got a direct personal warning. now, mr. kaiser did all that calculation about how many puffs. well, i could do the same calculation about take all those cigarettes and say he was warned every time he took a cigarette out and that is going to be, you know, a huge, huge, huge number. 2650 but the point is, he was warned every time he picked up a pack of cigarettes. warnings on advertisements and warnings through public service announcements. so that is what was out there in general. and then the red boxes are personal direct warnings from mr. -- and ms. gallagher went through all these today, the mother-in-law, the surgeon general's report that he would heard about at one point, emphysema, the heart attack, his wife quits, his wife constantly saying -- and the bottom tells the whole story. the testimony is that from 1950s on, until -- into '94 with the heart attack, he did not want to quit, he did not try to quit, and, in fact, he testified "i did not even think about quitting." and you heard dr. goldman say, "you are not addicted unless you have several things, one of which is you have got to try to quit." and that makes sense. how do you know you cannot quit if you never tried? and that is the case we have here. now, i'm not saying that mr. cuculino read all this or necessarily knew all this, but this is what is out there, this is what people are talking about. 2651 when you walk by the philadelphia inquirer, remember you saw that in the opening, i showed you, and dr. proctor was familiar, big, giant headlines about the relationship between smoking and health in the surgeon general's report. national news. you saw much of that. that is what is out there. and that is why it is otherwise available. it is available. and when his wife knows about it and tries to get him to quit, that is available. so nothing was concealed from mr. cuculino. just because he did not get a letter from the companies -- but he did, in 1966, did get, as ms. gallagher pointed out, a warning every time he picked a pack up. that is his one communication with the companies, and he has reasons he said he ignored them. let us go to the next slide. let us see, was this getting through. and then you heard testimony about all these different polls, and two-thirds believed in '64, 81 percent strongly, all the way up into the '80s, ninety percent believed. remember, he said there was some polls have you heard and then some do you believe. well, that is a do you believe poll. mr. cuculino says he 2652 did not ever know that there was a problem with this until much later, in fact, two years ago with lung cancer. but that is what was getting into the public. i submit to you it is available. whether he chose to pay attention to it or act on it, it is available, and it was throughout his entire smoking life. so -- slide number 15. those are the two slides relating to concealment. they have to show that there was an omission of material fact, a legal cause, that is where causation comes in, that is the bridge of causation, a legal cause of the coronary heart disease. and i submit your answer to those questions should be no because it was either known or otherwise -- it was otherwise known or available, and that is the test that the court has instructed you that you must follow in rendering a verdict in this case. i did want to just mention the admission of fault on mr. cuculino's -- mr. cuculino says -- told you that he did not know over this period that smoking was risky, that he would learned it later and 2653 then learned it two years ago about lung cancer. but he says that his attempts to -- his fault is based on his failure in the frequency and duration. that means he did not try hard enough and he did not try long enough. well, now, let us look at slide 16. let me tell you what that means. it means that he really did know smoking was dangerous, why else would he admit that i should have tried harder? it really means that he always had the ability to quit. what does he say, "i could have quit, i just did not try hard enough and i did not try often enough." and finally, until 2009, there was never a serious effort to quit, and ms. gallagher went through all of that with you. so when he says i can -- it is my fault based on duration and frequency, you would not make that admission unless you knew these things. if you honestly believe i did not know smoking was bad for me and i could not quit, he would not have made these admissions. but he did because the evidence really suggests, even though mr. cuculino has told you i did not know, i did not hear, i, you know, lived under a rock or something, even though he said all 2654 of that, the evidence suggests that he did know and it was there and he chose to ignore it. and it is not concealed. it is not concealed. now -- slide 17. this is the -- i just filled in for my client. you have heard the evidence. we should not get to this question. i should have said that early on. the rules are such that we have to argue about everything or talk to you about everything. i do not want to say argue with you. the rules are we have got to talk about everything because we do not get to come back, you do not get to answer the first two and then come back and discuss the second. so we have to talk about everything. and you have heard the evidence of about -- about my client's smoking and why it is -- because of the minimal level, it should not be in this case at all, and i submit when you get to this question, ms. gallagher has already suggested to you that her number should be zero as well, and i agree with that. now, the last thing i want to talk to you about is punitive damages. as you heard, the plaintiff in this case is making the claim, and 2655 that claim says essentially that he wishes you to render a judgment, a verdict in this case, that punishes my client. that punished. and as you heard, the burden of proof, -- number 18, please. -- is different. it is not tilting the scales, it is not a greater weight, it is evidence -- it is -- it is clear and convincing. evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and has such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation. that is a high standard. and you are going to be asked yes or no. this is going to be a yes-or-no question. that is the standard that has to be met in this case. but let me tell you the kind of behavior the judge has instructed you. i know it is -- you will get a chance to take all these instructions back, you will get them in the jury room, but when you hear them the first time, you may not -- we lawyers, we toil over every sentence. but let us look at the next slide. because this is the behavior that you have to show, as the instructions have told you. you have to show that my client and philip morris -- that our behavior was gross and flagrant. that we 2656 exercised reckless disregard toward mr. cuculino. remember, i'm going to tell you this in a minute, but the bridge of causation applies. so all of this behavior that they are talking about has to be directed and has to cause injury to mr. cuculino. it has to demonstrate an entire lack of care. a conscious indifference to what you should do. wanton or reckless disregard for safety and welfare. reckless indifference to the rights of others. intentional violation to those rights. you have to decide that some of that -- that describes our behavior by clear and convincing evidence. that is what is required. now, there are several concepts about punitive damages that i would like to share with you. number 20, please. first, as you have heard, these are not damages to compensate somebody. if you get to this point, and, of course, we do not believe you should, but if you get to this point, you will have already passed the compensatory damage number, so you are not awarding any dollars in this phase for the injury or anything. this is purely to punish my client. so the damages are over and above. 2657 and the punitive damages do not go to the government, they do not go to a public health agency, they do not go to any sort of antismoking advertisements or cancer bites. they go to mr. cuculino. and as you heard, there will be a separate phase to determine an amount if you get there. and most importantly, those engle findings have nothing to do with punitive damage. the engle findings were decided, remember i told you at the beginning, this was that other jury who had never heard of mr. cuculino and made these findings in general, that still have to be causally related. the findings were established by a greater weight of the evidence. so back to the findings, they have nothing to do, it should not be considered at all in your determination in this case about whether or not you wish to punish my client. now, as i said to you, 21, we will look at it again. sometimes in a case, i've done this once before and i actually drew a bridge, but it looked so bad i decided i would copy a -- because it just helps kind of make the point. 2658 there has to be a connection. whatever behavior you find to have caused or to warrant punitive damages has to have connection to mr. cuculino. it cannot be injuring anybody else. it has to be directly related, causally related. so the same analysis of causation applies. and as you have heard, or will hear, you cannot award mr. cuculino damage because someone else was injured, because they can bring their own case if they have one. and it has to be conduct that occurred in florida. and i submit to you that the plaintiff has not carried the burden in this case to prove beyond -- or, i'm sorry, almost misspoke. to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the behavior that you have heard about with regard to my client, r.j. reynolds, rises to the level. now, where -- let us think for a minute about where this evidence that you have heard came from. it came from the testimony of dr. proctor and some documents that were admitted. and dr. proctor, as you have heard, earns millions of dollars doing what you saw him do here in his direct testimony, getting on the stand and basically giving exactly the same testimony, without any difference, because 2659 it is -- as he said, i do not care about the plaintiff, that is not my job, i'm just going to give you this presentation that i put together. and he is done it time and time again, all over the state. he is earned millions of dollars. and most importantly, dr. proctor, this is part of a goal, he is trying to carry out one of his goals, and you heard that, his goal is to create a situation where adults do not have the right to buy and use tobacco products. dr. proctor has said, and he said it in front of you, that he wants to ban cigarettes. and he can have that view, but as you know, the congress of the united states has declared that adults can use tobacco. but dr. proctor, this is part of his strategy, "a lot of big verdicts against tobacco companies will put them out of business or do something negative to try to help in my goal," dr. proctor's goal, "of ending smoking." so i want to talk about some of the evidence. and you know it is interesting. i'm going to show you some evidence about how my client has behaved over the years, what we have done. and if i brought in a person from my company and that person 2660 testified -- mr. kaiser: objection as to if he brought anybody in. the court: overruled. mr. reid: and if he told you what the company did and they cross-examined and they would say would you work there, dr. proctor is the source of what i'm going to tell you, because he could not deny these facts. he did not tell you -- you know, there is a -- there is a saying that cross-examination is one of the great rights of litigants in the country. because you can -- you can bring in a witness, he can have credentials, he can have everything, and until cross-examination -- well, dr. proctor did not tell you any of this that i'm going to tell you now when he was on direct examination. but when he was on cross-examination, the person who -- whose testimony is really forming the basis of this claim for punitive damages, i want to tell you what he did. first he told you that something called the council for tobacco research, and you have heard that mentioned this morning, was a front organization, it did distraction research, did not really study, 2661 in fact, you heard this morning counsel argue it never studied smoking and health issues. well, dr. proctor had a different view on -- after he said all that on direct, this was his view on cross. number 25. he admitted that they spent over 350 million on projects, they funded projects, 7,000 reports and medical articles, 600 articles cited by the surgeon general. that is an interesting question. dr. proctor says, "none of their work had anything to do with smoking and health." if that is the case, the surgeon general's report is about what? smoking and health. why would the surgeon general cite 600 articles in a report about smoking and health if those 600 articles did not have anything to do with smoking and health? but dr. proctor told you -- told you that to start with. they funded ten future nobel. and most importantly, many of the studies that they did were also funded by the government and funded by the public health organizations. so clearly, they were carrying out legitimate research concerning smoking and health. he calls it distraction. 2662 let us look at slide 26. i just pulled these ten up to show him. and most of those things, it is hard for most of us here to pronounce and i certainly -- we all know -- remember we talked about nano something and pico something. i just said, "how many of these have you read?" he said, "well, i have read some, not many." and these ten i just found when i did a search and here they are and he admitted. and he admitted that these all relate to smoking and health. and you can tell they do. cigarette smoke inhalation. tracheobronchial epithelia, that is the lung area related to smoking. addictive aspects of smoking. important determinants of pulmonary resistance. did he bring you a single article in and show you an article and said, see, this is what i'm talking about, this is distraction research. he hoped that you would not know this is what the research really was. and he said a fairly dramatic thing, he said, "and these people," meaning my clients, "organizations that they funded, they would cut off your funding if you said smoking causes a disease." 2663 and i want you to think back. did he show you a single case where that happened? do not you think if that happened, he would be the first one and it would be part of his books and he would put it into his presentation? and you saw no evidence that that happened. no evidence at all. the clerk: 15 minutes. mr. reid: thank you. in fact, i'll show you a couple, when we look later, where there was actually a finding relating smoking to cancer, a study, and, he admitted, oh, yeah, they funded that, and it was exactly what he claimed they never funded. so that was it. you also heard that the surgeon general commended, and counsel said we did not do anything, but remember we are going to talk about it in a little bit where we gave them all the information about the constituents and we were involved, and they commended the companies. number 27. we worked closely with the federal government and the health community, national cancer institute, trying to develop a safer cigarette. funded research, did all those things, came up with 2664 some new ideas, and in the end, he admitted that the surgeon general -- that the head of hew, mr. califano, canceled the program because it was no longer politically appropriate to work with the tobacco industry, even trying to find a safer cigarette, and that is why it was canceled. should my client be punished for doing -- should they be punished for the ctr, should they be punished for this, should they be punished because they were rewarded -- or commended. 19 -- number 28. you heard about dr. teague today again and this was his study. this was the literature. and remember i showed it to him, it had 75 articles. i'm not saying that individual citizens needed to go to the libraries and read articles in spanish. but this was, as dr. proctor said, a responsible thing to compile this. this would have been known to people in the field who then would do studies and release their results and get it in the popular press. so to suggest that i'm saying mr. cuculino should have gone -- that is laughable almost to say that he would go and look in the library and look at one of these. that is not the point at all. the 2665 point is, r.j. reynolds as early as 1953, before a lot of those studies happened, was trying to do this. and let me just say, this talk about documents and why, i told you in the beginning there were two things to ask about documents, does it relate to mr. cuculino because of the bridge of causation; and secondly, was it ever the policy of the company. and dr. proctor agreed that the article in '72 by dr. teague that counsel mentioned this morning, he could never establish or find out if it ever became anybody's policy because it was on stationery, remember, it was done part of his study at a university to get an mba. so that is why i told you to ask those questions because they already talked about that document. number 29. we invented technology to study the compounds in smoke. and we did not keep it to ourselves. we did an eight-year study, we gave it to the government. we did the results disclosed in open conferences, hardly something you ought to be punished for as counsel is arguing in this case. counsel made some light, i would say, of the green 2666 monster, said you could get it for $8. could we see the next slide, please, 30? counsel, counsel said, well, that was just an $8 book. that is just an $8 book, but it cost a lot of money to compile and it was thousands -- it was a million words, dr. proctor complimented it, and it had articles in there that the tobacco company would not exactly find helpful because dr. proctor said it had both sides and the surgeon general used it in its landmark work. and finally, number 31, dr. proctor told you about how my client spent over a billion dollars to develop non -- non-burning technology, heating technology. it had not worked. it reduces carcinogens. it failed, the first one failed. the second one is still being sold. should we be punished for doing that? now, could we put back up slide, let me see, 24, please? the clerk: ten minutes. mr. reid: thank you. that is what i just went through. and i submit to you that all came from dr. proctor's testimony and he is the principal witness who talked about this, and for all of those reasons, he suggests 2667 that we should be punished for those -- for that activity. and i submit to you, i submit to that we should not be and that you should answer no to that question. mr. cuculino is seeking $10 million now and seeking extraordinary damages beyond that. notwithstanding some facts, notwithstanding that, number one, he has not been able to carry his burden with regard to smoking reynolds's products 30 years before he had this condition, the heart condition. by the way, when you go back and look at documents of counsel, there were about 12 documents entered -- of all these millions and millions of documents that dr. proctor has written three books about, they could only find 12 to put into evidence, and we talked about two of them, dr. teague's, and there was another one where we described generally our research, and there were a couple of -- and he talked about the talking heads. there were two 30-second clips of the president of reynolds and -- two different ceos of reynolds at the very last two, and that is it. that is the evidence in this case, less than a dozen documents, none of which relate to mr. cuculino. and that includes documents relating to the 2668 companies that reynolds merged with. so, number one, mr. cuculino is asking you to turn him into one of the wealthiest human beings in this area, to award $10 million because he could not prove that my client hurt him, my client was responsible for his injury. he smoked a little bit of my cigarettes a long time ago. he is asked for this money notwithstanding that he continued to smoke and hold onto the risks. he continued to smoke because he never seriously tried to quit. put 33 up. you have seen this before, but that summarizes what was in the chart. he seeks this money even though he was always able to quit and he did quit eventually. and so as ms. gallagher told you, we do not believe that these damages are warranted in this case. mr. kaiser: objection to what counsel and anybody else believes. the court: overruled. mr. reid: our position in this case, my client's position is they should not be damage -- they should not have any damages awarded and specifically not the punitive damages. we talk about it because we have to. sometimes if we 2669 do not, i expect they would get up and say, well, he must agree with it if we do not mention it. but you understand that our position, the company's position is there should be no damage award in this case. so finally, i want to go back to where it all started. this case is first and foremost about mr. cuculino. and the idea -- and his choice. and the idea of choice as relates to cigarettes has been around a long time. and if you look at slide 35, you heard this testimony, on three different occasions, '77, '82, and '86, the surgeon general of the united states said exactly what we have said in this case, that smoking is a personal choice health issue, and it is exactly what mr. cuculino said when you saw the board up here a minute ago, a personal choice behavior, an addictive behavior, and the individual must decide. that is what the surgeon general -- how it is been described and that is why we started this case by saying this is about mr. cuculino and what he chose to do. and it was interesting, that last quote that you saw when he said something to the effect of he 2670 did not think it should be a choice, someone should have the right, that is so interesting because if you recall, at the end of the case, you saw a clip, or at some time you did, i want you to see that clip right now. because it was 50 years ago, and yet it has such application to this case, and it is so similar to what mr. cuculino himself has expressed a belief in. show that. the court: harry froze up. mr. reid: yeah. yeah. one minute. yeah. i always makes the guys a little nervious when this happens. while he is trying to do that, let me tell you one more thing. and if you get it fixed -- (video clip played as follows:) mr. reasoner: in this type of a country, it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his. the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. 2671 (video clip stopped.) mr. reid: thank you. the last thing i want to say is that unbeknownst to you, that you have entered into an agreement with the parties here, all the parties. you have agreed and we have agreed -- first of all, we have agreed that you get to decide this case, judge and jury. that means you go into the room and nobody can come in. and it is not like i told you in the old days where you could be put in jail if you get the wrong result. you get to decide, and we have said -- and we cannot criticize what you do, and you will come out and we will get your result. you have the total unfettered right to decide the case. but you have promised the parties something, and that is you have promised the parties that you will decide the case on the law and the evidence and you will not decide it because it is a big company or you will not decide it because somebody 50 years ago wrote a think piece at a college paper. mr. kaiser: objection. the court: overruled. let us wrap it up. mr. reid: you will decide on the facts and the evidence and that is why this works. that is the 2672 pact between the parties and jurors. so i'll sit down now, and as ms. gallagher said, i will not get a chance to respond. the worst thing a lawyer can do is sit down and never speak to you again. again, on behalf of all of the folks on our side of the room, i want to thank you for your attention, and we totally look forward to your verdict.