closing argument mr. schultz: thank you, your honor. counsel. ms. danielson. good morning, everybody, and welcome back. today is the day you get the case after hearing all the evidence that you sat through for the last couple of weeks. i would like to echo the judge's comments. i told you in opening you would be thanked many times. i'm going to thank you again. you have been very attentive. you have asked lots of questions, and that is great. we understand you maintain an interest in the case, an interest in the evidence, and we appreciate that. it is been a long couple of weeks for all of us, but today is the day you get to decide. when you walked in a couple of weeks ago, you might have asked yourselves, and it is not an unreasonable question, "what in the world is somebody bringing a lawsuit against a tobacco company for over a man who smoked for many years and died from lung cancer?" this case has been about answering that question, and you have now seen all the evidence in the case. lamar danielson never saw the evidence that you saw in this courtroom. all of those documents from philip morris, all the documents from ti and tirc remain secret throughout his lifetime. he did not know what you learned in this trial about addiction or about what philip morris did and the engineering of its cigarettes. the ti was alive and well when he passed away. just a few months before he was diagnosed with lung cancer, the heads of the cigarette companies, including bill campbell from philip morris, went before congress and said, "we believe nicotine is not addictive." we know from their documents for many, many, many years before that that was not true. but it was an untruth that they told all of lamar danielson's lifetime, and we will talk about what impact that had on lamar. the danielson family is seeking justice from you in this courtroom as a community -- members of our community, peers within our community. this is their only chance to seek justice from you. and we are very proud that mrs. danielson and the danielson family chose us to come into court and present this case to you. lamar danielson paid with his life for his fault in this case. and we have all seen that. we do accept some fault, and i'll talk about it in a moment for lamar danielson. and one of the jobs you will have is to compare his fault to the fault of philip morris based on all the evidence that you have seen. philip morris accepts no fault, and they do not have to, when they come into this courtroom. it is our burden. we accept that burden. we have met that burden in this case. you have now seen evidence -- i would imagine you had no idea before you came in here -- in the 1930s philip morris is studying the literature on smoking causing disease. in the 1950s before lamar danielson is ever born, they are well aware of the mouse-painting studies and the other evidence that you saw. despite all of that knowledge, you saw that they went after kids. they redesigned marlboro based on a recommendation from the roper polling organization on how to get 15-year-old kids, and they got a lot of them over lamar danielson's lifetime. and lamar danielson was one of them, and he became addicted at a very young age. and he died at a very young age as a result of that addiction. philip morris, through the engineering of its products, through its advertising, made it as easy as possible to start smoking, as hard as possible to quit smoking, and as easy as possible to relapse. and we saw all of that with lamar danielson. now, you saw this in the opening statement, the issues in the case. the first one that you will have to answer on the verdict form -- and you heard a lot of evidence on it -- is whether addiction to marlboro cigarettes was a legal cause of lamar danielson's death. that is the question that you will have on the verdict form. and as i pointed out at the very beginning of the trial in opening statement, it is undisputed that smoking marlboro was the medical cause of lamar danielson's death. philip morris does not claim that he died from embalming fumes or fumes from a gas grill or because he waited too long to go to the doctor or anything else. smoking marlboro cigarettes was the cause of his death. so the real question for you is whether addiction to marlboro cigarettes substantially contributed to that heavy smoking that we all agree took his life. and you know now why i use the phrase "substantially contribute" because in that special definition of cause in a courtroom, legal cause, that is what we have to prove. it can be many things, but if addiction is one of the reasons that he smokes and it substantially contributed to his smoking, then it is the legal cause of his death. and you heard in opening statement and in jury selection we start out even in the case. these even scales. we have to put evidence on the scale. and if we put evidence that even tips the scale ever so slightly in our favor on any given issue, then we win on that issue. that is the greater weight burden in this case. so what did we put on the scale on this question of addiction? we brought you three of the top experts on nicotine and addiction in the country. dr. hurt from the mayo clinic, who ran the nicotine dependence center for more than 15 years; who has published hundreds of articles, has actually gone out and researched nicotine, researched addiction and how it affects the human body; and helped more than 50,000 people who came through that clinic during his tenure. you heard that testimony from him. dr. cummings, who got all the documents from the new york attorney general, cancer researcher at roswell cancer institute, who also wrote nearly 400 articles on the subjects that he talked to you about, also treated thousands of people for nicotine addiction. and dr. burns, who was the last expert to testify, who wrote the 1975 surgeon general's report and has been involved as an editor or reviewer on every single report in the 40 years since then. these are the -- the best experts you can find on these issues, and they came in here and talked to you. and what they told you is consistent with what they have told the rest of america through their publishing and medical journals and scientific journals, through their publishing in surgeon general's reports and nci monographs -- that is the credibility that they bring into this courtroom. we also brought you testimony of lamar danielson's friends, family, coworkers, who gave you all the addiction evidence, all of the behaviors around lamar danielson's smoking that prove the addiction in this case. the question, then, is, did philip morris put anything on the scale that counterbalanced that, that brought it back to even? because if they did not, then we win on the issue of addiction. philip morris cross-examined our witnesses. you saw some reader's digest articles. you heard 60 million people quit. we have never said addicted smokers cannot quit. lamar danielson eventually did. and they brought you dr. daphne dorce. dr. dorce has a fine education. she helps people with addiction problems. addiction problems are very serious problems. it is good work, and she should be proud of that, but that is not the issue in the courtroom. the issue in the courtroom is the evidence that she brings and the credibility behind her opinions. and you can judge that credibility based on how consistent or inconsistent they are with other sources. you heard her on cross-examination admit her opinions on the most fundamental issues in this case are at odds with the surgeon general, with the national institute of drug abuse, with the national institutes of health, with the centers for disease control, with the world health organization. she does not believe most smokers are addicted, like every one of those organizations does. and how could she? because if she came into the courtroom and said most smokers are addicted, would there be any question in your mind lamar danielson was one of them? if most are addicted, like the cdc and the surgeon general say, is lamar one of them or is he one of the minority smokers, the social smoker, the casual smoker, who can take or leave cigarettes, who does not have that compulsive need, which dr. dorce told you yesterday morning is feeling the need to smoke on a daily basis. that is how she defined compulsive smoking. that is compulsive smoking, and there is no question in this case lamar danielson was a compulsive smoker. dr. dorce has never published in the area of nicotine addiction; she is never published in -- on the objects of addiction at all. she is never talked to anyone about nicotine addiction, she said, other than as part of some other presentation outside of a courtroom. and she does not share her opinions -- the ones that she shared with you, how she interprets the dsm, what the dsm means, none of that has she ever shared outside of a courtroom in a tobacco trial. and you can ask yourself, why is that? you know, i asked her, "is not there a process where if you are too busy to write articles" -- although she told us, "nothing in my career has ever prevented me from publishing." she has not, but even if there were something preventing her, there is a process where she can take the testimony she gave you in this courtroom and has given in other courtrooms and subject that to peer review, simply send up it up and find out what other psychiatrists think about what she is saying about the dsm, what she is saying about addiction, and how her opinions are at odds with the public health community. she is never done that. and you can ask yourself why. does that affect the credibility of her opinions that she is not willing to put them out there to be subject to scrutiny or criticism by her peers? our experts have done that hundreds and hundreds of times. she told you she has a busy clinical practice. dr. cummings and dr. hurt have busy clinical practices, and they have treated thousands of patients as well. so you will have to decide whether that is a sufficient explanation for that. the standard that she brings into the courtroom is the dsm. and you heard a lot about the dsm. it is a psychiatric manual intended to diagnose mental disorders, even though she told you herself most people do not go to psychiatrists for nicotine addiction. and not all psychiatrists even use the dsm, but that is the manual she brought in. i asked her on cross-examination, "is not it true the dsm-5 -- the newest one that just came out a couple of years ago -- has never been independently established as reliable or valid? and she admitted it has not. they are still studying that, is what she said. so we do not have any evidence that dsm-5, this newest version of dsm, is reliable or valid in the first part; but, more importantly, she uses it in a way that the dsm itself says you cannot. dr. hurt told you on his direct examination that you have to have a clinical interview in order to apply the dsm. and, excuse me. i know you-all do not have water, but... i just have to take a sip. the first thing i showed dr. dorce on cross-examination -- i walked over and put the dsm on the elmo and showed her this quote. "on the basis of the clinical interview, text descriptions, criteria, and clinician judgment, a final diagnosis is made." and i said, "dr. dorce, i know it is not your fault, but you never had a chance to do a clinical interview of lamar danielson that is required by the dsm, correct?" and she said, "that is correct." and there is a reason that you have to have a clinical interview on the dsm. dr. hurt talked about this on his direct. if you just look at the first three criteria -- these are 6 out of the 11 -- what did lamar danielson intend? what was lamar danielson's persistent desire? did he have a strong desire or urge? it is not possible to say, no, no, no, unless you ask lamar danielson. that is why the dsm says you have to do a clinical interview. dr. dorce said in her practice she does a clinical interview with everyone who comes in. "an extensive examination" was the phrase that she used. she cannot do it here. you heard from dr. hurt it is not appropriate to use the dsm in this way. and you heard from her that the clinical interview is required, but that is not what she did. instead there is a substitute of questions asked largely by lawyers of cigarette companies of witnesses, many -- mr. geraghty: i would object to that as not in evidence, that last comment. the court: (after perusing realtime) i'll -- i'll sustain the objection to the particular question -- or the statement that "there is a substitute of questions asked largely by lawyers for cigarette companies of witnesses." thank you. mr. schultz: thank you, your honor. many questions asked in depositions years after the fact substitute for the clinical interview. did dr. dorce show you anything in the dsm that suggested that is appropriate? you did not see any evidence of that. you will hear in the instructions this case comes on the heels of the engle class action. and it is taken many years for us to get to the courtroom, through no fault of philip morris, no fault of -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to the comment as not evidence and irrelevant. the court: i'll overrule the objection. mr. schultz: -- through no fault of philip morris and no fault of mrs. danielson. but those are just the facts. and so, as it turns out, through no one's fault, we are asking people their memories of very specific events over the course of the lifetime many years after the fact. that is not a substitute for a clinical interview under the dsm. the judge will also tell you you can accept or reject the opinions of any expert in this case, ours or dr. dorce. or you can give them whatever weight they deserve. you do not have to agree with dr. dorce's assessment of the dsm. look at the first question up here. "tobacco is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period of time than was intended." did you see evidence in this case that lamar danielson smoked longer than he intended? he told his wife in the 1990s he quit. around 1992 he was absolutely done smoking, and he continued to smoke after five days. you heard all the evidence on the withdrawal symptoms around that. did he really intend to quit for five days and come unglued and pace the floors and go through what he went through just because he was going to go back a week later because he liked the taste of marlboro? that does not fit with the evidence. you can infer from the evidence in this case that he smoked longer than he intended. you can also infer there is a persistent desire. and you know there are unsuccessfully efforts to cut down or control tobacco use. dr. dorce mentioned a four-month to one-year quit in 1987. ask yourself if that is the evidence you saw in this case. we heard about quits from becky wiggins of a week in 1987, a week in 1988; roy wiggins said he remembered him once or twice quitting for a week. beverly milsted recalled him quitting for a month. lawana joyner said he had a quit in early '80s. all of those quits were unsuccessful. and they satisfy this criterion, "craving or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco." he told ricky stokes during the quit after his diagnosis that he could eat a cigarette. if that is not a craving, ladies and gentlemen, what is a craving for tobacco? do social smokers feel like they could eat a cigarette when they are not having one? that is addiction, and that criterion, you can find from the evidence, is satisfied. tobacco use is continued despite having knowledge of a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by tobacco. small cell lung cancer is about the worst problem you can get from smoking. and you heard in the evidence in this case, lamar danielson on friday, november 4th of 1994 was told he had a mass in his chest. he believed it was cancer. he went to lawana joyner on the way home to tell mrs. danielson about it and said, "here are my cigarettes. i'm done smoking." the very next day he tells his son billy, "i have cancer," and he is smoking a cigarette. the day after that he gets a call from the hospital and they say, you need to come in, this is bad. he is too scared and nervous to drive so he asked ricky stokes to drive him to the hospital; and he smokes a cigarette on the way to the hospital. tobacco use after knowledge that you have a problem. that is what the evidence in this case showed. dr. dorce gave tolerance as a satisfied criterion. there is no real way around that. people who have never smoked cannot smoke a pack and a half or two or three packs a day. and withdrawal as manifested by taking nicotine or cigarettes to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms; and those are some of the withdrawal symptoms. and i would submit to you the evidence shows lamar danielson had all of those and many more. mrs. danielson told you on one of his quits he said his teeth hurt. he could not concentrate. other people said he was coming unglued. he was driving his family crazy because of the withdrawal symptoms that he was having. all of these criteria are satisfied based on the evidence in this case. and i asked dr. dorce yesterday on cross-examination, what about the dsm that applied when lamar danielson was alive? why are we using a 2013 dsm for a man who was alive and smoking in the 1980s? it first came out in 1980; and i asked her, the dsm 3, the first version, did it require clinically significant impairment or distress? no, it did not. and one of the reasons it would not is because people would not get distressed about smoking in the 1980s. mr. geraghty: your honor, this is not evidence. mr. schultz: it is an inference, your honor. the court: hang on, please. i'll sustain the objection to one of the reasons it would not is because people would not get distressed about smoking in the 1980s. the jury should disregard that statement. thank you. mr. schultz: ask yourself this: if you can smoke virtually anywhere; you can smoke in your home; you can smoke at work. there are almost no restrictions. you can smoke on airplanes; you can smoke in restaurants. how many problems would lamar danielson have from smoking that impaired him? very different world today. there are lots of places you cannot smoke. clinically significant impairment and distress makes a lot of sense in a 2013 version of the dsm; and it makes sense that it was not in the 1980 version of the dsm. that is the version that if he had gotten to a doctor, a psychiatrist, to be diagnosed in the 1980s, it would have been applied to him. so it is the wrong test and it is used in the wrong way. no clinical interview when even dr. dorce admits that that is required. now, on the other hand, you heard from dr. hurt that the heaviness of smoking index is far and away -- those are his words, far and away -- a better tool for assessing dependence, especially under the circumstances of this case. time to first cigarette and cigarettes per day. because it is objective. you do not have to ask what is in lamar danielson's mind to answer that. and it is been established through scientific study and research and scientific publications as reliable, valid, and predictive. dr. cummings told you exactly the same thing; and neither of them said it was used as a screening tool. dr. cummings has treated thousands of people for nicotine addiction, and he uses the heaviness of smoking index. lamar danielson, if you use the one to one and a half packs a day estimate, scores a 5 out of the 6, high addiction on the heaviness of smoking index. if you use the two packs or more, which many people testified to, including lawana joyner who kept a spreadsheet of his smoking for his marlboro miles, then he would be 6 out of 6. so ask yourself: why would it matter what happens if somebody is a zero or a 1? does it mean everybody has addiction? that is not the case that you are here about. you are here about a man who scored a 5 or a 6 on a scale out of 6. and this also relates to this whole definition versus diagnosis. the cdc -- you heard from dr. cummings and from dr. dorce that the cdc and the surgeon general and nida do not send out armies of doctors to assess people under the dsm in order to compile information on the number of people addicted to nicotine in this country. you can use the definition; you can use the hsi; you can use the dsm. these are all valid ways to determine addiction. dr. dorce on this point, just like the others that we talked about, is at odds with the surgeon general, at odds with the cdc, and at odds with the national institute on drug abuse. only dr. dorce says you have to have the dsm diagnosis in order to apply the heaviness of smoking index. you did not hear that from dr. hurt. he is a medical doctor. you did not hear it from dr. cummings. you did not hear it from dr. burns, who is a medical doctor. and you have got a diagnosis in this case from dr. david burns, who is been writing surgeon general's reports for 40 years. he diagnosed mr. danielson with addiction and he told you in no uncertain terms it caused his death. dr. burns does not use the dsm. and you do not have to use the dsm. the jury instructions in this case do not tell you to diagnose lamar danielson with addiction. the jury instructions do not say to use the dsm. the verdict form does not ask you was he ever diagnosed with nicotine addiction or can you diagnose him with nicotine addiction? the question is: was he addicted and was it a legal cause? you do not even have to all agree on what the definition is if you unanimously agree that he was addicted. you will be told -- as i mentioned before, you can accept or reject any expert's testimony. you do not have to accept the dsm or the heaviness of smoking index. the court just told you the jury instructions will say to you bring your common sense to these issues. and if you apply your common sense -- if we were talking about methamphetamine or crack cocaine and somebody's dosing themselves hundreds of times a day with that drug, is there any question that is addictive behavior that you are talking about a drug addict? well, nicotine is a drug; and you have heard in this trial it is more addictive and addictive in the same ways as other drugs of abuse, and it causes more death than all other addictions combined. you can use your common sense. you do not have to have the dsm. you can diagnose under the heaviness of smoking index; you can diagnose under the dsm; or you can simply use your common sense. and the evidence in this case would tell you this is textbook addictive behavior. these are the very slides that i showed you with dr. cummings that we walked through with him. i'm not going to walk through all of this with you again. you have seen it. but you see the heavy smoking. you see smoking first thing in the morning before his feet would hit the floor because his brain has been deprived of nicotine. his different quit attempts, the ways he tried to quit. mr. danielson did not have chantix in the '80s. he did not even have patches. he did not have wellbutrin. he did not have vaping. those alternatives were not out there. he did use chewing gum. he used mints. he used lollipops. he was riding his bike in a suit because he was having a craving for a cigarette. he wanted to quit. he was motivated to quit. does that sound like somebody who is not motivated to quit? but he failed because he was heavily addicted to nicotine. and you heard this evidence many times and many ways: when mr. danielson quit smoking, it turned him inside out. he became the opposite of his normal personality. and these are all quotes from the people in his life, friends, family, coworkers, of the difference between lamar danielson when he was smoking and when he was not smoking. and becky wiggins, you heard her deposition read. ms. holman in our office came in and read it. she said she knew lamar was smoking again on one of his quits because he was suddenly calmed and he was back to being lamar. and the reason it works that way is because his brain was changed by nicotine at a very young age. and dr. hurt told you about this. dr. cummings spoke about it as well. kids who take up smoking who do not know the long-term consequences bathe their brains in nicotine day in, day out for years on end. it is a choice, quote/unquote, made by a teenager whose brain has not yet finished developing. dr. dorce told you that part of the brain that is not finished developing in a teen affects judgment. it affects the ability to foresee long-term consequences. it affects impulse control. that is why nearly ninety percent of people who smoke regularly started smoking as teenagers; and i think the evidence is pretty clear that philip morris understood that. you heard about up-regulation and down-regulation about nicotine receptors and you-all asked a lot of questions about that. dr. dorce told you there are alcohol receptors, opiate receptors. and dr. hurt told you that is true; but nicotine, he said, is unique in biology. it is different from all of those others because when people take other drugs of abuse, when they drink or if they are shooting heroin, those receptors down-regulate in response to that. nicotine receptors up-regulate; you get more of them. and when you quit smoking, yes, after six or eight weeks they will down-regulate. they will go back to their normal number that they were before, but they are permanently changed. and you heard that from dr. hurt. that indelible memory -- neuroplasticity, the indelible memory is how he described it. the nicotine receptors in a smoker's brain, even after they have quit and they have gone back to the normal number, are still permanently altered. that is the power of nicotine and that is what was happening to lamar danielson. you saw this slide a couple of times in the trial and that is a core question for you when you are talking about this: was he a social smoker or was he an addicted smoker? did he smoke compulsively? feeling the need to smoke every day, is what dr. dorce said. because it is that compulsive smoking that leads to all the lifetime exposures of the toxins in smoke, and that is what causes lung cancer. dr. burns told you that. there is no safe level of smoking. but you do not see small cell lung cancer in 15-year-old kids because they have not been smoking two packs a day for 25 years. those are the people who get cancer. that is exactly what happened to lamar danielson. and it is because addiction is part of who he was from a very young age. i mentioned this a moment ago: surgeon general of the united states, "nicotine dependency through cigarette smoking is not only the most common form of drug addiction, but the one that causes more death and disease than all other addictions combined." and dr. burns told you in this case there is no question that lamar's death was caused by his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. dr. cummings similarly told you if it was not for the addiction he would not have had that kind of exposure that we saw. i showed you this in opening statement. this is the jury instruction on what it means when you answer question one. what does it mean to say that it was a cause? and the important part in the plaintiff's case is that addiction need not be the only cause as long as it contributes substantially. so you can -- you have heard all this testimony about enjoyment, relaxation, stress relief. philip morris's acts, which certainly, as we will talk about in a moment, contributed to lamar danielson's smoking. all of those things can be causes. but if addiction is one of them, then the answer to the first question on the verdict form is yes. and let us face it. you heard from dr. dorce, herself -- enjoyment, relaxation, stress relief, suppressed appetite -- those things do not magically evaporate when you become addicted to nicotine. people who are addicted experience all of those things. you bet lamar danielson enjoyed smoking. he was addicted to it. of course he enjoyed smoking. even if enjoyment, relaxation, stress relief are reasons that he smoked, if addiction is one of the reasons alongside those, then the answer to the first question on the verdict form is yes. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. that misstates the court's instruction. the court: i'll overrule the objection. mr. schultz: and there is no fault on this question. that is the second question on the verdict form. we are not talking about whether it was lamar danielson's fault that he was addicted. the question is: was he and did it substantially contribute? you saw this document in opening. you saw it at trial. lamar danielson was five years old, turning six in 1959. and philip morris internally recognized, "sure, people smoke for enjoyment, people smoke for stimulation and relaxation, people smoke for addiction." all of that was true with lamar. and the answer to the first question on the verdict form is "yes" as a result of that. and that leads to the second question: "what percentage of fault for his death is attributable to philip morris and how much is attributable to lamar danielson?" one thing i want to stop and mention here, the court is going to tell you in the instructions, you cannot assign fault to lamar for anything that micah danielson may have done. and specifically, i'm talking about buying cigarettes, smoking around lamar when he was trying to quit, not encouraging him to quit or encouraging him more strongly to quit. you heard a lot of evidence on that. it is not about fault, and you will hear that it is not to affect your damages verdict either. the only purpose for that evidence goes to how it affected lamar danielson and his smoking. and, frankly, if he were not addicted, it would not much matter. the instructions are going to tell you that "negligence," which i'm going to talk about, because that is what we are talking about when we are talking about percentages of fault, "negligence is the failure to use reasonable care." it is doing something that a reasonable person or company would not do under the same or similar circumstances or failing to do something a reasonable person or company would do under the circumstances. failing to use reasonable care. and when you talk about dividing up fault in the case, consider how long philip morris knew about the dangers of smoking. we heard evidence all about lamar and what he knew -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. this is the waiver in rizzuto. the court: overruled. mr. schultz: we heard a lot of evidence about lamar and what he knew or what his family members knew. we also saw a lot of evidence about what philip morris knew. we do not accept any fault for philip morris's fraudulent concealment or the conspiracy, which we will talk about in just a moment. when it spoke, whether on its own or through the tobacco institute, it had a duty to tell the whole truth. and if you find later on, on those questions, that they were a substantial contributing cause to lamar danielson's death, there will not be any allocation -- there will be no reduction of damages based on an allocation of fault under this question, and that will probably make more sense when i talk about it then. but just so that we are very clear going into this, we do not accept fault for philip morris's concealment or the lies or the conspiracy they entered into. we showed you all the way back in 1936, philip morris was following the literature, including this: "abundant clinical evidence of an etiological role." dr. cummings told you that means a causal role of cigarette smoking and cancer. that is a study from 1929. it is found in a document from philip morris in 1936. this is 15 years before lamar danielson was born. what did philip morris do with this information? did it use reasonable care, which is the standard under negligence? was philip morris reading all those reader's digest articles that mr. geraghty showed mike cummings? lamar danielson was not reading articles in the 1920s, 1930s, "cancer by the carton" in the 1940s. can you infer that philip morris knew about them, though? they certainly knew about this, because this and the other studies that came out in the early 1950s, they told us in their documents, are what prompted them to get together at the plaza hotel. what did philip morris do with this information? is there something philip morris could have done with this information that would have changed lamar danielson's life, that would have affected whether lamar danielson ever smoked cigarettes? with the knowledge that they had going back into the 1930s, philip morris still chose, when it redesigned marlboro, to base it on a study from 1953 that included 15 year olds. and they were told, "if you want to increase the number of 15 year olds, here's the way you should go about it." george weissman, whose name you heard many times in the trial, who was the vice president at philip morris, writes to the head of research and says, "you know what? we are encouraged that we have our greatest strength among 15 to 24 years old -- year olds. and the roper survey is good information. we should proceed. let us go." and they did. and they redesigned marlboro, and it came out the next year when lamar danielson was one year old. the cornerstone of marlboro and the redesign of marlboro included 15-year-old kids. and you heard from jerry pate, by the time lamar danielson was a 15-year-old, everyone in their group, it was the hip cigarette wayfarers and marlboros. that was a quote from mr. pate. that did not happen by accident. and you are allowed to ask, you must ask, "is this reasonable care?" did philip morris act as a reasonable company, or did they act unreasonably based on the information that they had before lamar danielson was even born? we showed you an internal -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object to waiver in rizzuto. the court: approach, please. (the following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.) mr. geraghty: i do not mean to interrupt mr. schultz --- - the court: i understand. mr. geraghty: -- but whenever he is asking the jury -- he is done it twice now, even though he said to the contrary, but he is asking the jury to think about intentional conduct of philip morris and compare it to the conduct of mr. danielson under the comparative fault question. if you do that, you waive the argument that the comparative fault numbers do not apply to the intentional tort claims. i just want to make that clear, that those statements are doing that, and that is the basis for my objection, your honor. the court: okay. mr. geraghty: i realize your honor may not make that decision at this point, but i just -- the court: i understand. the reason i overruled the first objection was because it is really whether or not he is going to waive it. mr. geraghty: i understand that. the court: your objection actually was an alert to him and he -- (laughter.) the court: -- modified his comment in the next sentence and dealt with that. so it really is a question of whether in total it is a waiver. but if you wish to keep alerting him that he may be going in a direction, you can do that. mr. geraghty: well -- and i understand, and i just think there is going to be a point where the cumulative effect of this you cannot fix it, in other words, but i understand your honor's point, and i -- the court: but as to -- as to the latest objection, though, i -- i'm sorry, i did not see the -- mr. geraghty: okay. that is fine. the court: -- the connection. mr. geraghty: i understand. the court: and that is why i asked you to approach the bench. i understood your first objection. and -- and it was a statement that basically was comparing the fault of defendant to -- to the concealment of claim. and, yes, i agree that if he kept going down that road, he may stand in the position that he had waived it. but with respect to the second one, i did not -- mr. schultz: your honor, for the record, i'm talking about their conduct; they could have taken a different course. it was negligent of them not to do so. i'm going to talk about the conspiracy and their intentional concealment under those -- the court: again, it is important that the distinction be made if you are going to continue to be able to -- mr. schultz: yes. the court: -- given that pocket that has been developed. mr. schultz: and i've couched every single bit of this in terms of negligence because that is where it belongs. the court: thank you. (the following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury.) mr. schultz: you can pull that back up, please, ryan. this is what philip morris did with the knowledge that philip morris had, and this is when lamar danielson is a newborn. in fact, this is a month before -- or ten days before he was born. philip morris's fault, its negligence, its failure to use reasonable care to act as a reasonably prudent company would under the same circumstances extends far back before any fault could ever begin on the part of lamar danielson. philip morris, in their internal marketing videos, actually celebrated the success of this marketing effort, and they talked about marlboro as the greatest success in tobacco history and one of the most successful marketing concepts in the world. and now you will hear in the courtroom that none of that played any role in lamar danielson's smoking. well, you are entitled to draw the opposite conclusion, and the evidence suggests that you should. mr. geraghty told you in opening that philip morris clung too long to the notion that smoking did not cause lung cancer. philip morris did not cling to that notion at all. the evidence shows that it knew smoking caused lung cancer before lamar danielson was born. in 1961, helmut wakeham, the head of research, a presentation to the r & d committee, says, "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. they cannot get them all out." and in the same document they are discussing controlled nicotine delivery. this is before lamar danielson ever picked up a cigarette. is there something that a reasonable company would have done that might have changed the path of lamar danielson's life? how would a reasonable company act on the basis of this information? 1964, we saw this several times in the trial as well, the surgeon general links cancer to cigarette smoking. this is news across the front pages of america. it is not news to philip morris. but it is another opportunity for philip morris to act as a reasonable company would act under the circumstances. is there something philip morris could have done that would have changed the course of lamar danielson's life at this point before he is ever picked up a cigarette? 2003, philip morris told us, "most teenagers do not worry about long-term risks. they cannot imagine what it is like to be older, and they can become addicted quickly." and that is all true. we know around 1967 lamar danielson is smoking cigarettes. 1968, you know that he is smoking regularly. you heard that from jerry pate. there is a warning on the side of the packs. we have to believe it went on in early '66, and we do not have evidence of him smoking before then. but you saw from the federal trade commission in their 1967 report that that warning was ineffective. it could not overcome all the advertising that was surrounding mr. danielson, a message that they said in the ftc report, "anyone who could read or speak the english language would have gotten." mr. geraghty told you in opening that lamar was told constantly as a child not to smoke or drink. you have to judge the evidence in the case on that point. no one ever heard either of his parents speak to lamar about smoking. his father said he did not talk to lamar, even when he smelled smoke on him in high school. what we do know is that at least one time when he was 14 years old -- so we know he is smoking at 14 -- he got in trouble for smoking. but you heard the evidence from his brother ray, "yeah, mom was very opposed to smoking. she did not like the smell. she did not like the ashtrays. health was never mentioned." that was a direct quote from his brother ray danielson. "health was never mentioned." now, at the same time lamar danielson is beginning to smoke, philip morris's knowledge does not go away. it does not evaporate. it continues to grow. and philip morris, despite this knowledge, in 1970, is still targeting young people. this is the year lamar danielson is 16 years old, going on 17 years old. and they are talking about how to get that group of smokers. well, they have lamar danielson by this time. and they are trying to get others. is that how a reasonable company acts; a fault-free company acts? you have heard that a warning went on the packs in 1970. you have heard a lot about warnings in this case, and i'm not going to stand here and tell you lamar danielson never saw a warning on a pack of cigarettes in the 1970s. i think any reasonable person would know that he had to have seen it at some point in the 1970s. but we know what philip morris thought about the 1970 warning. dr. cummings showed you this formally secret business document. "a harsher warning will be required on all cigarette packages after november 1st, 1970. it remains to be seen whether this stiffer caution notice will affect sales. no change was evident when the present notice was added to the package in 1965." in other words, it did not make any difference. "we doubt the new notice will have an adverse effect." and if you look at the sales of marlboro, which we did through that internal marketing video, it did not. marlboro sales continued to skyrocket through the 1970s. and dr. cummings showed you the 1981 ftc report. "cigarette advertising does not disclose material health and safety information. as a result, many smokers remain unaware of the very basic fact that smoking is hazardous to health and many more hold false beliefs about the existence, probability, and severity of these dangers. in addition, the evidence indicates that the current warning is not an effective remedy for overcoming this problem." mr. geraghty: i object based on preemption. the court: okay. overruled. thank you. mr. schultz: we are not suggesting that philip morris should have put a different warning on the pack. philip morris put the warning -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to that comment as well and move to strike and make a motion. the court: okay. approach. (the following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.) the court: objection, please? mr. geraghty: number one, there is no failure to warn claim, and he just said he is not suggesting that philip morris should make -- should have made a stronger warning, but he really is implicitly suggesting that by this whole line of questioning. so your honor has put in the instructions that philip morris, after july 1, 1969, was not required to put on the packages any different warning labels than the one that was required by the federal labelling law. so i think this argument is implicitly trying to undermine that law and the court's instruction. the court: okay. i -- the -- well, let me let you briefly respond for the record. mr. schultz: i'm trying to do exactly the opposite, judge, and make it very clear the only relevance of this for the jury is the effect it would have on lamar danielson in terms of comparative fault. in fact, i was about to mention you will see a stipulation they put the proper warnings on there. the court: i -- i overruled the objection. deny the motion to strike. (the following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury.) mr. schultz: as i was saying, we are not suggesting philip morris should have put a different or stronger warning. it put on the warning the federal government required. but this is important in terms of how you judge the effect that warning may have had on lamar danielson when you assess his comparative fault. this is after that 1970 warning has been on the packages by the time of the report for 11 years. and you will recall philip morris had an internal document where they looked at the ftc report and said it was accurately reported and based on sound research techniques provided by reputable research technicians; in other words, it is accurate. the first evidence that we have of people encouraging lamar danielson to stop smoking is right around this time. becky wiggins and lorraine sanders, his sister-in-law and mother-in-law, stopped in 1980, and they started talking to him about smoking. there is no dispute about that. lamar danielson heard people in his life tell him, "you need to quit smoking." you heard evidence from lawana joyner that he tried to quit smoking in the early 1980s. you have also heard a lot about this statement over and over, "aw, sis, get out of here." that is not the only thing lamar danielson said to his sister-in-law, though, about smoking. he also told her, "i'm hooked." lamar danielson was struggling through the 1980s with this addiction, and he is not a whole lot different, as you will hear, from a lot of people his age. he had no idea what he was up against. this goes all the way before lamar danielson ever picked up a cigarette. and philip morris is attempting to study the effect of smoke ph on nicotine delivery. nicotine delivery varies. the higher the ph, the higher the nicotine delivery. and it concludes nicotine delivery can be controlled via filler or smoke ph adjustment. this is what is going on in philip morris's labs despite all of the knowledge that they have. is that how a reasonable company acts? does this make any difference to lamar danielson when you compare philip morris's fault and lamar danielson's fault? this is before he ever smoked. you saw more evidence going throughout his lifetime of the sophistication, the depth of philip morris's knowledge about its product and its efforts to manipulate that product to maximize addiction. it studied -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would move to strike that last comment. part of my motion in limine. the court: overruled. thank you. mr. schultz: they studied nicotine. they studied smokers. they studied it all. you heard directly from dr. cummings, not to reduce the addictiveness of their products but to maximize addiction. dr. dunn, who had the book that mr. geraghty showed dr. cummings, the one where he had the -- the -- this is not the views of philip morris or the ctr in his chapter in that book -- he is in charge of psychology at philip morris. they have a whole department devoted to studying the psychology of smoking, and he summarizes their mission very neatly in this document that you saw. "i would state our charter from philip morris is in this fashion: "study the psychology of the smoker in search of information that can increase corporate profits." 1977. it is been 41 years since that 1936 document we saw where they are studying the cancer-causing properties of their product. lamar danielson does not know that this is the fight that he is fighting. lamar danielson blamed himself. and philip morris says, "that is right. it is all your fault." you have to decide whether that is true, whether this contributed to his smoking, whether marketing to his generation as children contributed to his smoking, whether philip morris could have made more reasonable decisions as a company. you have seen this graph several times during the trial. lamar danielson grows up with smoking on the rise. and you can see over here (indicating) when we get into the early 1980s, there is a drop in the '70s. it starts to level off. if you draw a straight line from there back to the 1960s, consumption is just a hair below where it was back in the 1960s. lamar danielson's not isolated off by himself smoking cigarettes. cigarette smoking is, at the time he begins, over 4,000 cigarettes per capita per day and almost 4,000 cigarettes per year per adult in the 1980s. you heard about 60 million quits many times during the trial. the most important number we would submit to you about that is what dr. burns told you. that in the 1980s, as late as the 1980s, where you see this first uninterrupted drop that kind of levels off in the '90s, until you start seeing another drop in the '90s -- this steep decline is when lamar danielson is trying to quit smoking, right along with the rest of america. and dr. burns told you of the people of his generation, eighty percent of the men who had ever smoked were still smoking in the 1980s. lots of people had quit. sure. lots of people had died. lamar danielson was trying to quit. and 4 out of 5 men from what dr. burns told you, as his birth cohort -- the people born at the same time as him who smoked -- 4 out of 5 of them are still smoking in the 1980s. should lamar have tried more ways, more times to quit smoking? yes, he should have. and we accept fault for that. we have never said otherwise. but philip morris has responsibility here too. philip morris was saturating america with ads depicting the glory of cigarettes all of lamar danielson's lifetime. and they were manipulating their product -- you have seen evidence of that -- to maximize addictiveness. they were studying smokers to maximize addictiveness. they were targeting kids. and is any of that reasonable conduct, based on all the knowledge that they had? all of that goes into this comparative fault analysis. only a cigarette company would hook kids to a deadly addictive product and then blame them for smoking. mr. geraghty: i would object to that last comment and make a motion. the court: you need to approach to make the motion? mr. geraghty: no, sir. i can do it at the end of this. the court: okay. i will overrule the objection. thank you. mr. schultz: that is not how reasonable companies behave, and that is the question that you are being asked on the allocation of fault. philip morris has fault going back 30 years before lamar danielson ever picked up a cigarette. they have fault throughout his lifetime. wherever his fault begins, he should have known sooner. he should have known more. he should have tried harder. whatever that fault is, philip morris's fault does not end when lamar danielson's begins. philip morris has more fault than lamar danielson in this case, and you will hear -- we heard a lot in opening about control and responsibility. philip morris was in control of those cigarettes. they were in control of their product, and they have a responsibility as a company. the next issues in this case for you are there concealment of information regarding the addictiveness or health effects of smoking? was that a legal cause of lamar danielson's death? did it substantially contribute? and, likewise, was there conspiracy? their agreement to conceal with the ti, ctr, the tirc, r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson tobacco company. is that a cause? those are two separate questions. there is philip morris's concealment in its own right, what it knew. and there is concealment through the conspiracy through the ti and all of that. you saw lots of documents from the ti in this case. the court will tell you philip morris is responsible for every act taken by any coconspirator if that act was in furtherance of that conspiracy. now, i mentioned this before. we do not accept fault for this conduct (indicating). if you say yes on either of these questions -- was it a substantial contributing cause? -- any allocation of fault to lamar danielson will not reduce the verdict, and i want to be clear about that in this case. those are separate claims. the -- the negligence; the nonintentional conduct that i've just described; and the concealment, which is an intentional tort. the question here really is whether the message got out. you heard from dr. cummings. everyone in america heard this message. there is no question lamar danielson heard this message of denial and doubt all through the course of his lifetime. philip morris spent more than $500 million of its own money writing checks year after year after year to fund the tobacco institute, to fund ctr. you can infer from that philip morris certainly thought that it was working. and they told you in 1964 what the message was and the purpose of that message. "give smokers a psychological crutch, a self-rationale for continued smoking." philip morris understood smokers and they understood addiction. and they said, "you know what, surgeon general has said that it is bad. we need to give them some rationale to keep smoking because they are going to hear that message." and, of course, at some point in lamar danielson's life he heard the message. he knew smoking was bad for him, but that is how addiction works. rationalization and denial. and philip morris was there to provide the rationalizations and the denial. they are enablers to use addiction terminology. we went back to 1953. lamar danielson was a couple of months old when philip morris -- and i handed you this document during dr. cummings's direct examination -- when this was published in newspapers across america, "we, the tobacco industry, accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount" -- higher than -- "every other consideration in our business. "we believe the products we make are not injurious to health." this is 1954 now. and, "we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health." is that the evidence that you saw in this case, their responses to the surgeon general through the course of lamar danielson's lifetime? that is the promise that they made in 1954. and if you want to see two weeks before, you saw the document that shows what they were really thinking. this was that memo that the pr agency put together after they interviewed the research directors in the wake of the mouse-painting studies and all of that. and what did the research directors for the companies say? "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. "said another: 'boy! would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer free cigarette. what we could do to the competition!'" no question cigarettes cause cancer. if we could make one that does not, man, we would make a lot of money. "said another: 'suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. that would be maybe 40 billion a year.' and, again, 'the stock market fall is terrible.'" because dividends were going to be so good this year until this news about the health hazards of smoking was spread across the country. that was their initial reaction, and their initial concern was what it was always and that was money and profits. that is what drove the conspiracy. if we jump to 1972, dr. cummings showed you this document from two gentlemen -- two men in the tobacco institute. "for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts...the strategy was brilliantly conceived" -- they are celebrating it -- "brilliantly conceived and executed over the years." and it helped them win important battles. "it is only fair to say it was not -- nor was it intended to be -- a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy." we know sooner or later we have to stop denying. there will come a point where it is not plausible for us to deny the health harms of smoking anymore. well, that point came four or five years after lamar danielson died. but, in the meantime, we have a holding strategy, and we can sell lots of cigarettes to addicted smokers. how do you do that? creating doubt about the health charge without denying it, advocating the public's right to smoke, keeping smoking normalized, keep those triggers out there -- that is the ultimate effect of normalization of smoking advertising -- and always encouraging more research, and that is where the ctr came in. leading scientists say there is still doubt. we do not know. that is what you heard from dr. cummings. and that was the plan, as described internally, by the ti itself over the past 20 years, and it continued until after lamar danielson's death. around 1999 or 2000 the conspiracy came to an end. ti was shut down. the ctr was shut down. these kinds of messages stopped. "the no. 1 health problem is not cigarette smoking, but the extent to which public health officials may knowingly mislead the american public." you have not heard anyone say something like that in the last 15 years. because the only people who ever said this were the cigarette industry. and you know why they said it. they have told you, a psychological crutch, a self-rationale for continued smoking. that jamming of the transmission, these kinds of messages stopped in the year 2000. and you heard from three witnesses what is happened to smoking rates, especially youth smoking rates, in that time. and the judge told you, you can draw inferences from the evidence. you can draw an inference if they had done in 1953 what they had -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. there is no evidence of that. the court: (after perusing realtime screen) overruled. mr. schultz: if the industry had done in 1953 when they got together at the plaza hotel and said let us not jam the health message transmission. let us do really cooperate like we are going to tell everyone we are going to do. if they had done then what they did in the year 2000, how different would the world have been when lamar danielson was 15 years out just like we are today? how different would the smoking culture have been? you saw all the evidence of how the smoking culture back in the '60s and the '50s differed from what we see today. youth attitudes about smoking. the permissiveness of smoking. social attitudes about smoking. they are entirely different. and much of that is attributable to the fact that these messages went away 15 years ago. they could have gone away in 1953; but the industry got together and decided, no, we are going to do the opposite. did that have an effect on lamar danielson? did it have an effect on whether lamar danielson ever even picked up a cigarette? those are inferences you can draw from the evidence to conclude that this misconduct substantially contributed to his smoking; and we all agree his smoking took his life. never in his life would lamar danielson have heard something like this if they had done in '53 what they did in the year 2000 (indicating). the last two issues for you on the verdict form are the damages. the damages for mrs. danielson and her family and for the estate of lamar danielson. and punitive damages. and i'm going to talk about the punitive damages before i talk about the damages to them, although... uh, they will come last on the verdict form. punitive damages, the judge is going to tell you, are appropriate if we prove, by clear and convincing evidence, intentional misconduct on the part of the industry. and you will get the full instruction on what all of that means. it is a higher burden of proof. we have met that burden of proof in this case. you have to hear that it came from high officials in the company. the vast majority of the documents that you saw with dr. cummings, vice president, president, head of research, the conspiracy itself was carried out by the presidents of the companies. you cannot keep a conspiracy -- a conspiracy very long if everybody in the world knows about it. you heard the ti executive committee, the ti communications committee -- those were all people by people -- or populated by people like joe cullman, who you saw on face the nation. people like jim bowling, who you saw interviewed during dr. cummings's testimony. this all happened at the highest levels of the company. and when you are answering the punitive damages question of does philip morris deserve to be punished for what you have seen in this trial, ask yourself: was it an accident? if it was not intentional, what was it? did all of this happen for 45 years by accident? or was it conceived -- brilliantly conceived in the words of the ti itself and carried out in the name of profits? and look around and ask yourself if you can think of any example in the history of corporate culture that is more reprehensible -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to this argument. the court: overruled. mr. schultz: ask yourself if you can think of any example in the history of corporate culture that is more reprehensible than what you have seen from the cigarette industry in this trial. because reprehensibility is the key issue on whether they deserve to be punished. the ti itself said, "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." that is not matt schultz. it is not mrs. danielson. that is the tobacco institute itself. is that reprehensible conduct? is that deserving of punishment? especially when you are dealing with a product that is deadly and addictive. if you check yes on punitive damages, the jury instructions tell you you will return tomorrow, for less than a day, to take additional evidence and to decide the amount, if any, of punitive damages that you would award. finally, i want to talk about damages for the family. because that is really why we are here. there are two types of damages. i talked a little about this in opening. there are economic damages. these are the types of damages that would replace the money that lamar danielson -- because he died at such a young age -- would have brought into his household. these are going to be in jury instruction no. 5. so when you fill out the verdict form, when you fill out the damages portion, you can look to no. 5. these have been agreed to between the parties. these are the losses for the family in this regard. the court: you have -- mr. schultz: it will not be -- the court: mr. schultz, you have 30 minutes of your time remaining. mr. schultz: thank you, sir. you will have these numbers in the jury instruction no. 5 because they have been agreed to by the parties. estate losses are for lamar's estate. micah's losses, jennifer and sandi. because billy was of a certain age when mr. danielson died, he is not entitled to the economic damages. he is entitled to the other sort of damages, the much more serious damages that we are here about; and that is the loss of companionship, the mental pain and suffering, the mental anguish that comes from watching your father or your husband die from lung cancer and living the rest of your life without him. and those are by far and away the most substantial damages in this case. the court will tell you there is no fixed standard for these damages. and it is not easy to put a value on a human life. and that is not really what you are doing. in fact, it is not putting a value on his life; it is putting a value, as best you can, on the grief and the suffering and the mental anguish that the family has experienced as a result of his death. money is not going to bring lamar danielson back. we all know that. but it is the only thing our system can do and this is the system that we have. you saw the evidence of lamar. lamar was a special person. he was a prankster. he was a protector. and you heard from many people that everybody loved him. he is the kind of guy that everybody likes. he was not just anybody. and he was a good husband and he was a good father, and you saw that in the evidence. how many people sing love songs to their wife when they cannot really sing very well in front of their children and their friends? not everybody. they had a very special relationship. they were a very fortunate family, and he died at a very young age. i told you in opening statement we were asking for substantial damages in this case. we are recommending -- it is up to you ultimately, but we are recommending $6 million for micah danielson, and $3 million for each of her children in noneconomic damages in this case. you can give more. you can give less. you are the jury. you have heard the evidence. you have to make that decision. and it is not an easy one and we understand that. one way we try and value things in our culture and i guess everyone -- is by asking what would you pay for something? and ask yourself when you are talking about this issue: would the danielson family -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to this argument. the court: approach, please. (the following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.) the court: let me articulate -- let you articulate your objection. mr. geraghty: yeah, the preface to what he was just about to say was sometimes you ask people how much would they pay to have somebody back. i do not think that is a proper way to evaluate the loss that the family has had. so that is my objection. the court: okay. mr. schultz: what i was going to say is whether the family would give all of this up to have him back. the court: do you have a citation of authority? mr. geraghty: i do not, your honor. the court: i'm sorry, i will overrule the objection. (the following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury.) mr. schultz: as i was saying, when you ask yourself this question when you are talking about this issue, ask yourself: would the danielson family give all of this up to have lamar danielson back? to have him back for christmas. to have him back when sandi's baby is born in january. i think everybody in the courtroom knows the answer to that question. i'm going to show you very briefly because we have a verdict form in this case and the judge will read it to you, but i prefer that you see the verdict form itself. it is a few pages long because we have several claims in this case. the elmo, thank you, ryan. the first question on the verdict form, as i've already told you about: was addiction to marlboro cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of the death of norman lamar danielson? the answer to that question clearly is yes, based on all the evidence. lamar danielson was not a social smoker. lamar danielson did not smoke cigarettes -- 20, 30, 40 a day -- because he liked the taste of marlboro. he smoked compulsively, feeling the need every day to smoke -- dr. dorce's definition -- because he was addicted to nicotine. the next question on the verdict form: how much fault goes on philip morris? how much on lamar danielson? that is for you-all to decide. i would ask you to remember how long philip morris's fault goes back. how deep their fault is compared to lamar danielson's fault. his fault was human weakness. his fault was not overcoming an addiction. and we do believe he bears some fault for that. our suggestion is 75 percent to philip morris. you have to make that decision, just like the damages decision. it is not easy, but you have heard all the evidence in the case. you have been very attentive. the third and fourth questions pertain to the conspiracy and the concealment. the first question: was the concealment or omission of material information regarding the addictiveness or the health effects of cigarettes or both by philip morris usa, inc. a legal cause of the death of lamar danielson? if they had done in '53 what they did in 2000, would lamar have ever even smoked? how would it have affected his life if they told the truth all his life instead of doing exactly the opposite? the answer to that is yes. and the conspiracy is not just philip morris's concealment. that was the first question. this is the concealment by the tobacco institute, the ctr -- all the other companies, that whole empire that dr. cummings showed you of people devoted to keeping that psychological crutch out there for people like lamar danielson to hear. and, absolutely, it was a substantial contributing cause to the fact that he smoked. that is why they spent over a billion dollars on it. the next question is the estate damages. i've written that in there. it would not be written on the verdict form. jury instruction no. 5 has those numbers in there. the next page asks you the total amount sustained by micah danielson. that also is a number straight out of the jury instructions. the parties agree that is the number that goes on that blank in the verdict form. total damages sustained to her for loss, support and services. those are the economic damages i talked about. for the next -- this is our recommendation. and then you have to total them up on the verdict form. and i will not do the math every time. you get the idea, which is really what this is about. total damages for jennifer. again, the loss, support and services, that is jury instruction no. 5. the number will not be on the verdict form. you would have to write that number in. and then for damages for her and for each of the children, we are asking for $3 million. and that would be true on the next page for sandi, and it would be true for billy. billy does not have an entry on the jury form instruction, as i mentioned, because of the age that he was when his father died. we take this case very seriously. i know you-all took this case very seriously during the whole trial, and we appreciate that. i started off by asking, you know, when you walked in this courtroom, did you think -- maybe you did -- why in the world would somebody sue a cigarette company because their husband or their father smoked all his life and died from lung cancer? we have answered that question in this trial. you have been very attentive and we appreciate it. i'll have a little bit of time after mr. geraghty that i may or may not use, depending on what we hear in his closing. i'm sure you will give him the same attention that you have given me, and i greatly appreciate it. thank you. rebuttal argument mr. schultz: thank you, your honor. this is rebuttal, ladies and gentlemen. i will be brief. i'm not going to cover anything that i covered in my final argument. rebuttal is where i will rebut the things that mr. geraghty has said to you; and i will jump around a bit because i'm writing them down as i go. the first one i would like to address is this notion of accepting any responsibility means accepting full responsibility. well, we do accept responsibility. that is half the story. the other half is you will see the jury instruction that says exactly what we have said all along in this case; and that is that we accept responsibility that lamar danielson's acts in combination with the acts of philip morris are what caused his death. that is what we have said from day one in this case. that is what we have said in this courtroom. that is what will be in the jury instructions. and there is no question that we have ever said anything different. the -- i want to talk for a moment about these attacks on mrs. danielson and her credibility and her veracity. you were told very early on -- i think this was the first slide -- in evaluating believability of a witness you should consider whether they have a financial interest. well, the jury instructions tell you that. that is something you should consider in a case. any interest a witness has in the outcome of the case is worthy of consideration. but then you were shown this: mrs. danielson recalls only quits of seven or eight days, as if she is the only person who testified to that in this case. becky wiggins recalled a quit of one week in 1987, one in 1988. roy wiggins remembered one or two quits of a week's duration. mrs. danielson is not the only person who testified to this. and if you look down we see, for example, billy danielson, father quit for a couple of months to a year. well, that was half of the passage. you heard me read the other half of the passage with dr. dorce where he said -- when they mentioned a couple of months, he said that is right. for a brief time -- he said it twice -- i remember my father quitting for a brief time. you have heard all of that evidence and you have to consider all the evidence, not just snippets of it. lamar danielson told his doctor he quit for four months. he did. we do not dispute that. it was two days after he was told he had a mass in his lung that he believed might be cancer. is it possible lamar danielson was trying to convince himself and his doctor that it was not cancer; that it is not true? look, i quit for a long time. i do not know. nobody knows. it is what he told his doctor, and we do not dispute that at all. but no witness, not one witness in this case recalls lamar danielson quitting for four months. and certainly no one remembers anything close to a year when you put billy's testimony into context. those are the facts. they are not all lying under oath, ladies and gentlemen. those are the facts that you heard from all of the witnesses. ray danielson said lamar gained 25 or 30 pounds. he did say that. mrs. danielson told you she never had to buy a new suit for him. you will have all the photos in evidence throughout lamar's lifetime. sandi was born in 1986, and we have a photograph of him next to an ashtray in the hospital room when she is being born. you go forward in time when sandi is a small baby and look at those photographs and ask yourself if he gained 25 or 30 pounds. there is more evidence that just one-liners out of depositions in this case. one of the things that mr. geraghty attacked mrs. danielson about was saying -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to the word "attacked." the court: sustained. do not use the word "attacked." mr. schultz: one of the things that mr. geraghty said is worthy of consideration, i suppose, and whether mrs. danielson is being credible was that she only said her husband seemed to enjoy smoking; but she was one hundred percent confident that he was addicted. but you heard when i cross-examined dr. dorce yesterday morning, is when it was. i talked about mrs. danielson's testimony on this very point. and read a quote out of her deposition that he gave the appearance of being addicted, but she could not say he was, and they asked why the appearance? well, it is something that you cannot seem to control very well. i brought all of that out with dr. dorce. she is been perfectly consistent between saying he seemed to enjoy it. he seemed to me to be addicted. she was married to mr. danielson for 20 years. if you have been married 20 years it does not make you a mind-reader. she could not read lamar danielson's mind. she told you what she thinks based on her experiences. she was perfectly consistent. she never said she was one hundred percent confident that he was addicted. she said exactly what she said about enjoyment. and there is no dispute in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that people who enjoy cigarettes do not do so to the exclusion of addiction. mr. geraghty on one slide mentioned that a question for you would be whether mr. danielson relied on anything philip morris said. well, that is half of what you should consider under the jury instruction; but the instruction the court will give you says very plainly plaintiff need not prove the statements by the companies were related directly to lamar danielson if their content reached him through other sources. and you heard from dr. cummings that is what the ctr was all about. scientists who would get up and speak on behalf of the companies so the newspapers do not read the cigarette company says this; they read leading cancer researcher says no one knows yet about the -- the -- the hazards of smoking or what have you. that is how the conspiracy worked. that is why that instruction is in there. on the addiction, mr. geraghty said we were working real hard to push up the numbers of lamar's smoking. well, this is a slide we showed you with dr. cummings. from one to two and a half packs. ladies and gentlemen, that is what the evidence shows. lawana joyner kept a spreadsheet. mr. geraghty showed you lots of testimony from her or talked about it in his closing. is she now not telling the truth all of a sudden when she said he smoked a pack or two packs or over two packs a day based on a spreadsheet that she kept? the numbers that we used both in our social smoker versus addictive smoker slide, and the numbers that dr. cummings used on the heaviness of smoking index were based on one to one and a half packs a day. if you use two, he would have been a 6 out of 6. that is not what dr. cummings used. he was being very conservative. we are not trying to push the numbers up. we are trying to bring you all the evidence so you can make the best decision you can make on the facts as presented. and it is not all just about the heaviness of smoking index. dr. cummings told you these are considerations that come from the surgeon general of the united states. he took into consideration all of these things and wrote a 35-page report that he was asked about regarding lamar danielson. it is not just the heaviness of smoking index. that is a way to assess. it is important. it is valid. it is predictable. it is useful. but you heard a lot more than just that in dr. cummings's testimony. a couple of other things. the money that dr. cummings and dr. burns have made over time was brought up. these men have unique experience. they have testified for a long time. i told you in opening statement they are not friends of the tobacco industry. they are cancer researchers. the tobacco industry sells a product that has caused more cancer than anything else in the history of the world. they are not friends of the tobacco industry. they have testified against them in cases like this. and you have heard that over 400,000 people a year are killed by smoking. dr. cummings has testified in 100 cases over 20 years. if you look at the numbers for dr. dorce, 75 to $85,000 a year, if she testified for 30 years like dr. burns has, she would earn between 2.6 and $2.8 million. it sounds like a lot when you add it all up over 30 years, but you have to take into consideration these gentlemen's qualifications, their unique skill, their unique experience, and why they are testifying in cases like this. on the lungs, mr. geraghty started out saying that lamar regularly saw diseased lungs, the black diseased versus the healthy pink. then it became frequently. and by the end it was every single day. that is a quote. every single day he saw this. well, you have heard the evidence, ladies and gentlemen. swede danielson, his father, said way back we did autopsies in the funeral homes, and he would see these figures. would lamar see that? i'm sure he did. he did testify to that. charlie dillard said i saw all of the stuff that mr. geraghty crossed dr. cummings on about the biohazard bags; and he said i would imagine lamar saw that as well. and beverly milsted said we did not do autopsies by the time lamar danielson took over at the funeral home. that is the evidence. you can make of it whatever you can make of it. you heard dr. hurt, not on my questioning or ms. gilmer's questioning, but on mr. geraghty's questioning. mr. geraghty asked him to tell a story about seeing a cadaver and as a medical student it did not make him stop smoking; and, in fact, he used that as a lesson on denial and rationalization. knowledge is not power. even if lamar danielson knew in the 1970s of the health effects, his wife testified that knowing and believing are two different things. and mr. geraghty said that sounds like something dr. cummings would say. it is something dr. cummings said. it is something the federal trade commission said. if you remember the slide about the three levels of awareness: it is one thing to hear something; it is another thing to believe it is true; and it is another thing altogether to believe that it is true for you. that comes from the federal trade commission in a report that philip morris said was accurate. that is not just mrs. danielson. it is not just dr. cummings. but it is true. knowing something and believing something are different things. and when you are addicted -- how many addicted people in the world do you think -- do heroin addicts think they are shooting up vitamins? they know heroin is bad for them. it does not make them not addicted. it is proof of their addiction. mr. geraghty mentioned that by 1969, '70 or '71, mr. danielson may be experimenting with cigarettes. you heard mr. pate who testified he started out in middle school when he met lamar, and lamar was smoking. by high school he was smoking regularly. he testified if he was not in the water skiing, he had a cigarette in his hand. that is the testimony. unless you are going to assume that mr. pate came in here and took an oath and lied under oath, that is the evidence in the case about his smoking. you cannot spin that any other way. mr. geraghty also said that cigarette companies -- before i get to that, there was a question -- i think one of you asked a question. it was a good question. did anyone ever diagnose mr. danielson during his lifetime with nicotine addiction? mr. geraghty said the answer is absolutely not. the real answer is, we do not know. dr. crosswright, we do not have his records -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. this is speculative. the court: i'll overrule the objection. mr. schultz: dr. dorce told you we do not have dr. crosswright's records and that is why she could not be real clear about the nicotine patch prescription. but we do know -- so we do not know whether dr. crosswright did or did not diagnose him; but we do know he wrote him a prescription for nicotine patches to help him quit smoking. nicotine patches are often written to people who are diagnosed with addiction. i suppose sometimes they are written when they are not. that is something you will have to tease out of the evidence. but the answer not absolutely not. the real answer is we cannot know because we do not have all the records; and that is nobody's fault. that is just how the case evolved. mr. geraghty said at the very beginning cigarette company executives made some inappropriate comments, and that is what we showed you. is that what you took from the day and a half of dr. cummings's testimony that that is all philip morris did was make inappropriate comments? that is not the evidence in this case. they changed the smoking culture and the decisions they made impacted lamar danielson's life in a very real way. and i ask you one more time, consider if they had done in 1953 what they did in the year 2000 -- the way cigarette companies act changes how people in this country view cigarettes and how -- mr. geraghty: your honor, there is no evidence to support that. the court: overruled. thank you. mr. schultz: and how kids view cigarettes. you have seen that in your own lives. you can bring your common sense and your life experience into the jury room with you to make inferences about what would have happened if they had done the right thing. and you heard about damages. the danielsons, they are all different people with different lives with different losses. different ages when lamar died. different relationships with him up to that point in time. the damages are not just one big ball of wax. these are individual damages for individual people who suffered their own losses. it may be a large sum of money. it should be a large sum of money. what sum of money would you give to a loss of a husband of 20 years, somebody like lamar, for a father who died when you are nine years old? ladies and gentlemen, the only thing philip morris has ever understood is money. thank you. we appreciate your time. you have been very attentive. sorry if i got a little jumpy at the end, jumping around on this. we appreciate you being here, taking the time, and we look forward to receiving your verdict. thank you.